                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE MARGINS OF GLOBAL SOURCING:
                       THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM U.S. FIRMS

                                           Pol Antràs
                                         Teresa C. Fort
                                         Felix Tintelnot

                                      Working Paper 20772
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20772


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2014

Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed. We are grateful to Treb Allen, Isaiah Andrews, Andy
Bernard, Emily Blanchard, Ariel Burstein, Arnaud Costinot, Pablo Fajgelbaum, Paul Grieco,
Gene Grossman, Elhanan Helpman, Sam Kortum, Marc Melitz, Eduardo Morales, and Michael
Peters for useful conversations, to Andrés Rodríguez-Clare for his comments while discussing the
paper at the NBER, to the editor (Penny Goldberg) and two anonymous referees for their
constructive comments, and to Xiang Ding, BooKang Seol and Linh Vu for excellent research
assistance. We have also benefited from very useful feedback from seminar audiences at Aarhus,
AEA Meetings in Boston, Barcelona GSE, Bank of Spain, Boston College, Boston University,
Brown, Cambridge University, Chicago Booth, Dartmouth, ECARES, the Econometric Society
Meeting in Minneapolis, ERWIT in Oslo, Harvard, IMF, John Hopkins SAIS, LSE, Michigan,
MIT, UQ a Montreal, National Bank of Belgium, NBER Summer Institute, Northwestern,
Princeton, Sciences Po in Paris, SED in Toronto, Syracuse, Tsinghua, UBC, UC Berkeley, UC
Davis, UC San Diego, Urbana-Champaign, Virginia, and Yale. We thank Jim Davis at the Boston
RDC for invaluable support with the disclosure process. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Pol Antràs, Teresa C. Fort, and Felix Tintelnot. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory and Evidence from U.S. Firms
Pol Antràs, Teresa C. Fort, and Felix Tintelnot
NBER Working Paper No. 20772
December 2014, Revised July 2016
JEL No. C63,D21,D22,F12,F23,F61,L11,L16,L23

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a quantifiable multi-country sourcing model in which firms self-select into importing
based on their productivity and country-specific variables. In contrast to canonical export models
where firm profits are additively separable across destination markets, global sourcing decisions
naturally interact through the firm's cost function. We show that, under an empirically relevant
condition, selection into importing exhibits complementarities across source markets. We exploit
these complementarities to solve the firm's problem and estimate the model. Comparing
counterfactual predictions to reduced-form evidence highlights the importance of
interdependencies in firms' sourcing decisions across markets, which generate heterogeneous
domestic sourcing responses to trade shocks.

Pol Antràs                                      Felix Tintelnot
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Harvard University                              University of Chicago
1805 Cambridge Street                           5757 South University Avenue
Littauer Center 207                             Chicago, IL 60637
Cambridge, MA 02138                             and NBER
and NBER                                        tintelnot@uchicago.edu
pantras@fas.harvard.edu

Teresa C. Fort
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
teresa.fort@tuck.dartmouth.edu
1     Introduction
The world is becoming increasingly globalized. Dramatic advances in communication, information,
and transportation technologies have revolutionized how and where firms produce their goods. Inter-
mediate inputs account for approximately two thirds of international trade (Johnson and Noguera,
2012), and vertical specialization across countries is an important and growing feature of the world
economy (Hummels et al., 2001; Hanson et al., 2005). As global value chains rise in importance, a
firm’s production is more likely than ever to span multiple countries. There is also mounting evidence
that firm-level decisions play a critical role in explaining trade patterns (Bernard et al., 2009), and that
they have important ramifications for aggregate productivity, employment, and welfare (Goldberg et
al., 2010; Hummels et al., 2014).
    Despite the growing importance of global production sharing, the typical model of firm-level trade
decisions focuses on exporting rather than importing. Since every international trade transaction
involves an exporter and an importer, a natural question is: why not simply use the structure of
the well-known exporting framework to analyze firms’ import decisions? Existing export models
cannot be applied directly to analyze foreign sourcing for a simple – yet powerful – reason. While the
canonical export model ensures that a firm’s decision to enter each market can be analyzed separately
by assuming constant marginal costs, a firm chooses to import precisely because it seeks to lower its
marginal costs. In a world in which firm heterogeneity interacts with fixed sourcing costs, the firm’s
decision to import from one market will also affect whether it is optimal to import from another
market. Foreign sourcing decisions are therefore interdependent across markets, making a model
about importing much more complicated to solve theoretically and to estimate empirically.
    In this paper, we develop a new framework to analyze firm-level sourcing decisions in a multi-
country world. An important focus of the model is on firms’ extensive margin decisions about which
products to offshore and the countries from which to purchase them. Bernard et al. (2009) find
that these margins account for about 65 percent of the cross-country variation in U.S. imports, and
Bernard et al. (2007) show that U.S. importers are on average more than twice as large and about 12
percent more productive than non-importers.1 In Figure 1, we extend this evidence to show not only
that importers are larger than non-importers, but also that their relative size advantage is increasing
in the number of countries from which they source. The figure indicates that firms that import from
one country are more than twice the size of non-importers, firms that source from 13 countries are
about four log points larger, and firms sourcing from 25 or more countries are over six log points
bigger than non-importers. These importer size advantages are suggestive of sizable country-specific
fixed costs of sourcing, which limit the ability of small firms to select into importing from a large
number of countries.2
    1
      We obtain very similar findings when replicating these analyses for the sample of U.S. manufacturing firms used in
our empirical analysis (see the Online Appendix).
    2
      To construct the figure, we regress the log of firm sales on cumulative dummies for the number of countries from
which a firm sources and industry controls. The omitted category is non-importers, so the premia are interpreted as the
difference in size between non-importers and firms that import from at least one country, at least two countries, etc.
The horizontal axis denotes the number of countries from which a firm sources, with 1 corresponding to firms that use
only domestic inputs. These premia are robust to controlling for the number of products a firm imports and the number
of products it exports, and thus do not merely capture the fact that larger firms import more products. Consistent



                                                           1
               Figure 1: Sales premia and minimum number of sourcing countries in 2007




                                     6
                                     4
                           Premium
                                     2
                                     0




                                         1   3   5     7   9    11    13     15    17    19    21    23   25
                                                 Minimum number of countries from which firm sources

                                                                Premium               95% CI




    Not only do country-specific fixed costs of sourcing appear to be empirically relevant, but the ease
with which firms can begin sourcing from a country also seems to vary across countries in ways that
are distinct from these countries’ appeal as a source of marginal cost reductions. To illustrate this
variation, Table 1 shows the number of U.S. firms that import from a country versus total sourcing
from that country. The table lists the top ten source countries for U.S. manufacturers in 2007, based
on the number of importing firms. These countries account for 93 percent of importers in our sample
and 74 percent of imports. The first two columns show that Canada ranks number one based on the
number of U.S. importers and total import value. For most other countries, however, country rank
based on the number of importers does not equal the rank based on import values. China is number
two for firms but only number three for value; and Mexico, the number two country in terms of value,
ranks eighth in terms of importers. As another way to assess the differences in the intensive and
extensive margins of imports across countries, we compare the share of total importers that source
from a country (column 4) to the share of imports sourced from that country (column 6). These
relative values also differ significantly. For example, the U.K. and Taiwan account for only three and
two percent of total imports, respectively, but 18 percent of all importers source from the U.K., and
16 percent source from Taiwan.
    The considerable divergence between the intensive and extensive margins presented in Table 1
suggests that countries differ in terms of their potential as a marginal cost-reducing source of inputs
and the fixed costs firms must incur to import from them. In section 2, we develop a quantifiable
multi-country sourcing model that allows for this possibility. Heterogeneous firms self-select into
importing based on their productivity and country-specific characteristics (wages, trade costs, and
technology). The model delivers a simple closed-form solution for firm profits, in which marginal
costs are decreasing in a firm’s sourcing capability, which is itself a function of the set of countries

with selection into importing, the same qualitative pattern is also evident among firms that did not import in 2002, and
when using employment or productivity rather than sales. See the Online Appendix for additional details.



                                                                      2
                  Table 1: Top 10 source countries for U.S. firms, by number of firms

                               Rank by:            Number of Importers                  Value of Imports
                            Firms     Value         Firms      % of Total          Imports        % of Total
     Canada                   1         1          37,800           59              145,700            16
     China                    2         3          21,400           33              121,980            13
     Germany                  3         5          13,000           20               62,930             7
     United Kingdom           4         6          11,500           18              30,750              3
     Taiwan                    5        11         10,500           16               16,630            2
     Italy                     6        13          8,500           13               13,230             1
     Japan                    7         4          8,000            12              112,250            12
     Mexico                   8         2          7,800            12              125,960            14
     France                    9         9          6,100            9               22,980            3
     South Korea              10        10          5,600            9               20,390             2

     Notes: Sample is U.S. firms with some manufacturing activity in 2007. Number of firms rounded to
     nearest 100 for disclosure avoidance. Imports in millions of $s, rounded to nearest 10 million for disclosure
     avoidance.




from which a firm imports, as well as those countries’ characteristics. Firms can, in principle, buy
intermediate inputs from any country in the world, but acquiring the ability to import from a country
entails a market-specific fixed cost. As a result, relatively unproductive firms may opt out of importing
from high fixed cost countries, even if they are particularly attractive sources of inputs.
   In this environment, the optimality of importing from one country necessarily depends on the
other countries from which a firm sources its inputs. This stands in sharp contrast to standard
export models, where it is reasonable to assume constant marginal costs so that the decision to sell
in one market is independent of export decisions in other markets. This constant marginal cost
assumption is clearly not tenable for sourcing decisions, since the firm chooses to import precisely in
order to lower its marginal costs. The resulting interdependence in a firm’s extensive margin import
decisions complicates the firm’s problem considerably, as it now involves a combinatorial problem
with 2J possible choices, where J denotes the number of possible source countries.
   Despite these complications, we provide the first characterization of the firm’s extensive margin
sourcing decisions. First, we show that source countries can be complements or substitutes, depending
only on a parametric restriction that relates the elasticity of demand faced by the final-good producer
to the dispersion of input productivities across locations. When demand is inelastic or input efficiency
differences are small, the addition of a country to a firm’s global sourcing strategy reduces the marginal
gain from adding other locations. In such a “substitutes case,” the firm’s optimal choice of countries
to include in its sourcing strategy is extremely hard to characterize, both analytically as well as
quantitatively. High productivity firms may opt into countries with high fixed costs but with the
potential for high marginal cost savings, thus rendering further marginal cost reductions less beneficial.
Although low productivity firms would also like to source from these locations, the high fixed costs
may preclude them from doing so. In this scenario, high productivity firms will always source from


                                                          3
(weakly) better countries, but they may source from fewer countries than low productivity firms.
Global sourcing therefore magnifies any pre-existing differences in underlying firm productivity and
increases the skewness in the size distribution of firms, but does not necessarily lead to the hierarchical
entry predictions that are well-known for exporting.
    Conversely, selection into importing features complementarity across markets when demand is
relatively elastic (so profits are particularly responsive to variable cost reductions) and input efficiency
levels are relatively heterogeneous across markets (so that the reduction in expected costs from adding
an extra country in the set of active locations is relatively high). This case is much more tractable,
and delivers sharp results rationalizing the monotonicity in the sales premia observed in Figure 1. In
particular, we use standard tools from the monotone comparative statics literature to show that, in
such a case, the sourcing strategies of firms follow a strict hierarchical structure in which the number
of countries in a firm’s sourcing strategy increases (weakly) with the firm’s core productivity level.3
    Our quantitative analysis enables separate identification of the sourcing potential of a country
– a function of technology, trade costs, and wages capturing the potential of a country as source
of marginal cost savings – and the fixed cost of sourcing from that country. We use 2007 Census
data on U.S. manufacturers’ mark-ups and import shares to recover the sourcing potential of 66
foreign countries, as well as the average elasticity of demand and dispersion of input productivities
faced by U.S. firms. Consistent with the pattern documented in Figure 1, we find robust evidence
suggesting that the extensive margin sourcing decisions of U.S. firms are complements. This finding
paves the way for an additional methodological contribution of our paper –namely, to solve the firm’s
problem and estimate the model structurally. To do so, we apply an iterative algorithm developed
by Jia (2008), which exploits the complementarities in the ‘entry’ decisions of firms, and uses lattice
theory to reduce the dimensionality of the firm’s optimal sourcing strategy problem. We can therefore
estimate the fixed costs of sourcing, which range from a median of 9,000 to 46,000 USD, are around
11 percent lower for countries with a common language, and increase in distance with an elasticity
of 0.15. In line with the premise that countries differ along two dimensions, the relative rankings of
these fixed costs are also quite different from the rankings of countries’ potential to reduce marginal
costs.
    The structural estimation of the model is informative not only because it shows the importance
of marginal cost savings versus fixed cost heterogeneity across countries, but also because it allows
for counterfactual exercises.4 We exploit this capability by studying the implications of an increase
in China’s sourcing potential calibrated to match the observed growth in the share of U.S. firms
importing from China between 1997 and 2007. These years are governed both by data availability,
and the fact that they span China’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO). Consistent
with other quantitative models of trade, the China shock increases the competitive environment by
decreasing the equilibrium industry-level U.S. price index and driving some U.S. final good producers
    3
      The seminal applications of the mathematics of complementarity in the economics literature are Vives (1990) and
Milgrom and Roberts (1990). Grossman and Maggi (2000) and Costinot (2009) are particularly influential applications
of these techniques in international trade environments.
    4
      This is in contrast to moment inequality methods, which were first adopted in an international trade context by
Morales et al. (2014).



                                                         4
out of the market. Although the net result of these forces is a marked decrease in domestic sourcing
(and U.S. employment) in that sector, the net decline masks significant heterogeneity in how the shock
affects the sourcing decisions of firms at different points in the size distribution. More specifically, the
shock induces a range of U.S. firms to select into sourcing from China, and on average, these firms
increase their input purchases not only from China, but also from the U.S. and other countries. The
existence of gross changes in sourcing that operate in different directions is a distinctive feature of our
framework that does not arise in the absence of fixed costs of offshoring or whenever entry decisions
are independent across markets.
   To assess the empirical relevance of these channels, we compare the model’s counterfactual pre-
dictions to the observed changes in U.S. manufacturers’ sourcing from the U.S. and third markets
between 1997 and 2007. We first show that the same qualitative patterns predicted by the model are
evident in the raw data. Firms that begin importing from China over this period grow their domestic
and third market sourcing the most, continuing importers have smaller but still positive sourcing
changes, and firms that never import from China shrink their domestic sourcing and increase third-
market sourcing by a substantially smaller amount than both new and continuing China importers.
To ensure that the patterns observed in the raw data are not driven solely by firm-specific demand or
productivity shocks, we construct an exogenous firm-level shock to Chinese sourcing potential in the
spirit of Autor et al. (2013) and Hummels et al. (2014). The results show that exogenous increases
in firm-level imports from China do not decrease domestic and third market sourcing –as might be
expected in a world with no interdependencies in sourcing decisions– but instead are associated with
increased firm-level sourcing from other markets. We thus provide both structural and reduced-form
evidence of the empirical relevance of interdependencies in firms’ extensive margin import decisions.
   Our paper contributes to three distinct literatures. First, we add to a large body of theoretical
work on foreign sourcing. We follow existing theory that adapts the Melitz (2003) model to char-
acterize heterogeneous firms’ foreign sourcing decisions (e.g., Antràs and Helpman, 2004, 2008), but
our framework also shares features with a parallel literature that uses the Eaton and Kortum (2002)
model to study offshoring (Rodrı́guez-Clare, 2010; Garetto, 2013). More specifically, we build on the
approach in Tintelnot (forthcoming) of embedding the Eaton and Kortum (2002) stochastic represen-
tation of technology into the problem of a firm, though in our context firms choose optimal sourcing
rather than final-good production locations. This approach allows us to move beyond the two-country
frameworks that have pervaded the literature and develop a tractable multi-country model. A key
theoretical insight from our model is that a positive shock to sourcing from one location could lead a
firm either to decrease its sourcing from other locations as it substitutes away from them, or instead
to grow sufficiently so that it increases its net sourcing from other locations. This prediction is remi-
niscent of Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008), who show that an offshoring industry may expand
domestic employment if a “productivity effect” dominates a “substitution effect.” An important
difference is that in our framework, these effects take place within a firm rather than an industry.
   Our paper also relates to an extensive empirical literature on offshoring. A number of papers
provide reduced form evidence on the determinants of offshoring (Fort, 2015), as well as its impact
on firm performance and aggregate productivity (Amiti and Konings, 2007; Goldberg et al., 2010;


                                                     5
De Loecker et al., 2016). A related set of papers uses a more structural approach to quantify the
effect of importing on firm productivity and prices (Halpern et al., 2015; Gopinath and Neiman,
2014; Blaum et al., 2015). The first part of our estimation provides a similar quantification, implying
that a firm sourcing from all foreign countries faces nine percent lower variable costs and achieves 32
percent higher sales than when sourcing exclusively from domestic suppliers.5 The most important
distinction between those papers and ours is that we provide evidence not just on the intensive margin
implications of importing, but also on the firm’s extensive margin sourcing decisions in a multi-country
setting with heterogeneous fixed costs across countries. While Blaum et al. (2013) discuss the existence
of interdependencies across sourcing decisions in a model with an arbitrary number of countries and
inputs, ours is the first paper to characterize the extensive margin of importing in this setting and to
solve the firm’s problem quantitatively.
       Finally, we contribute to a growing body of work that analyzes interdependencies in firm-level
decisions. Yeaple (2003) and Grossman et al. (2006) first described the inherent difficulties in solving
for the extensive margin of imports in a multi-country model with multiple intermediate inputs and
heterogeneous fixed costs of sourcing. Those authors obtained partial characterizations of the problem
in models with at most three countries and two inputs. We provide the first characterization of the
firm’s extensive margin sourcing decision in this setting with multiple inputs and countries, and
show how these decisions can be aggregated to describe trade flows across countries. These trade
flow equations collapse to the well-known Eaton and Kortum (2002) gravity equation whenever fixed
costs are zero (so that there is universal importing), or to the Chaney (2008) gravity equation in the
knife-edge case that shuts down interdependencies across markets. In a general setting, our model
delivers an extended gravity equation reminiscent of Morales et al. (2014), who estimate a model with
interdependencies in firms’ export decisions. That paper uses moment inequalities to partially identify
the cost parameters and does not conduct any counterfactual analysis. Tintelnot (forthcoming) solves
the optimal plant location problem of multinational firms in a general equilibrium model, however,
in a setting with much fewer countries. We overcome the challenges in prior work by combining
the theoretical insights on complementarity with Jia’s (2008) algorithm for solving Walmart’s and
Kmart’s decisions about whether and where to open new retail establishments. Our paper is the first
to adopt this algorithm in an international setting or in a setting with more than two firms.
       The rest of the paper is structured as follows. We present the assumptions of our model in section
2 and solve for the equilibrium in section 3. In section 4, we introduce the data and provide descriptive
evidence supporting the assumptions underlying our theoretical framework. We estimate the model
structurally in section 5, and in section 6, we perform our counterfactual analysis and compare the
predictions of the model to reduced-form evidence. Section 7 concludes.
   5
    Quantitatively, this is lower than the findings of Halpern et al. (2015) for Hungarian firms. Using a two-country
model and a method similar to Olley and Pakes (1996), they find that importing all foreign varieties would increase
productivity of a Hungarian firm by 22 percent. Blaum et al. (2015) obtain even larger cost reduction estimates for
some French firms, perhaps due to an alternative interpretation of idiosyncratic differences in sourcing shares (e.g., as
measurement error in our context and as structural error in their paper.)




                                                           6
2     Theoretical Framework
In this section, we develop our quantifiable multi-country model of global sourcing.

2.1   Preferences and Endowments
Consider a world consisting of J countries in which individuals value the consumption of differentiated
varieties of manufactured goods according to a standard symmetric CES aggregator
                                                                σ/(σ−1)
                                       Z
                           UM i =           qi (ω)(σ−1)/σ dω                ,   σ > 1,              (1)
                                      ω∈Ωi


where Ωi is the set of manufacturing varieties available to consumers in country i ∈ J (with some
abuse of notation we denote by J both the number as well as the set of countries; we use subscripts
i and j to denote countries). These preferences are assumed to be common worldwide and give rise
to the following demand for variety ω in country i:

                                       qi (ω) = Ei Piσ−1 pi (ω)−σ ,                                   (2)

where pi (ω) is the price of variety ω, Pi is the standard ideal price index associated with (1), and
Ei is aggregate spending on manufacturing goods in country i. For what follows it will be useful to
define a (manufacturing) market demand term for market i as:
                                                         1−σ
                                           1        σ
                                      Bi =                       Ei Piσ−1 .                           (3)
                                           σ       σ−1

    There is a unique factor of production, labor, which commands a wage wi in country i. When we
close the model in general equilibrium, we later introduce an additional non-manufacturing sector into
the economy. This non-manufacturing sector captures a constant share of the economy’s spending,
also employs labor, and is large enough to pin down wages in terms of that ‘outside’ sector’s output.

2.2   Technology and Market Structure
There exists a measure Ni of final-good producers in each country i ∈ J, and each of these produc-
ers owns a blueprint to produce a single differentiated variety. The market structure of final good
production is characterized by monopolistic competition, and there is free entry into the industry.
Production of final-good varieties requires the assembly of a bundle of intermediates. We index
final-good firms by their ‘core productivity’, which we denote by ϕ, and which governs the mapping
between the bundle of inputs and final-good production. Following Melitz (2003), we assume that
firms only learn their productivity ϕ after incurring an entry cost equal to fei units of labor in country
i. This core productivity is drawn from a country-specific distribution gi (ϕ), with support in [ϕi , ∞),
and with an associated continuous cumulative distribution Gi (ϕ). For simplicity, we assume that
final-good varieties are prohibitively costly to trade across borders.


                                                      7
    Intermediates can instead be traded internationally, and a key feature of the equilibrium will
be determining the location of production of different intermediates. The bundle of intermediates
contains a continuum of measure one of firm-specific inputs, assumed to be imperfectly substitutable
with each other, with a constant and symmetric elasticity of substitution equal to ρ. Very little
will depend on the particular value of ρ. All intermediates are produced with labor under constant-
returns-to-scale technologies. We denote by aj (v, ϕ) the unit labor requirement associated with the
production of firm ϕ’s intermediate v ∈ [0, 1] in country j ∈ J.
    Although intermediates are produced worldwide, a final-good producer based in country i only
acquires the capability to offshore in j after incurring a fixed cost equal to fij units of labor in country
i. We denote by Ji (ϕ) ⊆ J the set of countries for which a firm based in i with productivity ϕ has
paid the associated fixed cost of offshoring wi fij . For brevity, we will often refer to Ji (ϕ) as the
global sourcing strategy of that firm.
    Intermediates are produced by a competitive fringe of suppliers who sell their products at marginal
cost.6 Shipping intermediates from country j to country i entails iceberg trade costs τij . As a result,
the cost at which firms from i can procure input v from country j is given by τij aj (v, ϕ) wj , and the
price that firm ϕ based in country i pays for input v can be denoted by

                                   zi (v, ϕ; Ji (ϕ)) = min {τij aj (v, ϕ) wj } .                                   (4)
                                                            j∈Ji (ϕ)


    We can then express the marginal cost for firm ϕ based in country i of producing a unit of a
final-good variety as
                                             Z     1                                 1/(1−ρ)
                                         1                                 1−ρ
                                ci (ϕ) =                zi (v, ϕ; Ji (ϕ))        dv              .                 (5)
                                         ϕ      0

    Building on Eaton and Kortum (2002), we treat the (infinite-dimensional) vectors of firm-specific
intermediate input efficiencies 1/aj (v, ϕ) as the realization of an extreme value distribution. More
specifically, suppliers in j draw the value of 1/aj (v, ϕ) from the Fréchet distribution

                                                                       θ
                                   Pr(aj (v, ϕ) ≥ a) = e−Tj a ,             with Tj > 0.                           (6)

These draws are assumed to be independent across locations and inputs. As in Eaton and Kortum
(2002), Tj governs the state of technology in country j, while θ determines the variability of produc-
tivity draws across inputs, with a lower θ fostering the emergence of comparative advantage within
the range of intermediates across countries.

2.3    Discussion of Assumptions
This completes the description of the key assumptions of the model. A number of dimensions of our
setup are worth discussing at this point. First, although we have assumed that inputs are firm-specific,
our model is in fact isomorphic to one in which the unit measure of inputs, as well as their associated
unit labor requirements aj (v, ϕ), are identical for all firms and denoted by aj (v). We emphasize the
   6
     Implicitly, we assume that contracts between final-good producers and suppliers are perfectly enforceable, so that
specificity of inputs is irrelevant for the prices at which inputs are transacted.


                                                               8
firm-specificity of inputs to justify why intermediaries (e.g., wholesalers) would not trivially eliminate
the need for all firms to incur fixed costs of foreign sourcing. Second, to highlight the importance
of importing, we have assumed that final-good varieties cannot be traded across borders. In the
Online Appendix, we show how one can relax this assumption and study the joint determination of
the extensive margins of both exports and imports, an approach that has been further pursued by
Bernard et al. (2016). Third, our model assumes that all final-good producers combine a measure one
of inputs in production. As we demonstrate in the Online Appendix, it is simple to generalize our
framework to the case in which final-good producers also hire local labor to assemble the bundle of
inputs, and in which firms optimally choose the complexity of production, as captured by the measure
of inputs used in production (see Acemoglu et al., 2007). The qualitative results of these extensions
are analogous to those of our benchmark model, but incorporating these features would significantly
complicate the structural estimation. Fourth, tractability concerns also dictate our assumption that
wages are pinned down in a non-manufacturing sector, as we discuss at greater length in section
6. Finally, we have introduced an asymmetric market structure in the final- and intermediate-input
sectors because this allows our model to nest two key workhorse trade models developed in recent
years. It would be feasible to turn the intermediate-input sector into a monopolistically competitive
sector with a fixed mass of firms, and the relevant expressions would all be very similar.7


3     Equilibrium
We solve for the equilibrium of the model in three steps. First, we describe optimal firm behavior
conditional on a given sourcing strategy Ji (ϕ). Second, we characterize the choice of this sourcing
strategy and relate our results to some of the stylized facts discussed in the Introduction. Third, we
aggregate the firm-level decisions and solve for the general equilibrium of the model. We conclude
this section by outlining the implications of our framework for bilateral trade across countries.

3.1    Firm Behavior Conditional on a Sourcing Strategy
Consider a firm based in country i with productivity ϕ that has incurred all fixed costs associated
with a given sourcing strategy Ji (ϕ). In light of the cost function in (5), it is clear that after learning
the vector of unit labor requirements for each country j ∈ Ji (ϕ), the firm will choose the location
of production for each input v that solves minj∈Ji (ϕ) {τij aj (v, ϕ) wj }. Using the properties of the
Fréchet distribution in (6), one can show that the firm will source a positive measure of intermediates
from each country in its sourcing strategy set Ji (ϕ). Furthermore, the share of intermediate input
purchases sourced from any country j (including the home country i) is simply given by

                                                  Tj (τij wj )−θ
                                      χij (ϕ) =                     if j ∈ Ji (ϕ)                                    (7)
                                                     Θi (ϕ)
   7
     Conversely, it would considerably complicate any counterfactual analysis if there was a monopolistically competitive
intermediate good sector with free entry, since then one would need to re-solve for the mass of entering firms in the
intermediate-good sector in every country.




                                                           9
and χij (ϕ) = 0 otherwise, where

                                                                Tk (τik wk )−θ .
                                                       X
                                          Θi (ϕ) ≡                                                                 (8)
                                                     k∈Ji (ϕ)


The term Θi (ϕ) summarizes the sourcing capability of firm ϕ from i. Note that, in equation (7),
each country j’s market share in the firm’s purchases of intermediates corresponds to this country’s
contribution to this sourcing capability Θi (ϕ). Countries in the set Ji (ϕ) with lower wages wj , more
advanced technologies Tj , or lower trade costs when selling to country i are predicted to have higher
market shares in the intermediate input purchases of firms based in country i. We shall refer to the
term Tj (τij wj )−θ as the sourcing potential of country j from the point of view of firms in i.8
       After choosing the least cost source of supply for each input v, the overall marginal cost faced by
firm ϕ from i can be expressed, after some cumbersome derivations, as

                                                       1
                                            ci (ϕ) =     (γΘi (ϕ))−1/θ ,                                           (9)
                                                       ϕ
         h       iθ/(1−ρ)
where γ = Γ θ+1−ρ
              θ             and Γ is the gamma function.9 Note that in light of equation (8), the
addition of a new location to the set Ji (ϕ) increases the sourcing capability of the firm and necessarily
lowers its effective marginal cost. Intuitively, an extra location grants the firm an additional cost draw
for all varieties v ∈ [0, 1], and it is thus natural that this greater competition among suppliers will
reduce the expected minimum sourcing cost per intermediate. In fact, the addition of a country to
Ji (ϕ) lowers the expected price paid for all varieties v, and not just for those that are ultimately
sourced from the country being added to Ji (ϕ).
       Using the demand equation (2) and the derived marginal cost function in (9), we can express the
firm’s profits conditional on a sourcing strategy Ji (ϕ) as
                                                                                   X
                              πi (ϕ) = ϕσ−1 (γΘi (ϕ))(σ−1)/θ Bi − wi                      fij ,                   (10)
                                                                               j∈Ji (ϕ)


where Bi is given in (3). As is clear from equation (10), when deciding whether to add a new country
j to the set Ji (ϕ), the firm trades off the reduction in costs associated with the inclusion of that
country in the set Ji (ϕ) – which increases the sourcing capability Θi (ϕ) – against the payment of
the additional fixed cost wi fij .
       It is worth highlighting the connection between our modeling of the gains from importing inter-
mediate inputs and the Armington-style approach that is standard in the literature on importing.10
More specifically, suppose that all suppliers in a given country produce the same intermediate input
   8
     It may seem surprising that the dependence of country j’s market share χij (ϕ) on wages and trade costs is shaped
by the Fréchet parameter θ and not by the substitutability across inputs, as governed by the parameter ρ in equation
(5). The reason for this, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002), is that variation in market shares is explained exclusively by
a product-level extensive margin.
   9
     These derivations are analogous to those performed by Eaton and Kortum (2002) to solve for the aggregate price
index in their model. To ensure a well-defined marginal cost index, we assume θ > ρ − 1. Apart from satisfying this
restriction, the value of ρ does not matter for any outcomes of interest and will be absorbed into a constant.
  10
     See, among others, Halpern et al. (2015), Goldberg et al. (2010), and Gopinath and Neiman (2014).


                                                          10
using local labor under a constant-returns-to-scale technology featuring a unit labor requirement equal
to (γTj )−1/θ in each country j ∈ J. Assume, in addition, that inputs are differentiated by country of
origin with an elasticity of substitution across inputs from any two locations equal to 1 + θ. Finally,
as in our framework, assume that in order to import country j’s unique input, final-good producers
in i need to incur a fixed costs equal to wi fij and iceberg trade costs τij . Under these assumptions, it
is then straightforward to verify that the resulting firm profits will be identical to those in equation
(10) above.
   This isomorphism between our model and the love-for-variety approach carries three significant
implications. First, it should be clear that the interdependencies in the firm’s extensive margin sourc-
ing decisions are also a feature of the Armington-style models that have pervaded the literature on
importing. Second, it follows that the results below on the optimal determination of the sourcing
strategy Ji (ϕ), as well as the techniques we develop in section 5 to structurally estimate the model,
are also applicable in these types of models. Third, it implies that our model provides an intuitive mi-
crofoundation for why being able to import from (several) foreign countries is productivity-enhancing,
without resorting to the elusive notion of input differentiation by country of origin. With this in mind,
we next turn to an analysis of the optimal sourcing strategy of firms.

3.2     Optimal Sourcing Strategy
Each firm’s optimal sourcing strategy is a combinatorial optimization problem in which a set Ji (ϕ) ⊆
J of locations is chosen to maximize the firm’s profits πi (ϕ) in (10). We can alternatively express
this problem as
                                                                                      (σ−1)/θ
                                                                J                                            J
                                                                      Iij Tj (τij wj )−θ 
                                                                X                                            X
         max          πi (ϕ, Ii1 , Ii2 , ..., IiJ ) = ϕσ−1 γ                                     B i − wi         Iij fij ,   (11)
      Iij ∈{0,1}J
                j=1                                             j=1                                          j=1


where the indicator variable Iij takes a value of 1 when j ∈ Ji (ϕ), and 0 otherwise. The problem
in (11) is not straightforward to solve because the decision to include a country j in the set Ji (ϕ)
depends on the number and characteristics of the other countries in this set. In theory, one could
simply calculate firm profits for different combinations of locations and pick the unique strategy
yielding that highest level of profits. In practice, however, this would amount to computing profits
for 2J possible strategies, which is clearly infeasible unless one chooses a small enough number J of
candidate countries.
   Inspection of (11) reveals, however, that the profit function πi is supermodular in ϕ and Θi (ϕ),
and features increasing differences in (Iij , Iik ) for j, k ∈ {1, ..., J} and j 6= k, whenever (σ − 1) /θ >
1. These properties of the problem in (11) allow us to establish the following result (the proof is
straightforward and is relegated to the Online Appendix):

Proposition 1. The solution Iij (ϕ) ∈ {0, 1}Jj=1 to the optimal sourcing problem (11) is such that:
                                             J
                                               Iij (ϕ) Tj (τij wj )−θ is nondecreasing in ϕ;
                                             P
   (a) a firm’s sourcing capability Θi (ϕ) =
                                                          j=1
   (b) if (σ − 1) /θ ≥ 1, then Ji (ϕL ) ⊆ Ji (ϕH ) for ϕH ≥ ϕL , where Ji (ϕ) = {j : Iij (ϕ) = 1}.


                                                                 11
       Part (a) of Proposition 1 simply states that more productive firms choose a larger sourcing ca-
pability –either because they select into more countries or because they select into better countries–
thereby magnifying their cost advantage relative to less productive firms. This in turn implies that
the equilibrium size distribution of firms will feature more positive skewness than what would be
observed without foreign sourcing.
       It is important to emphasize that this first result does not imply that the extensive margin of
sourcing at the firm level (i.e., the number of elements of Ji (ϕ)) is necessarily increasing in firm
productivity as well. For example, a highly productive firm from i might pay a large fixed cost to
offshore to a country j ∗ with a particularly high sourcing potential (i.e., a high value of Tj ∗ (τij ∗ wj ∗ )−θ )
– thus greatly increasing Θi – after which the firm might not have an incentive to add further locations
to its sourcing strategy. Instead, a low productivity firm from i might not be able to profitably offshore
to j ∗ , but may well find it optimal to source from two foreign countries with associated lower fixed
costs.
       Part (b) of Proposition 1 states, however, that this possibility can only arise when (σ − 1) /θ < 1.
When instead (σ − 1) /θ ≥ 1, the cardinality of the set Ji (ϕ) is necessarily weakly increasing in ϕ.
Because firm size is increasing in core productivity ϕ, this prediction is consistent with the upward
sloping sales premium documented in Figure 1 in the Introduction. The intuition behind this second
result in Proposition 1 rests on the fact that, when (σ − 1) /θ > 1, the profit function πi (ϕ) features
increasing differences in (Iij , Iik ) for j, k ∈ {1, ..., J} and j 6= k, and thus the marginal gain from adding
a new location to the set Ji (ϕ) cannot possibly be reduced by the addition of other countries to the
set. This case is more likely to apply whenever demand is elastic and thus profits are particularly
responsive to variable cost reductions (high σ), and whenever input efficiency levels are relatively
heterogeneous across markets (low θ), so that one achieves a relatively high reduction of costs by
adding an extra country into the set of active locations.11
       Part (b) of Proposition 1 also has the strong implication that there should be a strict hierarchical
order in the extensive margin of offshoring – a ‘pecking order’ which is reminiscent of the one typically
obtained in models of exporting with heterogeneous firms, such as Eaton et al. (2011). This prediction
is very strong and often violated in the data: it is not uncommon to observe less productive firms
sourcing from countries from which more productive firms do not source. Still, in section 4.2 we
show that over a third of U.S. firms follow the predicted pecking order from the top ten source
countries, whereas we would expect only 20 percent to do so if the probabilities to source from
individual countries were independent and equal to the share of importers that source from them.
A possible explanation for the violation of a strict hierarchy of import sources is the fact that fixed
costs of sourcing might be heterogeneous across firms. With that in mind, our structural estimation
in section 5 will incorporate such heterogeneity in fixed costs. In that section, a variant of part (b) of
Proposition 1 will be instrumental for reducing the dimensionality of the optimal sourcing problem.
In particular, because of increasing differences in the profit function when σ − 1 > θ, we can state
(see the Online Appendix for a formal proof):
  11
    Readers familiar with the work of Eaton and Kortum (2002) might expect that θ > σ − 1 is in fact implied by the
need for the firm’s marginal cost function to be well-defined. Note, however, that our parameter ρ plays the role of σ
in the Eaton-Kortum setup, and thus this technical condition is instead θ > ρ − 1 in our setup (see footnote 9).


                                                         12
Proposition 2. Define the mapping Vj (ϕ, J ) taking a value of one whenever including country j in
the sourcing strategy J raises firm-level profits πi (ϕ, J ) , and taking a value of zero otherwise. Then,
whenever (σ − 1) /θ ≥ 1, Vj (ϕ, J 0 ) ≥ Vj (ϕ, J ) for J ⊆ J 0 .

   The usefulness of this result is best demonstrated with an example. Suppose that one is trying
to assess whether a given country j belongs in the firm’s optimal sourcing strategy Ji (ϕ). Without
guidance from the theory, one would need to compute all 2J candidate sourcing strategies to answer
that question. Proposition 2 implies, however, that if for country j, Vj (ϕ, J ) = 1 when J is the
null set, then j is necessarily in Ji (ϕ), while if Vj (ϕ, J ) = 0 when J includes all countries except
for j, then j cannot possibly be in Ji (ϕ). In section 5 we will discuss Jia’s (2008) algorithm, which
leverages this logic to devise an iterative algorithm to solve the problem defined in (11) efficiently.
   In our above discussion, we focused on the ‘complements case’ (σ − 1 > θ), which allows one
to characterize some key properties of the optimal sourcing problem in (11) without any restriction
on the relationship between the various countries’ sourcing potentials and fixed costs of sourcing.
In the ‘substitutes case’ (σ − 1 < θ), this is no longer feasible and one needs to make additional
assumptions to obtain a sharp characterization of the firm’s sourcing strategy. For instance, consider
a situation in which the fixed costs of offshoring are common for all foreign countries (as in Blaum
et al., 2015), so fij = fiO for all j 6= i. In such a case, and regardless of the value of (σ − 1) /θ, one
could then rank foreign locations j 6= i according to their sourcing potential Tj (τij wj )−θ and denote
by ir = {i1 , i2, ..., iJ−1 } the country with the r-th highest value of Tj (τij wj )−θ . Having constructed
ir , it then follows that for any firm with productivity ϕ from i that offshores to at least one country,
we have i1 ∈ Ji (ϕ); for any firm that offshores to at least two countries, we have i2 ∈ Ji (ϕ); and so
on. In other words, not only does the extensive margin increase monotonically with firm productivity,
but it does so in a manner uniquely determined by the ranking of the Tj (τij wj )−θ sourcing potential
terms. It is important to emphasize, however, that this result relies on the assumption of identical
offshoring fixed costs across sourcing countries, an assumption that appears particularly unlikely in
light of the evidence documented in Table 1.
   Even in the presence of cross-country differences in the fixed costs of offshoring, a similar sharp
result emerges in the knife-edge case in which (σ − 1) /θ = 1. In that case, the addition of an
element to the set Ji (ϕ) has no effect on the decision to add any other element to the set, and the
same pecking order pattern described in the previous paragraph applies, but when one ranks foreign
locations according to the ratio Tj (τij wj )−θ /fij rather than Tj (τij wj )−θ . This result is analogous to
the one obtained in standard models of selection into exporting featuring constant marginal costs, in
which the decision to service a given market is independent of that same decision in other markets.
   We close this section by using the properties of the profit function to discuss comparative statics
that apply when holding constant the market demand level Bi . First, and quite naturally, a reduction
in any iceberg trade cost τij or fixed cost of sourcing fij (weakly) increases the firm’s sourcing
capability Θi (ϕ) and thus firm-level profits. Second, in the complements case, a reduction of any τij
or fij also (weakly) increases the extensive margin of global sourcing, in the sense that the set Ji (ϕ)
is nondecreasing in τij and fij for any j. Third, and perhaps more surprisingly, in the complements
case a reduction of any τij or fij (weakly) increases firm-level bilateral input purchases from all


                                                     13
countries. To see this, note that firm-level intermediate input purchases from any country j ∈ Ji (ϕ)
are a fraction (σ − 1) χij (ϕ) of firm profits, and using (7) and (10), they can thus be expressed as

                
                 (σ − 1) B γ (σ−1)/θ ϕσ−1 (Θ (ϕ))(σ−1−θ)/θ T (τ w )−θ        if j ∈ Ji (ϕ)
                           i                 i               j ij j
      Mij (ϕ) =                                                                                    (12)
                 0                                                           otherwise.

   When (σ − 1) /θ ≥ 1, Mij (ϕ) is thus increasing in all the terms in Θi (ϕ). Intuitively, when
demand is sufficiently elastic (i.e., σ is high enough) or the strength of comparative advantage in the
intermediate-good sector across countries is sufficiently high (i.e., θ is low enough), the scale effect
through the demand response to lower costs dominates the direct substitution effect related to market
shares shifting towards the locations whose costs of sourcing have been reduced. It is useful to restate
this third result in the following way (see the Online Appendix for a formal proof):

Proposition 3. Holding constant the market demand level Bi , whenever (σ − 1) /θ ≥ 1, an increase
in the sourcing potential Tj (τij wj )−θ or a reduction in the fixed cost fj of any country j, (weakly)
increases the input purchases by firms in i not only from j, but also from all other countries.

   It should be emphasized that the sharp results above only apply when holding market demand –
of which the price index is a key component – fixed. In general equilibrium, these same parameters
also affect the level of market demand. As we shall see in our counterfactual exercise in section 6,
the endogenous response of market demand is quantitatively important in our estimation, and thus
the implications we derive from changes in trade costs are much more nuanced than those discussed
above (see Bache and Laugesen, 2013). Despite these nuances, Proposition 3 will still prove to be very
useful in interpreting our counterfactual results and in relating them to the observed transformation
in the global sourcing practices of U.S. firms.

3.3    Industry and General Equilibrium
Consider now the general equilibrium of the model. As mentioned before, we simplify matters by
assuming that consumers spend a constant share (which we denote by η) of their income on manufac-
turing. The remaining share 1 − η of income is spent on a perfectly competitive non-manufacturing
sector that competes for labor with manufacturing firms. Technology in that sector is linear in labor,
and we assume that 1−η is large enough to guarantee that the wage rate wi in each country i is pinned
down by labor productivity in that sector. For simplicity, we also assume that this ‘outside’ sector’s
output is homogeneous, freely tradable across countries, and serves as a numeraire in the model. We
thus can treat wages as exogenous in solving for the equilibrium in each country’s manufacturing
sector.
   We next turn to describing the equilibrium in the manufacturing sector. Given our assumption
that final-good producers only observe their productivity after paying the fixed cost of entry, we can




                                                  14
use equation (10) to express the free-entry condition in manufacturing as
                                                                                        
                       Z   ∞                                                  X
                               ϕσ−1 (γΘi (ϕ))(σ−1)/θ Bi − wi                         fij  dGi (ϕ) = wi fei .          (13)
                         ϕ̃i                                               j∈Ji (ϕ)


In the lower bound of the integral, ϕ̃i denotes the productivity of the least productive active firm
in country i. Firms with productivity ϕ < ϕ̃i cannot profitably source from any country and thus
exit upon observing their productivity level. Note that Bi affects expected operating profits both
directly via the explicit term on the left-hand side of (13), but also indirectly through its impact
on the determination of ϕ̃i , Ji (ϕ) and Θi (ϕ). Despite these rich effects (and the fact that the set
Ji (ϕ) is not easily determined), in the Online Appendix we show that one can appeal to monotone
comparative statics arguments to prove that:

Proposition 4. Equation (13) delivers a unique market demand level Bi for each country i ∈ J.

       This result applies both in the complements case as well as in the substitutes case and ensures
the existence of a unique industry equilibrium. In particular, the firm-level combinatorial problem
in (11) delivers a unique solution given a market demand Bi and exogenous parameters (including
wages). Furthermore, the equilibrium measure Ni of entrants in the industry is easily solved from
equations (3) and (13), by appealing to the marginal cost in (9), to constant-mark-up pricing, and to
the fact that spending Ej in manufacturing is a share η of (labor) income. This delivers:

                                                                        ηLi
                                           Ni =                                              !.                         (14)
                                                      R∞       P
                                                  σ    ϕ̃i              fij dGi (ϕ) + fei
                                                             j∈Ji (ϕ)


With this expression in hand, the equilibrium number of active firms is simply given by Ni [1 − Gi (ϕ̃i )].12

3.4      Gravity
In this section we explore the implications of our model for the aggregate volume of bilateral trade
in manufacturing goods across countries. Because we have assumed that final goods are nontradable,
we can focus on characterizing aggregate intermediate input trade flows between any two countries
i and j. Using equation (12) and aggregating across firms, we obtain the following expression for
aggregate manufacturing imports from country j by firms based in i:
                                   Z   ∞
                    Mij = Ni               Mij (ϕ)dGi (ϕ) = (σ − 1) γ (σ−1)/θ Ni Bi Tj (τij wj )−θ Λij ,                (15)
                                   ϕ̃ij
  12
     In the Online Appendix, we show that in the complements case, and when ϕ is distributed Pareto with shape
parameter κ, we can further reduce equation (14) to Ni = (σ − 1) ηLi / (σκfei ). In such a case, the measure of entrants
is independent of trade costs. This result is analogous to that derived in canonical models of selection into exporting
(see, for instance, Arkolakis et al. (2012)), but note that it here applies in a setup with interdependent entry decisions. It
is important to stress, however, that this result relies on the existence of fixed costs of domestic sourcing which generate
a positive measure of inactive firms that do not source any inputs. Because in our empirical work all firms are active
and source inputs, we will set fii = 0, and the equilibrium measure of entrants will react to changes in trade costs,
wages, and technological parameters.


                                                                   15
where                                     Z   ∞
                                Λij =             Iij (ϕ) (Θi (ϕ))(σ−1−θ)/θ ϕσ−1 dGi (ϕ) .                        (16)
                                           ϕ̃ij

In the second expression, ϕ̃ij denotes the productivity of the least productive firm from i offshoring
to j, while Iij (ϕ) = 1 for j ∈ Ji (ϕ) and Iij (ϕ) = 0 otherwise. We next re-express equation (15)
so that it is comparable to gravity equations used in empirical analyses. In particular, plugging the
equilibrium values for Bi and Ni in (13) and (14), and rearranging, we obtain

                                         Ei                           Qj
                              Mij =     1−σ            ×P           Ek      −θ
                                                                                     × τij−θ × Λij ,              (17)
                                      Pi /Ni                   k P 1−σ /Nk τkj Λkj
                                                                  k


where Ei equals country i’s total spending in manufacturing goods (which is a multiple σ/ (σ − 1) of
                                                              P
country i’s worldwide absorption of intermediate inputs), Qj = k Mkj denotes the total production
of intermediate inputs in country j, and Pi is the ideal manufacturing price index in country i.13
      Equation (17) resembles a standard gravity equation relating bilateral trade flows to an importer
‘fixed effect’ (i.e., a term that is common for all exporters holding the importer country constant), an
analogous exporter fixed effect, and bilateral iceberg trade barriers τij . Notice, however, that equation
(17) incorporates an additional term Λij that typically varies both across importers and exporters.
In fact, the only case in which this is not the case is when the fixed costs of offshoring are low enough
to ensure that all firms acquire the capability to source inputs from all countries. In such a case, we
have                                                          !(σ−1−θ)/θ Z
                                                                             ∞
                                          Tk (τik wk )−θ
                                    X
                          Λij =                                                   ϕσ−1 dGi (ϕ) = Λi ,
                                    k∈J                                     ϕ̃i

and thus Λij gets ‘absorbed’ into the importer fixed effect. In this universal importing case, the elas-
ticity of trade flows with respect to changes in these bilateral trade frictions is shaped by the Fréchet
parameter θ, just as in the Eaton and Kortum (2002) framework. This should not be surprising,
since, in the absence of selection into offshoring, all firms buy inputs from all markets according to
the same market shares χij in (7) with Ji (ϕ) = J for all ϕ.
      When fixed costs of sourcing are large enough to generate selection into importing, changes in
variable trade costs will not only affect firm-level sourcing decisions conditional on a sourcing strategy,
but will also affect these same sourcing strategies. As a result, the aggregate elasticity of bilateral
trade flows to bilateral trade frictions no longer coincides with the firm-level one, given by θ. In the
plausible case in which a reduction in τij enhances the extensive margin of imports from country j,
the aggregate trade elasticity will thus tend to be higher than θ.
      A general proof of this magnification result for arbitrary parameter values of σ and θ, and for a
general distribution of productivity Gi (ϕ), is intricate due to the difficulties in the characterization
of Θi (ϕ) and due to industry equilibrium effects. For the special case in which (σ − 1) = θ, notice
however that Λij reduces to                        Z   ∞
                                          Λij =             ϕσ−1 dGi (ϕ) = Λij (ϕ̃ij ) .
                                                     ϕ̃ij
                                                                                      R∞
 13
      The ideal manufacturing price index in country i is given by Pi1−σ = Ni          ϕ̃i
                                                                                             pi (ϕ)1−σ dGi (ϕ).


                                                                  16
       Thus, to the extent that a reduction in bilateral trade costs between i and j generates an increase
in the measure of firms from i sourcing in j (i.e., a reduction in ϕ̃ij ), it is clear that the elasticity of
bilateral trade flows with respect to τij will now be higher than the firm-level one. Furthermore, as
we show in the Online Appendix, if we assume that firms draw their core productivity from a Pareto
distribution with shape parameter κ (assumed to be higher than σ − 1 to ensure a finite variance of
sales), we can express aggregate manufacturing imports from country j by firms based in i as

                       (Ei )κ/(σ−1)                           Qj
               Mij =                          κ/(σ−1)
                                                                                              (τij )−κ (fij )1−κ/(σ−1) ,   (18)
                            Ψi      P     (Ek )
                                                           (τkj )   −θ
                                                                         (fkj )   1−κ/(σ−1)
                                        k      Ψk

                               κ/(σ−1)−1
where Ψi = fei ϕ−κ
                i
                   Pi−κ wi                 /Li . Notice that equation (18) is a well defined gravity equation
in which the ‘trade elasticity’ (i.e., the elasticity of trade flows with respect to variable trade costs)
can still be recovered from a log-linear specification that includes importer and exporter fixed effects.
But notice that this trade elasticity κ is now predicted to be higher than the one obtained when the
model features no extensive margin of importing at the country level (since κ > σ − 1 = θ).14
       The knife-edge case σ − 1 = θ is useful in illustrating why one should expect the aggregate trade
elasticity to be larger than the firm-level one. Yet it masks the fact that whenever σ − 1 6= θ, Λij in
(16) will be a function of Iij (ϕ) Θi (ϕ) for ϕ > ϕ̃ij , and will thus depend on which other countries
are included in the sourcing strategy of firms from i sourcing from j and those other countries’
characteristics. In such a case, equation (17) becomes an extended gravity equation – to use the term
in Morales et al. (2014) – featuring third market effects. Holding constant the sourcing strategy of all
firms (and thus ϕ̃ij and Iij (ϕ) in equation (16)), it appears that the sign of these third-market effects
depends crucially on whether σ − 1 > θ or σ − 1 < θ. Nevertheless, changes in trade costs naturally
affect the extensive margin of sourcing and also lead to rich industry equilibrium effects, thereby
thwarting a sharp characterization of these extended gravity effects in our model. Interestingly, our
model suggests a relatively simple way to control for these extended gravity forces. In particular,
defining the importer-specific term Ξi = Ti (τii wi )−θ (σ − 1) γ (σ−1)/θ Ni Bi , note that we can express
                                                Z    ∞
                1
          Λij =    × (σ − 1) Ni Bi γ (σ−1)/θ               Iij (ϕ) ϕσ−1 (Θi (ϕ))(σ−1−θ)/θ Ti (τii wi )−θ dGi (ϕ) ,
                Ξi                                  ϕ̃ij


where the second term on the right-hand-side corresponds to the domestic input purchases aggregated
over all firms based in i that import inputs from j. We will elaborate on this point in section 5.2.
  14
    It may be surprising that the Fréchet parameter θ, which was key in governing the ‘trade elasticity’ (i.e., the
elasticity of trade flows to variable trade costs) at the firm level, is now irrelevant when computing that same elasticity
at the aggregate level. To understand this result, it is useful to relate our framework to the multi-country versions of
the Melitz model in Chaney (2008), Arkolakis et al. (2008) or Helpman et al. (2008), where an analogous result applies.
In those models, firms pay fixed costs of exporting to obtain additional operating profit flows proportional to ϕσ−1 that
enter linearly and separably in the firm’s profit function. Even though in our model, selection into offshoring increases
firm profits by reducing effective marginal costs, whenever σ − 1 = θ, the gain from adding a new market is strictly
separable in the profit function and also proportional to ϕσ−1 . Hence, this effect is isomorphic to a situation in which
the firm obtained additional revenue by selecting into exporting. It is thus not surprising that the gravity equation we
obtain in (18) is essentially identical to those obtained by Chaney (2008) or Arkolakis et al. (2008).




                                                                17
4         Data Sources and Descriptive Evidence
In the theory sections, we provide a parsimonious model that characterizes the margins of firms’
global sourcing decisions. When there are complementarities in the firm’s extensive margin sourcing
decisions, the model is consistent with the strong, increasing relationship between firm size and
the number of source countries depicted in Figure 1. The model also provides a framework for
distinguishing between country-level fixed costs and country sourcing potential – two key dimensions
along which Table 1 suggests that countries differ. Before turning to the structural estimation,
we describe the data used in the paper and provide several novel empirical facts that support the
theoretical framework.

4.1        Data Description
The primary data used in the paper are from the U.S. Census Bureau’s 1997 and 2007 Economic Cen-
suses (EC), Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), and Import transaction database. The LBD uses
administrative record data to provide employment and industry for every private, non-farm employer
establishment in the U.S. The ECs supplement this information with additional establishment-level
variables, such as sales, value-added, and input usage.15 The import data, collected by U.S. Customs
facilities, are based on the universe of import transactions into the U.S. They contain information on
the products, values, and countries of firms’ imports. We match these data at the firm level to the
LBD and the EC data.
         The focus of this paper is on firms involved in the production of goods. We therefore limit the
analysis to firms with at least one manufacturing establishment. Because we envision a production
process entailing physical transformation activities (manufacturing) as well as headquarter activities
(design, distribution, marketing, etc.), we include firms with activities outside of manufacturing.16
We also limit the sample to firms with positive sales and employment and exclude all mineral imports
from the analysis since they do not represent offshoring. Firms with at least one manufacturing plant
account for five percent of firms, 23 percent of employment, 38 percent of sales, and 65 percent of non-
mineral imports. In terms of explaining aggregate U.S. sourcing patterns, it is critically important to
include firms with manufacturing and other activities. They account for 60 percent of U.S. imports,
while manufacturing-only firms account for just five percent. The import behavior of the firms in our
sample is consistent with patterns documented in past work on heterogeneous firms in trade. About
one quarter of U.S. manufacturing firms have positive imports in 2007. Additional details on the
    15
     The Census of Manufactures (CM) has been widely used in previous work. The other censuses are for Construction,
Finance, Insurance and Real Estate, Management of Companies, Professional and Technical Services, Retail Trade,
Transportation and Warehousing, and Wholesale Trade. The variables available differ across these censuses. This
coverage ensures that we provide a more complete depiction of the entire firm compared to studies that rely solely on
the CM.
  16
     We recognize that focusing on firms with positive manufacturing activity will miss some offshoring, for example by
factoryless goods producers (FGPs) in the wholesale sector that have offshored all physical transformation activities
(see Bernard and Fort, 2015, for details). Unfortunately, there is no practical way to distinguish FGPs from traditional
wholesale establishments. Furthermore, data on input usage, which is crucial for our structural estimation, is less
complete for firms outside manufacturing. We also note that we cannot identify manufacturing firms that use inputs
imported by intermediaries.



                                                          18
sample and data construction are in the Online Data Appendix.
   The model predicts an important role for country characteristics in determining country-level
fixed costs and sourcing potential. We compile a dataset with the key country characteristics in
2007– technology and wages, as well as other controls– from various sources. Country R&D data and
the number of private firms in a country for 2007 are from the World Bank Development Indicators.
Wage data are from the ILO data described by Oostendorp (2005). Distance and language are from
CEPII. Physical capital is based on the methodology in Hall and Jones (1999), but constructed using
the most recent data from the Penn World Tables described by Heston et al. (2011). Control of
corruption is from the World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators. We also obtain years of
schooling and population from Barro and Lee (2010).

4.2   Descriptive Evidence
We use the 2007 data to assess the model’s assumptions and predictions. First, we provide information
on the number of products imported by U.S. firms, and the number of countries from which they
source. Second, we show that although firms source multiple inputs from multiple countries, each
input is generally sourced from a single location. Finally, we document the extent to which firm
sourcing decisions follow a hierarchical pattern.
   Two key assumptions that drive our theoretical approach are that firms source multiple inputs
and that they may source these inputs from multiple countries. While the Census data do not provide
detailed information about the total number of inputs used by a firm, the linked import data can
shed light on the number of foreign inputs firms use. We define a product as a distinct Harmonized
Schedule ten-digit code, of which there are nearly 17,000 categories in the U.S. import data. The data
show that importers source an average of 12 distinct products from about three foreign countries.
The median number of imported products is two, while the 95th percentile is 41. The median number
of source countries is two, and the 95th percentile is 11.
   One feature of our model is that it delivers a closed-form solution for the share of inputs a firm
sources from a particular country. This solution comes from an Eaton and Kortum (2002) selection
process in which a firm sources each input from the single, lowest cost location. Table 2 shows that
this assumption is consistent with the data. While firms tend to source multiple inputs per country,
they seldom buy the same product from more than one country. The left panel of Table 2 presents
statistics on the firm-level mean, median, and maximum number of products that a firm imports from
a particular country. We report the mean, median, and 95th percentile of these firm-level measures.
The average of the firm-level mean is 2.78 products imported per country, and the 95th percentile of
the firm-level mean is 8.23. Column 3 shows that the average of the maximum number of products a
firm imports from a particular country is 7.21, and the 95th percentile is 25 products per country.
   The right panel of Table 2 presents the same firm-level statistics for the number of countries from
which a firm imports the same HS10 product. Unlike the product counts per country, almost every
statistic in this panel is about one. The median firm imports each distinct product from an average
of only one country. The median number of countries per product for firms is always one, even for
the 95th percentile of firms. Finally, the maximum number of countries per product for the median


                                                    19
Table 2: Firm-level statistics on the number of imported products per source country and the number
of source countries per imported product


                                Products Per Country            Countries Per Product
                                   Firm-level                       Firm-level
                               Mean Median Max                  Mean Median Max
                    Mean        2.78      2.18      7.21         1.11      1.03      1.78
                    Median      2.00      2.00      2.00         1.00      1.00      1.00
                    95%tile     8.23      5.00      25.00        1.61      1.00      4.00
                    Notes: The left panel reports on the number of unique HS10 products
                    that a firm imports from a particular country. The right panel reports
                    on the number of countries from which a firm imports the same HS10
                    product.




firm is still just one, while firms in the 95th percentile import the same product from a maximum of
four countries. These results provide strong support for the premise that firms source each input from
one location. In the Online Appendix we show that this pattern is still evident when the sample of
importers is limited to firms that source from at least three countries. We also provide the statistics
at the HS6 level, and we show that every statistic on the number of countries from which a firm
sources a given product is equal to or lower than the comparable statistic for the number of countries
to which a firm exports a given product.
   Before turning to the structural estimation, it is useful to assess the extent to which firms follow
a hierarchical pecking order in their sourcing behavior. To do so, we follow Eaton et al. (2011)
and count the number of firms that import from Canada (the top destination by firm rank) and
no other countries, the number that import from Canada and China (the top two destinations) and
no others, and so on. We calculate these statistics irrespective of firm sourcing outside the top ten
countries. Columns 1 and 2 in Table 3 show that over 21 thousand firms, or 36 percent of importers,
follow a pecking order. To assess the significance of this share, we calculate the share of firms that
would follow this hierarchy if firms selected into countries randomly. Specifically, we use the share of
importers from country j as the probability that any given firm will source from j, and we assume
that each probability is independent. Column 5 shows that fewer than 20 percent of firms would
follow a pecking order under random entry–just over half the share observed in the data.
   This pattern is reminiscent of the results found by Eaton et al. (2011) in their study of French
exporters. While it is certainly suggestive of a pecking order in which country characteristics make
some countries particularly appealing for all U.S. firms, it also points to a high degree of firm-specific
idiosyncrasies in the selection of a firm’s sourcing strategy. We will incorporate this feature of the
data in our structural analysis by extending the theory to allow for firm-country-specific fixed costs.




                                                     20
                     Table 3: U.S. firms importing from strings of top 10 countries

                                                                    Data                        Random Entry
 String                                                  Firms     % of Importers          Firms     % of Importers
    CA                                                   17,980          29.82             6,760           11.21
    CA-CH                                                 2,210           3.67             3,730           6.19
    CA-CH-DE                                               340            0.56             1,030           1.71
    CA-CH-DE-GB                                            150            0.25              240            0.40
    CA-CH-DE-GB-TW                                          80            0.13               50            0.08
    CA-CH-DE-GB-TW-IT                                       30            0.05               10            0.02
    CA-CH-DE-GB-TW-IT-JP                                    30            0.05                0            0.00
    CA-CH-DE-GB-TW-IT-JP-MX                                 50            0.08                0            0.00
    CA-CH-DE-GB-TW-IT-JP-MX-FR                             160            0.27                0             0.00
    CA-CH-DE-GB-TW-IT-JP-MX-FR-KR                          650           1.08                 0             0.00
 TOTAL Following Pecking Order                           21,680          36.0              11,820          19.6
 Notes: The string CA means importing from Canada but no other among the top 10; CA-CH means importing from
 Canada and China but no other; and so forth. % of Importers shows percent of each category relative to all firms that
 import from top 10 countries.




5    Structural Analysis
In this section, we use the firm-level data in conjunction with country-level data to estimate the
key parameters of the model. In doing so, we distinguish country sourcing potential from the fixed
costs of sourcing and quantify the extent to which the latter depend upon source-destination-specific
country characteristics. The parameter estimates obtained here are also critical for performing the
counterfactual exercises in the next section.
    The structural analysis is performed in three distinct steps. First, we use a simple linear regression
to estimate each country’s sourcing potential Tj (τij wj )−θ from a U.S. perspective (i.e., i = U.S.). In
the second step, we estimate the productivity dispersion parameter, θ, by projecting the estimated
sourcing potential values on observed cost shifters and other controls. We also measure the elasticity
of demand, σ, from observed variable mark-ups. In the third and final step, we estimate the fixed
costs of sourcing and other distributional parameters via the method of simulated moments. To make
the firm’s problem computationally feasible, we apply the technique in Jia (2008), originally designed
to estimate an entry game among chains and other discount retailers in a large number of markets.
    Because we use data on the sourcing strategies of firms from a single country, in what follows,
we often drop the subscript i from the notation, with the understanding that the unique importing
country is the U.S. We also denote a firm by superscript n. To facilitate the estimation, we include
only those countries with at least 200 U.S. importing firms. This criterion leaves us with a total of
67 countries, including the U.S.




                                                         21
5.1      Step 1: Estimation of a Country’s Sourcing Potential
The first step in our structural analysis is to estimate each country’s sourcing potential. To do so, we
take the firm’s sourcing strategy J n as given and exploit differences in its share of sourcing across
countries. Recall from equation (7) in the model that a firm’s share of inputs sourced from country j,
χnij , is simply that country’s contribution to the firm’s sourcing capability, Θni . Country j’s sourcing
potential – from the perspective of country i – is therefore summarized by the term ξj ≡ Tj (τij wj )−θ .
Rearranging equation (7) by taking logs and normalizing the share of inputs purchased from country
j by the firm’s share of domestic inputs leads to

                                        log χnij − log χnii = log ξj + log nj ,                                   (19)

where n denotes the firm. In order to turn the model’s equilibrium condition (7) into an empirical
specification, note that this equation includes a firm-country-specific shock nj .17
       The dependent variable in equation (19) is the difference between a firm’s share of inputs sourced
from country j and its share of inputs sourced domestically. We measure these shares using data on
a firm’s total input use, production worker wages, and total imports from each country from which
it sources. We include firms that import from countries with fewer than 200 U.S. importers in the
estimation, adjusting their total input usage by subtracting their imports from any of the excluded
countries. Additional details on our measure of input shares are in the Estimation Appendix.
       Intuitively, this specification allows us to identify a country’s average sourcing potential ξj by
observing how much a firm imports from that country relative to the same firm’s domestic input
purchases, restricting attention to countries included in the firm’s sourcing strategy. For this mea-
surement strategy to be consistent, it is important that there is no selection based on the errors in the
regression. This condition will be satisfied if firms only learn their country-specific efficiency shocks,
nj , after their sourcing strategy is selected, or if the term nj simply represents measurement error. It
is also consistent with firm-country-specific shocks to the fixed costs of sourcing. In what follows we
treat nj as measurement error.18
       Table 4 provides summary statistics from estimating equation (19) via Ordinary Least Squares
(OLS), using country fixed effects to capture the ξj terms. The estimated coefficients on these fixed
effects represent each country’s sourcing potential, which we note is simply the average share difference
by country. By estimating sourcing potentials via OLS, however, we also calculates standard errors,
which show that all the sourcing potential fixed effects are significant at the 99 percent level. We
have also estimated these sourcing potential measures controlling for industry effects. The estimates
are highly correlated (0.996) with our baseline results and retain their statistical significance.
       Figure 2 plots the estimated sourcing potential fixed effects against total input purchases (left
panel) and against the number of firms importing from that country (right panel). Our parameter
  17
     When normalizing by the domestic share, we set domestic sourcing potential to 1. All other country variables are
then measured relative to the U.S. value.
  18
     Note that this assumption rules out measurement error related to a firm’s global sourcing strategy. In other words,
we assume that the set of countries from which the firm imports is correctly observed and that a firm has positive
imports from all countries for which it has paid a fixed cost of sourcing.



                                                          22
estimates suggest that China has the highest sourcing potential for U.S. firms, followed by Canada
and Taiwan. More firms import from Germany and the United Kingdom than from Taiwan, however,
and more firms import from Canada than from China, suggesting that fixed costs of sourcing are
likely to differ across source countries. The variation in this figure is helpful for understanding
how the structural estimation will identify country fixed costs. For instance, it is heterogeneity in
those costs across countries that will result in fewer firms sourcing from China–the highest potential
country–relative to Canada.

                              Table 4: Summary statistics for sourcing
                              potential estimation

                               Number of observations            200,000
                               Range of foreign log ξj       - 3.78 to -8.22
                               Sum of foreign ξj                  0.193
                              Notes: Summary statistics for regression based on
                              equation (19). Estimated fixed effects plotted in
                              Figure 2. Number of observations rounded for dis-
                              closure avoidance. The R2 from specification with
                              a constant is 0.08.




                          Figure 2: Country sourcing potential parameters




   Our estimates of the sourcing potential of a country enable us to calculate the extent to which the
sourcing capability of a firm Θn = j∈J n ξj is higher if it imports from all countries as opposed to
                                   P

sourcing only domestically. Since domestic sourcing potential is normalized to one and the summation
of the foreign sourcing potential terms is 0.193, these results imply that the sourcing capability of
a firm that imports from all 67 countries is 19.3 percent larger than that of a firm sourcing only
domestically. The impact of a firm’s sourcing capability on its marginal cost in turn depends on
the dispersion parameter θ of the intermediates productivities, as seen in equation (9). The effect of
sourcing capability on firm sales also depends on θ, as well as on the elasticity of substitution, σ. We
now turn to estimating these two parameters.


                                                     23
5.2      Step 2: Estimation of the Elasticity of Demand and Input Productivity Dis-
         persion
It is simpler to start by discussing how we recover σ from the data. With CES preferences and
monopolistic competition, the ratio of sales to variable input purchases (including intermediates and
basic factors of production) is σ/ (σ − 1). We exploit this relationship to obtain a parameter value for
σ by calculating a measure of average mark-ups from the establishment-level data in the 2007 Census
of Manufactures. Specifically, the mark-up is the ratio of sales to variable inputs, where inputs are
the sum of an establishment’s materials, wages, capital expenditures, and total expenses. The mark-
up for the median establishment is 35 percent, with a bootstrapped standard error of 0.0005. This
implies an estimate for the elasticity of demand, σ, of 3.85. Of course it is impossible to distinguish
perfectly between fixed and variable costs in the data, and there may be certain costs that simply
are not measured well, but we view this as a plausible estimate that is similar to previous findings.19
Given the potential issues that may affect the accuracy of our estimate of the demand elasticity, we
include a sensitivity analysis in section 6.3, in which we consider alternative values for the elasticity
of demand, as well as other parameters.
       A second key parameter of our model is the dispersion of the productivity shocks of the interme-
diate inputs. Conditional on the firm’s sourcing strategy, θ represents the firm-level trade elasticity
in our model. We use data on wages to identify this elasticity. Recall that the sourcing potential ξj ,
which we estimated in the previous section, is a function of a country’s technology parameter, trade
costs, and wages. We thus project the estimated sourcing potential on proxies for all these terms,
including R&D stock, capital per worker, a measure of control of corruption, wages, distance, and
common language. Specifically, we estimate the following equation:

       logˆ ξj =β0 + βr log R&Dj + βk log capitalj + βF log number of firmsj − θ log wj
                                                                                             
               − θ log βc + βd log distanceij + languageij log βl + βC control of corruptionj + ιj ,              (20)

so that iceberg trade costs are proxied by log distance, common language, and control of corruption.
       Equation (20) shows that the parameter θ can be recovered from the estimated coefficient on wages.
In theory, one could also identify θ using tariffs, but, as we show in the Online Data Appendix, there is
not enough variation in U.S. tariffs to do so. A potential issue with the use of country wage data is the
fact that variation in wages partly reflects differences in worker productivity and skill across countries.
Since firms’ sourcing decisions are based on the cost of an efficiency unit of labor, we follow Eaton and
Kortum (2002) and use a human-capital-adjusted wage. Even adjusting for skill differences across
workers, there are other country-level factors that are likely correlated with the average wage, such as
infrastructure, that will lead to an upward bias on the wage coefficient. To address this issue, as well
the potential for measurement error, we instrument for a country’s wage using its population. The
first stage results, presented in the Estimation Appendix, show a negative and statistically significant
coefficient on the log of country population. One concern with using population as an instrument
  19
    For example, Broda and Weinstein (2006) estimate a mean elasticity of 4 and a median of 2.2 at the SITC-3 level for
1990-2001. At the SITC-4 level, Feenstra and Romalis (2014) estimate a higher median elasticity of 6.2 for 1984-2011.
Our estimate falls within this range.


                                                          24
is that it may violate the exclusion restriction if high population countries are also technologically
advanced countries. To address that possibility, we include country R&D stock, a level measure of
technology, in all specifications. Country population may also indirectly affect sourcing potential since
it could be correlated with the number of potential suppliers in a country, a concern that leads us to
control for the number of private firms in the economy. These country-level variables are available
for 57 of the 66 foreign countries included in the structural estimation.
   The first column of Table 5 presents the results from estimating equation (20) via OLS. Column 2
provides the analogous IV estimates, using population as an instrument for wages. As expected, the
IV estimate for θ (1.789) is larger than the OLS estimate. In line with the discussion in section 3.4, the
data on firm-level trade flows suggest a much larger dispersion in productivities across countries than
is typically obtained with aggregate trade data. For example, Eaton and Kortum (2002) estimate
a coefficient of 3.60 using data on wages. Column 4 shows that we obtain a similar coefficient of
4.544 when estimating the same specification as in equation (20), but using aggregate imports as
the dependent variable. In the Online Data Appendix we also provide robustness tests in which we
control for GDP and tariffs, and in which we constrain the coefficient on wages and tariffs to be the
same.
                       Table 5: Estimation of firm and aggregate trade elasticities

                                                   log ξ                        log aggregate imports
                                           OLS             IV               OLS            IV             IV
         log HC adjusted wage           -0.537***      -1.789**             -0.643      -4.544**       -1.268*
                                          (0.184)       (0.696)            (0.390)       (1.844)       (0.768)
         log distance                     -0.341*      -0.621**           -0.859**      -1.733**       -0.650*
                                          (0.197)       (0.294)            (0.418)       (0.779)       (0.333)
         log R&D                         0.352***      0.524***           0.763***      1.298***         0.251
                                          (0.068)       (0.125)            (0.144)       (0.332)       (0.176)
         log capital/worker                -0.184        0.425              -0.264        1.633          0.308
                                          (0.175)       (0.390)            (0.370)       (1.033)       (0.421)
         common language                    0.105        0.146              0.354         0.479         0.137
                                          (0.223)       (0.289)            (0.471)       (0.764)       (0.317)
         control corrupt                    0.156      0.621**               0.365      1.816**         0.414
                                          (0.151)       (0.312)            (0.319)       (0.826)       (0.350)
         log no. of firms                   0.108        -0.020              0.031        -0.369        -0.062
                                          (0.086)       (0.130)            (0.183)       (0.345)       (0.142)
         log domestic purchases                                                                       2.392***
                                                                                                       (0.327)
         Constant                       -7.250***     -11.068***         14.499***        2.600      -37.389***
                                         (0.922)        (2.323)           (1.952)        (6.156)       (6.573)
         Observations                       57             57                57             57             57
        Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. In the IV specifications, the human-capital-adjusted wage is in-
        strumented by population. HC adjusted wage is country wage adjusted for differences in human capital.
        Domestic purchases is total purchases of U.S. inputs by firms sourcing a particular country. First-stage
        F-statistic on the excluded instrument in 6.49. The first-stage regression results are in the Estimation Ap-
        pendix.


   Motivated by our discussion at the end of section 3.4, in column 5 we present estimates from


                                                            25
including the log of domestic input purchases aggregated over all U.S. firms importing inputs from
country j. To the extent that this term controls for the term Λij in (15), one would expect this
specification to deliver a lower estimate of θ that is in line with the estimate in column 2. Indeed, the
resulting estimate of theta (1.268) is lower than the one in column 4 and quite close to our preferred
estimate from the firm-level data presented in column 2. This result is reassuring, but should be
interpreted with caution for two reasons. First, the orthogonality condition which ensures that our
firm-level estimate of θ in column 2 is consistent, does not guarantee that the estimate in column
5 is consistent as well (see our Online Data Appendix for details). Second, and perhaps relatedly,
the coefficient we obtain on log domestic purchases is higher than the theoretically-predicted value of
1.20 For these two reasons, we henceforth treat our column 2 coefficient θ = 1.789 as our benchmark
estimate of θ.
       With estimates for country sourcing potential, the firm-level trade elasticity, and the elasticity
of demand in hand, we can calculate how global sourcing affects firm costs and size. Our estimates
imply that a firm sourcing from all countries faces around nine percent (1.193(−1/1.789) ) lower input
costs than a firm sourcing purely domestically, and consequently its sales are around 32 percent
(1.193(2.85/1.789) ) larger.
       Across various specifications, including the additional robustness tests included in the Estimation
Appendix, we find that the ratio of elasticity of demand, σ − 1, to the dispersion of intermediate
good efficiencies, θ, is always larger than one. As shown in section 2, this implies that the profit
function has increasing differences in the firm’s sourcing strategy. In the third step of our estimation,
we exploit this feature to solve the firm’s problem numerically and thereby estimate the fixed costs
of sourcing from different markets.

5.3      Step 3: Estimation of Fixed Costs of Sourcing
In this section, we estimate the fixed costs of sourcing via the method of simulated moments. As
is common in the literature that estimates trade costs, we allow the fixed cost of sourcing from
a country to depend on the gravity variables distance and language as well as on a measure of
the source country’s control of corruption. The model discussed so far with common fixed costs
across firms – though possibly varying across countries – implies that the number of importing firms
should be identical to the number of firms that source from the most popular country. This is
an extreme prediction driven by the assumption that firms face an identical fixed cost to source
from a particular market. In contrast, the data show that around 64,600 firms import, but only
about 37,800 import from Canada – the most popular sourcing country. For the remainder of the
structural analysis, we therefore enrich the model by allowing the fixed costs of sourcing to vary by
firm-country combinations. Specifically, we model firm-country-specific fixed costs of sourcing, fijn ,
                                                                         f
which are drawn from a lognormal distribution with dispersion parameter βdisp and scale parameter
log βcf +βdf log distanceij +log βlf languageij +βC
                                                  f
                                                    control of corruptionj .21 Because in our data all firms
  20
     When constraining that coefficient to be 1, we estimate θ = 3.175, which is lower than 4.544, but also higher than
1.789.
  21                                                                                                  n
     Analogous to the core productivity level, ϕ, the firm learns about its fixed costs of sourcing, fij , after having paid
the fixed entry cost, fei , which in turn are homogeneous among potential firms in country i.


                                                            26
source domestically, we cannot identify the fixed costs of domestic sourcing, so we set them equal to
zero (fiin = 0).
       In a setting with a large number of countries, the firm faces a very large discrete choice problem to
solve for its optimal sourcing strategy. If there are 67 countries, the firm selects among 267 , which is
roughly 1020 , possible sourcing strategies. Clearly, calculating the profits for each of these strategies
for every firm is infeasible. To reduce the dimensionality of the firm’s problem, we rely on Proposition
2 and adopt an algorithm first developed by Jia (2008). The specifics of the algorithm are as follows.
Given a core productivity ϕ and a guess J for the firm’s sourcing strategy, J n , define the marginal
benefit of including country j in the sourcing strategy J as:
                                                                  
                  ϕ σ−1 γ (σ−1)/θ B Θ (J ∪ j)(σ−1)/θ − Θ (J )(σ−1)/θ − f n                    if j ∈
                                                                                                   /J
                
                
                                    i                  i               ij

                                                                 
                 ϕσ−1 γ (σ−1)/θ B Θ (J )(σ−1)/θ − Θ (J \ j)(σ−1)/θ − f n
                
                                                                                              if j ∈ J .
                                    i               i                  ij


       As in Proposition 2, we define a mapping, Vj (J ) that takes a value of one if this marginal benefit
is positive, and takes a value of zero otherwise. Under the empirically relevant condition σ − 1 > θ,
Proposition 2 shows that this mapping is an increasing function of J . Jia (2008) shows that when
starting from the set J (which contains no country), an iterative application of the V-operator that
adds each country to the set one-by-one leads to a lower bound of the firm’s sourcing strategy. That
is, the optimal sourcing strategy contains at least those countries for which the marginal benefit of
adding a country is positive when that country is added individually. Similarly, when starting from
the set J (which contains all countries), and removing individual countries one-by-one, the iterative
application of the V-operator leads to an upper bound for the optimal sourcing strategy. Should the
two sets not perfectly overlap, it is only necessary to evaluate the profits resulting from all possible
combinations contained in the upper but not the lower bound set.
       In the presence of a high degree of complementarity, there is the potential for this algorithm to
lead to a large number of possible choices between the two bounds, hence rendering this approach
infeasible. Intuitively, the iterative process might stall too quickly if it is optimal for firms to add
or drop countries from the set J only in pairs (or larger groups). Fortunately, in our application,
this approach leads to completely overlapping lower and upper bound sets in the vast majority of
simulations. In addition, the two sets only differ by a small number of countries in those cases in
which the sets are not identical (see Appendix Table B.4). In principle, the algorithm could still be
useful even if a sizable number of location sets need to be evaluated; for example, one could assume
that the firm evaluates the lower and upper bounds and a random vector of alternative sourcing
strategies that are contained in the two bounds.
       Turning to the practical implementation of our structural estimation, we follow Melitz and Redding
(2015) and assume that firms’ core productivities are distributed Pareto. We set the shape parameter
κ of the Pareto distribution equal to 4.5, but discuss sensitivity results with
                                                                           h    alternative values ifor κ in
section 6.3. This leaves the following six parameters to estimate: δ = B, βcf , βdf , βlf , βC
                                                                                             f    f
                                                                                               , βdisp .22 To
  22
       We set γ 1/θ ϕUS = 1, as it scales input purchases equivalently to an increase in B.



                                                              27
do so, we simulate a large number of U.S. firms. That is, for each firm we draw a core-productivity
shock from a uniform distribution (which, given κ, can be inverted to yield the Pareto-distributed
firm core productivity level), and a J-dimensional vector of fixed cost shocks from a standard normal
distribution (which, given a parameter guess δ, can be used to calculate the lognormal distributed
firm-country specific fixed cost level).23 Note that there is no relationship between the number
of simulated firms and the number of actual firms in the data. The model assumes that we have a
continuum of firms whose core efficiency, fixed cost draws, and country-specific efficiency shocks follow
particular distributions, and we use the simulated firms as evaluation points of these distributions.
       We use the simulated firms to construct three sets of moments. The first moment is the share of
importing firms (about 26 percent in the data). This is simply a scalar, which we label as m1 in the
actual data and as m̂1 (δ) for the simulated data. The second set of moments is the share of firms
that import from each country. We label this (J − 1) × 1 vector of moments in the data as m2 and the
simulated moment vector as m̂2 (δ). This set of moments is informative about the overall magnitude
of the fixed costs of sourcing, as well as on how they vary with distance, language, and control of
corruption. In addition, the share of importing firms from the most popular country relative to the
total share of importers is indicative of the fixed cost dispersion parameter. The intuition here is that
if there were zero dispersion in fixed costs across firms, the total share of importers would be identical
to the share of importers from the most popular sourcing country. Finally, the third moment is the
share of firms whose input purchases from the U.S. are less than the median U.S. input purchases in
the data. This is also a scalar, and we label the moment in the data as m3 and the simulated moment
as m̂3 (δ). The information from this moment helps pin down the scale parameter B.
       We describe the difference between the moments in the data and in the simulated model by ŷ(δ):
                                                                              
                                                                m1 − m̂1 (δ)
                                     ŷ(δ) = m − m̂(δ) =  m2 − m̂2 (δ)  ,
                                                                       

                                                           m3 − m̂3 (δ)
and the following moment condition is assumed to hold at the true parameter value δ0 :

                                                   E [ŷ(δ0 )] = 0.                                               (21)

       The method of simulated moments selects the model parameters that minimize the following
objective function:
                                          δ̂ = arg min [ŷ(δ)]> W [ŷ(δ)] ,                                       (22)
                                                     δ

where W is a weighting matrix. We weight the moments equally, hence the weighting matrix is the
  23
    We use a stratified random sampling technique to simulate the Pareto draws, in which we simulate many more
points in right tail of the distribution (in total 12 intervals with 10 random draws each). For the fixed cost draws we
use a Hybrid-Quasi-Monte-Carlo procedure, in which we generate a vector of 18,000 quasi-random numbers from a van
der Corput sequence in one dimension (which have better coverage properties than usual pseudo-random draws), and
then for each country we use this vector, but with independent random permutations of elements of this vector. Each
core productivity draw is then interacted with a vector of fixed cost draws, which together represent a firm. In total,
the interaction of fixed cost and core productivity draws yields S = 2, 160, 000 simulated firms.




                                                          28
identity matrix.24
       The parameter estimates are displayed in Table 6 below. We find that the fixed costs of sourcing
are increasing in distance with an elasticity of 0.15, and that sourcing from countries with a common
language reduces fixed costs by about 11 percent. The fixed costs of sourcing also seem reasonable in
magnitude. The median fixed cost estimate ranges from 9,000 to 46,000 USD, though the assumption
of a lognormal distribution means they can be substantially larger for some individual firm-country
combinations. Out of the total variance of fixed cost draws across firms and countries, the country-
level variation explains about 14 percent of the total variance, with the remainder explained by
firm-country-level variation.

                                                                   Table 6: Estimated parameters


                                                         B           βcf              βdf            βlf             f
                                                                                                                    βC                f
                                                                                                                                     βdisp
                                                      0.127        0.021         0.146              0.893          -0.408            0.829

       In Figure 3, we show the estimated sourcing potential and median fixed costs by country. It is
clear that Canada has one of the highest sourcing potentials, but the lowest fixed costs. Mexico
has both higher sourcing potentials and higher fixed costs than Germany and the United Kingdom.
These differences in sourcing potentials and fixed costs help reconcile the variation in a country’s
rank in terms of the number of importing firms and the import values displayed in Table 1. They
also highlight the importance of heterogeneous fixed costs in matching the model to the data. We
conclude this section by describing the estimated model’s fit of the data, and by assessing the need
for heterogeneous fixed costs for a good fit.

                Figure 3: Estimated sourcing potential and median fixed costs by country

                                                  −1.2                                              BGD
                                                 10
                                                                                                      RUS
                                                                           VEN UKR
                                                                                EGY                IDN     VNM
                                                  −1.3               ECU                                                                     CHN
                                                 10                                             PHL THA PAK
                                                                                     ARG
                                                                                    DOM HND LKA GTM
                                                          SAU            BGR                             IND
                                                                                  ROM         PERBRA
                                                  −1.4       PAN
                                                 10                             COL     SLVTUR MYS
                                                                                                               MEX
                             Median Fixed Cost




                                                          TTO                GRC POL
                                                                                  CZE                  ITA
                                                                     SVK           ZAFMAC
                                                                                                                TWN
                                                  −1.5                                                   KOR
                                                 10                           HUN
                                                                                    CRI
                                                                           ARE        SVN PRT ESP
                                                  −1.6
                                                                                                       ISR
                                                 10                                                                 JPN
                                                                                            CHL
                                                                                              BEL
                                                                                                          FRA
                                                  −1.7
                                                 10                                                                 DEU

                                                         LUX                       NOR                    HKGGBR
                                                  −1.8
                                                                                     IRLAUT
                                                                                        AUS
                                                 10                                           CHE
                                                                                             NLD
                                                                                        SWE SGP
                                                                                 NZLFIN
                                                                                   DNK
                                                  −1.9
                                                 10                                                                       CAN
                                                                                  −3                                            −2
                                                                                 10                                         10
                                                                                             Sourcing Potential




  24
     We use the identity matrix instead of the inverse of the estimated variance-covariance matrix of the 68 moments
as the weighting matrix, since the former leads to a better fit of the import shares of the most popular countries, in
particular China, which are most relevant for the counterfactuals below (at the expense of a worse fit of the shares of
less popular importing countries).


                                                                                              29
5.4               Fit of the Model
Overall, the model fits the data reasonably well. We start by comparing the predictions of the model
for the moments it was targeted to fit. First, in both the data and baseline model, approximately 26
percent of U.S. firms import (25.8 in the data and 25.9 in the baseline model). For the second set of
moments on the share of importing firms by country, the correlation coefficient between the actual
and simulated data is 0.98. Figure 4a depicts this relationship by country. Finally, in both the data
and in the parameterized model, the median firm’s input purchases from the U.S. are approximately
equal (568,000 in the data and 579,000 in the model). The model also does a good job of two sets
of non-targeted moments. Import shares by country were not targeted directly in the estimation,
but they still have a correlation coefficient of 0.78 between the actual and simulated data. This
relationship is depicted in Figure 4b. In Table 7, we also show that the estimated model does a good
job of matching the hierarchal sourcing patterns of firms.

                               Figure 4: Model fit: share of firms and aggregate sourcing

                    (a) Share of importers by country                    (b) Share of aggregate foreign sourcing by country
                           (targeted moment)                                           (non-targeted moment)
        0                                                                 0
       10                                                                10




                                                                          −1
                                                                         10
        −1
       10



                                                                          −2
                                                                         10
data




                                                                  data




        −2
       10

                                                                          −3
                                                                         10



        −3
       10
                                                                          −4
                                                                         10




        −4                                                                −5
       10                                                                10
             −4          −3         −2         −1        0                     −4      −3          −2         −1         0
            10          10         10         10        10                    10      10          10        10          10
                                  model                                                          model




             It is important to emphasize that our model fits the data substantially better than a model with
common fixed costs across countries and firms. Such a model would be much simpler to estimate,
and would not require our adoption of Jia’s (2008) algorithm to solve the firm’s problem. This
simplification, however, comes at a large expense. For example, in the common fixed costs model
only 18 percent of firms import, as opposed to 26 percent in the baseline model and data (in the
common fixed cost model, the share of importing firms equals the share of firms importing from the
most popular country). The correlation between the common fixed cost model’s predictions and the
data is only 0.63 for the share of importers by country and only 0.66 for import shares by country.
Furthermore, while the baseline model does a good job at fitting the hierarchies in firms’ sourcing
patterns, the common fixed costs model does poorly, since – given the estimated sourcing potentials
– it predicts, for instance, that China, not Canada, is the number one source of inputs.25
 25
    In Appendix Table B.2 we also illustrate the superior fit of the statistics described in Table 1 by the baseline
model compared to the model with common fixed costs. Note that one important point about the comparison of the


                                                             30
                         Table 7: Hierarchies in sourcing patterns: data and model

                                                                             Data     Baseline
                         String                                                        model
                         CA                                                  29.82     29.62
                         CA-CH                                               3.67       3.97
                         CA-CH-DE                                             0.56      0.74
                         CA-CH-DE-GB                                         0.25       0.17
                         CA-CH-DE-GB-TW                                      0.13       0.11
                         CA-CH-DE-GB-TW-IT                                   0.05       0.03
                         CA-CH-DE-GB-TW-IT-JP                                 0.05      0.04
                         CA-CH-DE-GB-TW-IT-JP-MX                              0.08      0.09
                         CA-CH-DE-GB-TW-IT-JP-MX-FR                          0.27       0.15
                         CA-CH-DE-GB-TW-IT-JP-MX-FR-KR                       1.08       0.84
                         TOTAL Following Pecking Order                       36.0        35.8
                       Notes: This table depicts the percentage of importers following a partic-
                       ular sourcing pattern. The first row shows the percentage of firms only
                       importing from Canada; the second row shows the percentage of firms
                       only importing from Canada and China; and so forth (irrespective of
                       firm sourcing outside these top 10 countries). The ranking of countries is
                       determined by the number of firms sourcing from these countries in the
                       data.



6     Counterfactual: An Increase of China’s Sourcing Potential
In this section, we use the parameter estimates from section 5 to assess how firm-level import decisions,
the firm size distribution, and aggregate sourcing by country respond to a shock in China. We
focus on China not only because it is one of the biggest U.S. trade partners, but also because its
accession to the WTO in 2001 provides an actual shock in the data against which we can compare
the model’s predictions. The aggregate U.S. employment effects of this shock have been studied in
several contexts (e.g., Autor et al., 2013, 2014; Pierce and Schott, 2013), but with a focus on import
competition rather than offshoring opportunities. Our results highlight the empirical relevance of
interdependencies inherent in firm-level sourcing decisions, and show that these interdependencies
lead to significant heterogeneity in the firm-level implications for domestic employment.
    We model the China shock as a change to China’s sourcing potential that is large enough to
explain the observed increase in the share of firms importing from China from 1.9 percent in 1997
to 8.5 percent in 2007. Specifically, when multiplying the Chinese sourcing potential estimated for
2007 by a factor of 0.38, and holding all other exogenous variables fixed – but re-solving for the price
index and the mass of firms – the share of firms that imports from China is equal to the 1997 value of
1.9 percent.26 Our baseline specification uses the estimated parameters for 2007, but with the lower

heterogeneous versus homogeneous fixed cost models is that the former has two sources heterogeneity: country and
firm-country-specific variation. A model with common mean fixed costs across countries, but with firm-country-specific
variation in the fixed costs, would still require our algorithm in order to to solve the firm’s problem, since for a given
firm, fixed costs would again be heterogeneous across countries.
   26
      Of course, the increase in the share of firms sourcing from China may have been triggered by both an increase of



                                                           31
1997 Chinese sourcing potential. We then analyze the changes our model predicts from increasing
Chinese sourcing potential to its actual estimated value in 2007. Although it might have been more
natural to re-estimate our model for the year 1997, data limitations (particularly the poor coverage
of U.S. importers from Canada) preclude us from doing so in a proper manner. Throughout the
counterfactual exercises we solve for the new equilibrium price index and let the mass of firms adjust
such that the free entry condition is satisfied.27 While firms in our static model are only one-period
lived, we can nevertheless compare firms with the same productivity levels and fixed cost draws before
and after the China shock.
    The shock to China’s sourcing potential could be due to a decrease in tariffs on Chinese goods or
to an increase in China’s productivity in producing intermediate inputs. It is important to emphasize,
however, that we are not able to trace the responses of final-good producers in foreign countries to
this China shock. As long as wages are pinned down by a non-manufacturing sector, these foreign
responses are irrelevant for the quantitative implications of the shock for the sourcing decisions of
U.S. final-good producers. Even with endogenous wages, the qualitative implications of the shock
would also be unaffected by the decisions of final-good producers abroad. Nevertheless, the aggregate
implications of our model for overall sales of U.S. intermediate-input producers and for overall U.S.
manufacturing employment could well be affected by these foreign responses.

6.1    Baseline Predictions
Table 8 (Panel A) documents how the China shock affects sourcing in various markets for different sets
of firms. The 6.6 percent of firms that start importing from China also increase their sourcing from
the U.S. and from third countries by 0.8 and 1.5 percent, respectively. Firms that continue sourcing
from China comprise 1.9 percent of firms, and they slightly increase their domestic and third country
sourcing. The expansion of these new and continuing China importers is associated with these firms’
being able to sell their products at lower prices, which in turn leads the aggregate price index and the
mass of active firms to adjust. As a result, firms for which the shock is not large enough to induce
importing from China face tougher competition, which leads their sourcing from the U.S. and other
foreign countries to contract by 0.6 and 1.4 percent, respectively. The responses in sourcing from
other foreign countries are generally larger than for domestic sourcing, since the former involves both
intensive and extensive margin adjustments (i.e., firms selecting into or out of particular countries).
Sourcing responses are also necessarily larger for new China importers, since these firms’ extensive
the Chinese sourcing potential and a reduction of the fixed costs of sourcing from China. Since one of our goals is
to compare our model’s predictions with those from a model with common fixed costs across countries, we focus on a
change to only the sourcing potential.
   27
      Given our parameter estimates and the counterfactual parameter change, the calculation of the counterfactual price
index and mass of firms works as follows. We set total expenditure, E, equal to the the total sales of firms in the data.
We then use our estimate of B together with equation (3) and the ideal CES price index associated with (1) to back out
the mass of firms, N , in the equilibrium associated with the estimated parameters. Using the free entry condition (13),
we set the fixed costs of entry to the average profits of firms implied by the estimated model. In our counterfactual,
after changing the Chinese sourcing potential, we solve for the new level of B such that the free entry condition (13),
is again satisfied and – given the new level of B – use (14) to determine the new mass of firms. The new equilibrium
price index then follows from the standard formula.




                                                           32
margin sourcing change leads them to grow relatively more.28

                 Table 8: Third country sourcing effects of Chinese sourcing potential shock


        Chinese            Change in sourcing         Change in sourcing         Change in sourcing         Share
        import status          from U.S.             from other countries           from China             of firms
        Panel A: Baseline model
        Entrants                    1.008                     1.015                        ∞                0.066
        Continuers                  1.002                     1.002                      2.637              0.019
        Others                      0.994                     0.986                        -                0.915
        Panel B: Baseline model, fixed sourcing strategies
        Entrants                      -                         -                          -                0.000
        Continuers                  1.004                     1.003                      2.641              0.019
        Others                      0.996                     0.996                        -                0.981
        Panel C: Independent entry decisions model (θ = σ − 1 = 2.85)
        Entrants                    0.997                     0.993                        ∞                0.067
        Continuers                  0.997                     0.995                      2.623              0.019
        Others                      0.997                     0.991                        -                0.914
        Panel D: Universal importing model (no fixed costs)
        Entrants                      -                         -                          -                0.000
        Continuers                  0.988                     0.988                      2.600              1.000
        Others                        -                         -                          -                0.000
        Panel E: Common fixed costs model
        Entrants                    1.004                     1.060                        ∞                0.143
        Continuers                  0.998                     0.997                      2.626              0.041
        Others                      0.990                       -                          -                0.817
       Notes: The table groups firms by Chinese import status. Entrants are those firms (i.e. bundles of productiv-
       ity levels and fixed cost draws) that begin sourcing from China. Continuers are firms that source from China
       before and after the shock. Columns 1, 2, and 3 contain the ratio of the total sourcing by each group of firms
       before and after the shock. Figures in this table do not include changes in sourcing due to changes in the mass
       of firms after the counterfactual shock. Changes in sourcing due to changes in the overall mass of firms are
       included in the figures in Table 9.



       Figure 5a depicts the percent growth in sales by firm size percentile. Firms are ranked according to
their sales before the China shock. Large firms increase their sales by about 1.5 percent. While these
magnitudes may seem small, this is partly driven by the fact that fixed costs are firm-country-specific
and hence not all firms within a certain size category import from China. Firms below the 85th
percentile of the size distribution see their sales shrink on average in response to the China shock.
       Overall, aggregate imports from China increase by 377 percent while aggregate sourcing from the
  28
    It is important to note that continuing Chinese importers need not necessarily increase their domestic and third
market sourcing. If the price index decline were sufficiently large, the interdependencies in their extensive margin
sourcing decisions which lead them to grow could be swamped by the increased competitive pressure that leads all firms
to shrink.


                                                             33
                                                                                       Figure 5: Changes in the size of firms

                                                 (a) Baseline                                                                                               (b) Fixed Sourcing Strategies
                             −3                                                                                                                   −3
                         x 10                                                                                                                 x 10

                                                                                                                                         16

                    15
                                                                                                                                         14


                                                                                                                                         12

                    10                                                                                                                   10


                                                                                                                                          8
  Growth in Sales




                                                                                                                       Growth in Sales
                     5                                                                                                                    6


                                                                                                                                          4


                                                                                                                                          2
                     0
                                                                                                                                          0


                                                                                                                                         −2

                    −5
                                                                                                                                         −4

                         0        10   20   30     40         50          60      70     80   90   100                                        0        10     20    30     40         50          60       70   80       90   100
                                                  Percentiles size distribution                                                                                           Percentiles size distribution




U.S. falls by 0.58 percent (see Table 9). The net change in U.S. sourcing masks a substantial amount
of domestic churn. As shown in Table 9, new and continuing importers from China increase their
domestic sourcing by 5.59 billion USD (or 0.14 percent of total sourcing). Comparing this figure
to the total decline in domestic sourcing accounted for by contracting or exiting firms (i.e., 28.40
billion USD) implies that every dollar reduction in domestic sourcing is thus partly offset by a 20 cent
increase in domestic sourcing from expanding firms. Since in our model this spending represents jobs
in the intermediate goods sector, we predict a substantial amount of employment churn in response to
an increase in Chinese sourcing potential. We also find that an increase in China’s sourcing potential
lowers the price index in the manufacturing good sector by 0.2 percent. Consumers are therefore
better off since they enjoy lower prices for the goods they buy.

                                                                                  Table 9: Gross and net U.S. sourcing effects


                                                                                                                                                                                   Fixed sourcing
                                                                                                            Baseline
                                                                                                                                                                                   strategies

                                                                                              Difference in        Change in                                       Difference in                            Change in
                                                                                              sourcing in        percent of total                                  sourcing in                            percent of total
                                                                                              billion USD         U.S. sourcing                                    billion USD                             U.S. sourcing

   Increase in domestic sourcing                                                                    5.59                0.14                                              2.51                                   0.06
   Decrease in domestic sourcing                                                                   -14.88              -0.38                                             -12.61                                 -0.32
     by firms that continue to operate
   Decrease in domestic sourcing                                                                   -13.52              -0.35                                                 0                                       0
     by firms that shut down
   Total                                                                                           -22.80              -0.58                                             -10.10                                 -0.26
 Notes: We use the model’s predictions for the U.S. sourcing pre and post the shock to China’s sourcing potential in or-
 der to calculate percentage changes in U.S. sourcing. We then use aggregate U.S. sourcing purchases in the data and the
 percentage differences predicted by the model to calculate the predicted USD change in sourcing in response to the shock.




                                                                                                            34
6.2    Fixed Sourcing Strategies
An important emphasis of our model is the role of the extensive margin in firms’ sourcing strategies.
To assess the importance of this margin on aggregate trade patterns and welfare, we repeat the same
counterfactual exercise but hold firms’ extensive margin sourcing strategies fixed. In the exercise,
we recompute the equilibrium price index and the mass of firms. As expected, when firms’ sourcing
strategies cannot change, the aggregate response to the China shock is substantially smaller. U.S.
sourcing decreases by 0.26 percent (see Table 9), and aggregate sourcing from China increases by 164
percent (see Table 9, Panel B), with these responses being about half as large as those under flexible
strategies.
   The micro effects by firm type are helpful to understand these differences. In the baseline, the
large number of new importers from China drives most of the aggregate Chinese sourcing increase.
This increase leads the price index to fall significantly, which reduces sourcing from both the U.S.
and other countries. In addition, in the baseline analysis the increase in firms’ extensive margin
sourcing decisions results in higher expenditures on fixed costs. Given constant expenditure in the
manufacturing sector, this leads ceteris paribus to lower expected profits, which in turn are brought
back to zero by a decrease in the number of firms. In contrast, under fixed sourcing strategies,
the number of firms remains the same in equilibrium, and consequently there is no decrease in U.S.
sourcing from firms that shut down (see Table 9). Firms that source from China slightly increase
their sourcing from the U.S. and other countries, while all other firms reduce their sourcing from the
U.S. and other countries (see Table 8, Panel B).
   The responses of the size distribution are also quite different (see Figure 5b). When firms’ sourcing
strategies are fixed, the only firms that grow are those that previously imported from China, which on
average tend to be the larger firms. Firms of all other sizes contract. We find that under fixed sourcing
strategies the price index declines by 0.14 percent, which is about 70 percent of the impact of the
shock when firms can adjust their extensive margin decisions. While under flexible sourcing strategies
an improvement in the Chinese sourcing potential will induce larger U.S. fixed cost expenditures on
sourcing, at the same time the mass of entering firms shrinks so that the free entry condition remains
satisfied and the total expenditure on fixed costs (inclusive of the entry costs to establish a firm)
remains unchanged. Therefore, given fixed wages, the decline in the manufacturing price index
captures the full effect of the shock on aggregate real income. This decline in the price index is larger
under flexible than under fixed sourcing strategies.

6.3    Comparison with Alternative Models and Sensitivity Analysis
As discussed in Section 3.4 when describing the model’s predictions for aggregate trade flows, our
framework nests two canonical frameworks of the last decade: the Melitz (2003) heterogeneous firms
model and the Eaton and Kortum (2002) Ricardian trade model. In order to demonstrate the quali-
tative differences between our baseline model and these other models, we modify the parameters such
that these canonical models emerge as special cases. We also compare our baseline model’s predictions
to a model in which the fixed costs across countries and firms are common, and we test the robustness
of our results to alternative parameter values. An important caveat is that, because these exercises

                                                   35
require changing parameter values, it is clearly not possible to hold all else equal. We therefore focus
on the qualitative differences in the predictions and caution that quantitative differences may reflect
several changing factors.
       We first consider a scenario similar to the Chaney (2008) multi-country Melitz model in which
firms’ import decisions are independent across markets, which occurs in the knife-edge case of θ = σ−1
in our model. To do so, we increase the value of θ to 2.85 so that it is equal to σ − 1. We re-estimate
fixed costs under these parameter values in Step 3, leading to a similar model fit as in the baseline.
To minimize the number of moving parts, and to account for the empirical fact that the number of
importing firms is much larger than the number of firms importing from the most popular sourcing
country, we continue to include firm-country-specific fixed costs, although these are not present in
the original Chaney (2008) paper.
       The counterfactual predictions from this version of our model in which firms’ import entry deci-
sions are independent across markets are quite different from the baseline results. Our baseline model
predicts substantial differences between net and gross changes in sourcing, with some firms expand-
ing their sourcing from other countries and the U.S. and other firms contracting. In contrast, under
independent entry decisions, the only effect on sourcing from other countries comes from a general
equilibrium effect (a fall in the aggregate price index), which leads all firms to reduce their sourcing
from the U.S. and other countries except China. All active firms reduce their sourcing from the U.S.
by the same amount: -0.3 percent (see Table 8, Panel C). Sourcing from third markets also declines.
Most notably, the aggregate net effects are exactly equal to the gross effects under these parameter
values. One might be concerned that this conclusion rests on our simplifying assumption that wages
are unaffected by the China shock. Inspection of equation (12) – after plugging in the restriction
θ = σ − 1 – reveals, however, that changes in wages would necessarily lead all firms to change their
sourcing from the U.S. by the same proportion. In sum, when entry decisions are independent, there
is no scope for domestic churn and reallocation following the China shock.29
       We next follow Eaton and Kortum (2002) and assume that there are no fixed costs to import,
which results in universal importing by all firms. In this exercise, we re-do the quantification of
the scale parameter, B, in Step 3 of the estimation, while restricting the fixed cost parameters to
be zero. Under these conditions, all firms decrease their sourcing from the U.S. and from all other
countries except China by 1.2 percent (see Table 8, Panel D). Furthermore, as in the case with no
interdependencies in firms’ entry decisions across markets, net changes in import flows are identical
to gross changes in flows.
       An important contribution of our paper is to present a new framework for analyzing extensive
margin sourcing decisions when the fixed costs to import differ across countries. To asses the impor-
tance of this fixed costs heterogeneity, we revisit the case of common fixed costs across countries and
firms, first described when evaluating the fit of the model in section 5.4. This model predicts a perfect
pecking order of firms’ sourcing, which restricts the extensive margin response to the counterfactual
change. Specifically, because China has the highest sourcing potential in 2007, a firm that does not
  29
    In a Melitz-Chaney model of exporting, domestic sales of all surviving firms change by the same percentage; larger
firms grow and small firms shrink only because the latter only sell domestically, while the former also export. Focusing
on sales in a particular market (not just the domestic one), all firms scale up or down proportionally.


                                                          36
import from China after the counterfactual change cannot possibly find it optimal to import from any
other foreign country before or after the shock. This prediction is clearly violated in the data. The
common fixed costs model is instead successful in delivering gross increases and decreases in sourcing
from U.S. suppliers, albeit quantitatively to a lesser extent than the baseline model (see Table 8,
Panel D).
      A key takeaway from these counterfactual exercises is that the interdependencies in firms’ extensive
margin sourcing decisions lead to significant differences between the gross and net changes caused
by the shock. Although the China shock is associated with a sizable decrease in domestic sourcing
in the U.S., some firms increase their domestic input purchases considerably following the shock.
More generally, the third-market effects – that is how a shock to one country (in this case China)
affects sourcing from other countries – are quite different for both firm and aggregate outcomes in
the presence of interdependencies in the extensive margin.
      Before turning to a comparison of our counterfactual predictions to actual data, we test the
sensitivity of our results to specific values of the key structural parameters. To do so, we re-estimate
the fixed costs of sourcing using alternative values of the shape parameter of the core productivity
distribution, κ; the elasticity of demand, σ; and the dispersion parameter of intermediate input
efficiencies, θ. We summarize the main results here, with detailed results presented in Appendix
Table B.3. The estimates for the effects of language and control of corruption on the fixed costs of
sourcing are remarkably robust across alternative parameters. The estimated range of fixed costs
across countries varies, but not dramatically. With respect to the counterfactual predictions, as
expected the price index changes are decreasing in the firm-level trade elasticity θ. The amount of
churning attributable to changes in sourcing from the U.S. increases for a lower value of θ = 1.3. In
that case, for every dollar decrease in U.S. sourcing, a 40 cent increase in U.S. sourcing takes place.
The amount of churning is lower for larger values of θ and for lower values of κ, since more weight is
given to the large firms that are already incumbents of sourcing from China. The amount of churning
is roughly unchanged when the elasticity of demand increases to σ = 5.

6.4      Comparing Counterfactual Predictions to Actual Changes
We conclude this section by comparing the counterfactual predictions from the model to actual
changes in U.S. firms’ sourcing from 1997 to 2007. We analyze changes from 1997 to 2007 since
data on firm sales and input purchases are available only in years ending in 2 and 7, and these years
conveniently span China’s accession to the WTO. Table 10 presents an analog to Table 8 in which we
use the data, deflated to 1997 dollars, to calculate the relative changes in domestic sourcing, sourcing
from other countries, and sourcing from China. We use an unbalanced panel of firms in this exercise
to ensure that the observed patterns are not driven by selection of more productive firms that are
more likely to survive over this period.30
      The counterfactual exercise considers a shock to Chinese sourcing potential that predicts a change
in the share of China importers that matches the actual change from 1997 to 2007. Consistent with
this objective, we see that the share of new China importers (Entrants) in the data is eight percent,
 30
      This selection does not occur in the model since the core productivities of firms are unchanged by the counterfactual.


                                                             37
which is similar to the 6.6 percent of new China importers in our counterfactual analysis.31 While
the counterfactual predicts that firms will grow or shrink their sourcing by small amounts, Table 10
shows that in the data, all types of firms changed their sourcing significantly. This is not surprising
since the counterfactual holds all else constant, while in reality many factors change over the ten-year
period. Nevertheless, one can still compare relative changes in sourcing across Chinese import status
to assess whether the qualitative predictions of the model are evident in the data. Consistent with the
counterfactual predictions, firms that begin sourcing from China grow both their domestic sourcing
and their sourcing from other countries relatively more than continuing China importers and non-
China importers. Table 10 also shows that continuing importers grow their domestic sourcing and
sourcing from other countries more than non-importers. In fact, as in the counterfactual predictions,
aggregate domestic sourcing by firms that never source from China shrinks over this period. The main
qualitative difference from the model is that sourcing from third markets by non-China importers
grows, but this growth is substantially smaller relative to foreign sourcing growth of both new and
continuing China importers.

       Table 10: Observed changes in third country sourcing from 1997 - 2007 by firms’ Chinese
       import status


         Chinese            Change sourcing          Change Sourcing           Change Sourcing         Share
         import status        from U.S.            from other countries          from China           of firms
         Entrants                   2.68                     5.93                       -               0.08
         Exiters                    0.15                     0.02                     0.00              0.00
         Continuers                 1.03                     1.32                     5.75              0.01
         Others                     0.74                     1.03                       -               0.91
       Notes: This table is based on an unbalanced panel of manufacturing firms from 1997 and 2007. Exiters
       (entrants) are those firms that stop (begin) sourcing from China. Continuers are firms that source from
       China in 1997 and 2007. Columns 1, 2, and 3 contain the ratio of total sourcing in 2007 deflated dollars
       relative to 1997 dollars by each group of firms.



    The fact that both the model and data show China importers growing their domestic and third
market sourcing relatively more than non-China importers provides support for the empirical relevance
of the interdependencies highlighted in the model. As shown in both Panels D and E of Table 9, we
would not expect to see increased domestic and third market sourcing by U.S. firms sourcing from
China if entry decisions were independent across markets, or if there were no fixed costs of sourcing.
While the common fixed cost model would still lead to increased domestic and other sourcing by
new China importers, it also makes the extreme prediction that all new importers would necessarily
source from China –a prediction clearly at odds with the empirical evidence presented in Table 1.
    A potential concern with this comparison to the data is that China importers may simply be
firms that experienced positive demand or productivity shocks during this period. To make a cleaner
comparison of the counterfactual predictions of our model to the observed evolution of sourcing in
  31
     These shares do not match perfectly since in reality, not all firms that import from China in 1997 continue to do so
in 2007.


                                                           38
the data, we exploit the significant productivity growth within China and its accession to the WTO
in 2001 to construct a firm-specific, exogenous shock to Chinese sourcing potential. In the spirit of
Autor et al. (2013) and Hummels et al. (2014), we instrument for changes in U.S. firms’ imports from
China using changes in Chinese export shares to other high-income countries in a firm’s 1997 input
industries.32 We then estimate the relationship between predicted changes in sourcing from China
and firm sourcing from domestic and third markets according to

                                          ∆yn = β0 + βCh ∆Chinan + εn ,                                               (23)

                           ImportsCh            Ch
                                  n2007 −Importsn1997
where ∆Chinan =          (ImportsCh    +ImportsCh )/2    is a Davis-Haltiwanger-Schuh (DHS) growth rate of
                                 n2007         i1997
firm n’s imports from China that captures changes in firms’ intensive and extensive margin sourcing.
We estimate the relationship between China sourcing and five dependent variables (all represented by
a DHS growth rate unless otherwise noted): domestic input purchases, imports from other countries,
the log difference in the number of countries from which the firm sources (excluding China but
including the U.S.), and firm-level employment. All dollar values are deflated using NBER industry
deflators.
       Table 11 presents results from estimating equation (23) via OLS and two-stage least squares for
the balanced panel of manufacturing firms present in both 1997 and 2007.33 Standard errors are
clustered at the industry level to match the same level of aggregation as the China shock variable.
The OLS estimates presented in columns 1-4 are all significant at the 99 percent level and suggest
that a ten percentage point increase in firm-level sourcing from China was associated with a 0.7 point
increase in domestic sourcing, a 2.6 percent increase in the number of countries from which the firm
sources, and a 3.6 point increase in sourcing from other foreign countries. Columns 5-7 show that
IV estimates are larger and still significant at the 99 percent level. Given the considerable focus
in the literature on the employment effects of Chinese imports, we also estimate the relationship
between changes in China sourcing and firm-level employment. While the OLS estimate shows that
10 point increase in the growth rate of Chinese imports is associated with a one point increase in the
firm’s U.S. employment, the IV estimate is negative but statistically insignificant. This result is still
consistent with our framework since the model predictions relate to changes in a firm’s total domestic
input/employment use, and not to employment at the firm itself. The bottom panel of Table 11 also
presents first-stage statistics, which show a positive and significant coefficient on the instrument and
a Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic of 28.51.
       There are two potential concerns with this reduced form analysis. First, the exclusion restriction
might be violated if industries in which China gained market share in high-income countries are also
industries that faced greater competition from China. Although we instrument with a shock to a
  32
     Unlike Autor et al. (2013) who use changes in the levels of Chinese imports across industries in eight other high-
income countries as an instrument, we use changes in Chinese market shares in these countries. We choose market
shares rather than levels to address the potential for correlated demand shocks between those countries and the U.S.,
which are a more serious concern in our framework. Additional details on the instrument construction and first stage
are in the Estimation and Online Data Appendices.
  33
     Here we focus on a balanced panel since we require a 1997 firm industry to construct our instrument. The results
are significantly stronger if we used an unbalanced panel and assigned shocks to new firms based on their initial industry.
We do not present those results since they may be biased by firms’ endogenous entry and exit decisions.


                                                            39
                  Table 11: Estimates of the impact of the China shock on firm-level sourcing
              Dependent variable is firm-level change from 1997 to 2007 in:
                              Domestic       No. of       Foreign        Firm          Domestic       No. of       Foreign      Firm
                               inputs       countries     inputs         empl.          inputs       countries     inputs       empl.
                                                     OLS                                                      IV
              China, DHS      0.066***      0.255***     0.360***      0.097***        0.759***      0.553***      0.653***      -0.094
                               (0.010)       (0.007)      (0.013)       (0.007)         (0.214)       (0.080)       (0.197)     (0.161)
              Constant        0.054***      0.144***     0.315***     -0.075***          -0.054      0.097***      0.269***      -0.046
                               (0.019)       (0.013)      (0.026)       (0.014)         (0.039)       (0.017)       (0.044)     (0.032)
              N                127,400       127,400      127,400      127,400          127,400       127,400      127,400     127,400
              First Stage Statistics            Coeff (se) 2.691*** (0.504)                           KP F stat 28.51
            Notes: All variables are changes or growth rates from 1997 to 2007. China, DHS is a Davis-Haltiwanger-Schuh growth rate in
            firm imports from China. Domestic inputs, foreign inputs, and firm employment are a DHS growth rate. No. of countries is the
            log difference in the number of countries (excluding China, but including the U.S.) from which the firm sources inputs. Stan-
            dard errors are in parentheses and clustered by 439 NAICS industries. In the IV specifications, firm-level sourcing from China
            is instrumented by the change in Chinese market share in high-income countries of a weighted average of the firm’s inputs. KP
            F stat is the Kleibergen Paap F-statistic. N is rounded for disclosure avoidance.



firm’s inputs rather than outputs, input and output shocks may still be correlated. In the Online
Data Appendix, we show that the results are robust to controlling for import penetration from China,
and to instrumenting for import penetration from China with a shock to a firm’s output industries.
Another concern with our approach is that the exclusion restriction could be violated because the
multilateral nature of the China shock may have indirectly affected firm sourcing from third markets
by affecting input suppliers in those markets.34 Unfortunately there is no clean way to control for
shocks to a firm’s suppliers in these data, but this could be a fruitful avenue to explore with richer
information on supply-side firm-level networks.
         The results in Tables 10 and 11 provide strong support for the empirical relevance of our theoretical
mechanism. First, they show that firms sourcing from China increase their domestic and third market
sourcing substantially more than firms that do not import from China. This is inconsistent with the
predicted responses in a world with independent entry decisions since, as shown in Panel D of Table 8,
under this scenario all firms decrease their domestic sourcing by the same amount. Second, they show
that increased domestic and foreign sourcing occurs not just across, but also within firms. Third, they
rule out firm-specific demand or productivity shocks as drivers of these changes. Most importantly,
the results show that increased firm-level imports from China do not decrease domestic and third
market sourcing –as might be expected in a world with no interdependencies in sourcing decisions–
but instead are associated with increased firm-level sourcing from other markets.


7         Conclusion
This paper provides a new framework in which to analyze the global sourcing decisions of firms in a
multi-country world where production combines multiple inputs. Our model nests the two canonical
    34
    To the extent that the China shock displaced input suppliers either in the U.S. or other foreign countries, these
indirect effects might bias our estimates of βCh down (e.g. Hanson and Robertson, 2010). Alternatively, the China
shock may have led to wage decreases or productivity increases among suppliers that in turn led U.S. firms to increase
sourcing from them. To the extent that these changes disproportionately affect industries in which a firm’s inputs were
shocked (e.g., Torres-Ruiz and Utar, 2013), our estimates might be biased up.


                                                                        40
models of the extensive margin of exporting, the Eaton and Kortum (2002) Ricardian competitive
model and the Melitz (2003) monopolistic competition with heterogeneous firms. These special cases
highlight the fact that in a general setting, sourcing decisions interact through the cost function, so
that determining the extensive margin of importing must involve solving a 2J -dimensional discrete
choice problem (where J is the number of countries), rather than solving J binary problems as in
canonical models of exporting.
   A key contribution of this paper is to overcome these challenges by showing that –under a simple
parametric restriction that is consistent with the data– a firm’s decision to source from one coun-
try is complementary to its decision to source from other countries. These complementarities in a
firm’s extensive margin sourcing decisions underpin our new methodological approach to reduce the
dimensionality of the firm’s problem and solve it. By extending the pioneering work of Jia (2008) to
a multi-firm environment, we recover the key parameters of our model from confidential U.S. firm-
level data on the sourcing decisions of U.S. firms in 67 countries. Armed with these estimates, we
explore the quantitative bite of the key novel features of our framework by studying how a shock to
the potential benefits of sourcing from a country (namely, China) differentially affects the sourcing
decisions of U.S. firms depending on their core productivity and their pre-shock sourcing strategies.
A distinctive characteristic of our framework is that a sectoral import competition shock that does
not simultaneously increase export opportunities may still lead to intraindustry reallocation effects
by which firms sourcing from the shocked country may expand, while firms not sourcing from that
country shrink. We show that a ‘China shock’ calibrated to match the growth in U.S. foreign sourcing
from China between 1997 and 2007 generates qualitative effects consistent with the observed evolution
of U.S. firms’ domestic and third-market sourcing.
   Our theoretical framework is necessarily stylized, but it can flexibly accommodate various exten-
sions. As shown in the Online Appendix and further explored in Bernard et al. (2016), it can easily
be extended to include the joint determination of the extensive margin of importing and exporting.
It is also straightforward to incorporate fixed costs of sourcing costs at the input level (see the Online
Appendix) and also at the supplier level. This latter approach is explored by Bernard et al. (2015)
in their study of buyer-seller relationships in Japan. Similarly, we have abstracted from the type of
contractual frictions inherent in global sourcing transactions, but as outlined in Antràs (2016), these
contractual aspects can also be incorporated in our framework, thus permitting a multi-country anal-
ysis of the choice between intrafirm versus arm’s-length global sourcing, along the lines of Antràs and
Helpman (2004). Finally, we believe that the methodological tools we have developed in this paper,
and particularly our application of Jia’s (2008) iterative algorithm for solving single-agent entry deci-
sions with interdependencies across markets, could be fruitfully adopted in alternative environments,
such as in exporting models with non-constant marginal costs or when there are demand linkages
across markets.




                                                   41
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Pol Antràs, and Elhanan Helpman, “Contracts and Technology Adoption,” American
 Economic Review, 2007, 97 (3), 916–943.

Amiti, Mary and Jozef Konings, “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity: Evidence
 from Indonesia,” American Economic Review, December 2007, 97 (5), 1611–1638.

Antràs, Pol, Global Production: Firms, Contracts and Trade Structure 2016. Princeton University Press.

      and Elhanan Helpman, “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (3).

  and , “Contractual Frictions and Global Sourcing,” in “The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy,”
  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, “New Trade Models, Same Old
 Gains?,” American Economic Review, February 2012, 102 (1), 94–130.

  , Svetlana Demidova, Peter J Klenow, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, “Endogenous Variety and the
  Gains from Trade,” American Economic Review, April 2008, 98 (2), 444–450.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Jae Song, “Trade Adjustment: Worker-level
 Evidence,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129, 199–1860.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
 Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (6), 2121–68.

Bache, Peter and Anders Laugesen, “Monotone Comparative Statics for the Industry Composition,”
 Working Paper, Aarhus University, 2013.

Barro, Robert and Jong Wha Lee, “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 1950-2010,”
 2010. NBER Working Paper No. 15902.

Bernard, Andrew B. and Teresa C. Fort, “Factoryless Goods Producing Firms,” American Economic
  Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2015, 105 (5), 518–523.

  , Andreas Moxnes, and Yukiko U. Saito, “Production Networks, Geography and Firm Performance,”
  Working Paper 21082, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2015.

Bernard, Andrew B, J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J Redding, and Peter K Schott, “Firms in
  International Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, August 2007, 21 (3), 105–130.

  ,     ,   , and    , “The Margins of US Trade,” American Economic Review, April 2009, 99 (2), 487–493.

  ,     ,   , and    , “Global Firms,” paper commissioned by the Journal of Economic Literature, 2016.

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow, “Does Schooling Cause Growth?,” American Economic Review, 2000,
  90, 1160–1183.

Blaum, Joaquin, Claire Lelarge, and Michael Peters, “Non-Homothetic Import Demand: Firm Produc-
  tivity and Quality Bias,” Unpublished paper, 2013.

  , Claire LeLarge, and Michael Peters, “The Gains from Input Trade in Firm-Based Models of Import-
  ing,” Working Paper 21504, NBER August 2015.

Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, “Globalization and the Gains From Variety,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, May 2006, 121 (2), 541–585.

Chaney, Thomas, “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International Trade,” Amer-
 ican Economic Review, August 2008, 98 (4), 1707–1721.

Costinot, Arnaud, “An Elementary Theory of Comparative Advantage,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (4),
 1165–1192.

                                                     42
De Loecker, Jan, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Nina Pavcnik, “Prices, Markups,
 and Trade Reform,” Econometrica, March 2016, 84 (2), 445–510.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (5),
  1741–1779.

  , , and Francis Kramarz, “An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence From French Firms,” Econo-
  metrica, 2011, 79 (5), 1453–1498.

Feenstra, Robert C. and J. Bradford Jensen, “Evaluating Estimates of Materials Offshoring from U.S.
  Manufacturing,” Economic Letters, 2012, 117, 170–173.

  and John Romalis, “International Prices and Endogenous Quality,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  May 2014, 129 (2), 477–527.

Fort, Teresa C., “Technology and Production Fragmentation: Domestic versus Foreign Sourcing,” Working
  Paper 2015.

Garetto, Stefania, “Input Sourcing and Multinational Production,” American Economic Journal: Macroe-
 conomics, April 2013, 5 (2), 118–151.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, Amit Kumar Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik, and Petia Topalova,
 “Imported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India,” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, November 2010, 125 (4), 1727–1767.

Gopinath, Gita and Brent Neiman, “Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises,” American
 Economic Review, March 2014, 104 (3), 793–831.

Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,”
 American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1978–97.

Grossman, Gene M and Giovanni Maggi, “Diversity and Trade,” American Economic Review, December
 2000, 90 (5), 1255–1275.

Grossman, Gene M., Elhanan Helpman, and Adam Szeidl, “Optimal integration strategies for the
 multinational firm,” Journal of International Economics, 2006, 70 (1), 216–238.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, “Why do some countries produce so much more output per worker
 than others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114, 83–116.

Halpern, László, Miklós Koren, and Adam Szeidl, “Imported Inputs and Productivity,” American
 Economic Review, December 2015, 105 (12), 3660–3703.

Hanson, Gordon H. and Raymond Robertson, “China and the Manufacturing Exports of Other De-
 veloping Countries,” in Robert Feenstra and Shang Jin Wei, eds., China’s Growing Role in World Trade,
 University of Chicago Press and the NBER, 2010, pp. 137–159.

  , Raymond J. Mataloni, and Matthew J. Slaughter, “Vertical Production Networks in Multinational
  Firms,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2005, 87 (4).

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners
 and Trading Volumes,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2008, 123 (2), 441–487.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, “Penn World Table Version 7.0,” 2011. Center for
 International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania.

Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in World
 Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 2001, 54, 75–96.

  , Rasmus Jorgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang, “The Wage Effects of Offshoring: Evidence
  from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104, 1597–1629.



                                                  43
Jia, Panle, “What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis of the Discount Retailing
  Industry,” Econometrica, November 2008, 76 (6), 1263–1316.

Johnson, Robert C. and Guillermo Noguera, Fragmentation and trade in value added over four decades,
  Working Paper, Dartmouth College, January 2012.

Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productiv-
 ity,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.

  and Stephen J. Redding, “New Trade Models, New Welfare Implications,” American Economic Review,
  March 2015, 105 (3), 1105–1146.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, “The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology, Strategy, and
 Organization,” The American Economic Review, June 1990, 80 (3), 511–528.

Morales, Eduardo, Gloria Sheu, and Andrés Zahler, “Gravity and Extended Gravity: Using Moment
 Inequalities to Estimate a Model of Export Entry,” Working Paper 19916, National Bureau of Economic
 Research February 2014.

Olley, G Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment
  Industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1263–97.

Oostendorp, Remco H., “The Standardized ILO October Inquiry 1983-2003,” mimeo, Amsterdam Institute
 for International Development 2005.

Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott, “A Concordance between Ten-Digit U.S. Harmonized System
  Codes and SIC/NAICS Product Classes and Industries,” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement,
  2012, 37, 61–96.

   and    , “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment,” forthcoming American
  Economic Review, 2013.

Rodrı́guez-Clare, Andrés, “Offshoring in a Ricardian World,” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
 nomics, April 2010, 2 (2), 227–258.

Tintelnot, Felix, “Global Production with Export Platforms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Torres-Ruiz, Luis and Hale Utar, “International Competition and Industrial Evolution: Evidence from
  the Impact of Chinese Competition on Mexican Maquiladoras,” Journal of Development Economics, 2013,
  105, 267–287.

Vives, Xavier, “Nash equilibrium with strategic complementarities,” Journal of Mathematical Economics,
  1990, 19 (3), 305–321.

Yeaple, Stephen Ross, “The complex integration strategies of multinationals and cross country dependencies
  in the structure of foreign direct investment,” Journal of International Economics, 2003, 60 (2), 293–314.
    0.53cm




                                                    44
A     Estimation Appendix
A.1    Measuring Firm-Level Offshoring Shares
We measure a firm’s total inputs using production worker wages from the CM, total cost of materials from the
Economic Censuses of manufacturing, construction, and mining, and merchandise purchases from the Census
of Wholesale. Inputs from any foreign country j are simply the firm’s total imports from j. Domestic inputs
are the difference between total inputs and imports. A firm’s share of inputs from country j, χij , is computed
as imports from j divided by total input purchases. Additional details are in described in the Online Data
Appendix.

A.2    Estimation of the Trade Elasticity
Table B.1 presents the first stage regressions for the IV estimates of θ, where we instrument for country wages
using population. As expected, the estimated coefficient on population is negative and significant at the 95
percent level. The F-statistics for the excluded instrument is 6.49. In unreported results (available upon
request), we verify that the Anderson-Rubin F test and χ2 test of significance of the endogenous regressors are
statistically significant at the 95 percent level.

                    Table B.1: First stage regressions for trade elasticity estimates

                                  Dependent variable is log HC adj. wage
                                  log population             -0.32**
                                                              (0.12)
                                  log distance                 -0.20
                                                              (0.14)
                                  Common language              -0.05
                                                              (0.17)
                                  log R&D                    0.32***
                                                              (0.09)
                                  log KL                        0.14
                                                              (0.17)
                                  Control of corruption       0.22*
                                                              (0.12)
                                  log no. of firms             -0.04
                                                              (0.07)
                                  Constant                     -0.03
                                                              (0.90)
                                  R-Squared                    0.88
                                  Observations                   57
                                 Notes: First stage regressions for the IV estimates
                                 presented in Table 5. Wage is the log of the human
                                 capital-adjusted wage. Population is the excluded
                                 instrument.



A.3    Estimation Results and Counterfactual Predictions
In this Appendix, we provide tables reporting estimation and counterfactual results for various alternative
parameter values. We also include a table with some details related to the performance of our application of
Jia’s (2008) algorithm.

A.4    China Shock Measure for Reduced Form Estimates
We instrument for changes in firm-level sourcing from China using changes in a novel measure of Chinese
comparative advantage in a firm’s inputs. Specifically, we measure Chinese comparative advantage in the


                                                        45
                      Table B.2: Share of imports and importers: data and models

                                    Share of Importers                       Share of Imports
                                 Data Baseline C.F.C.                   Data Baseline C. F. C.
                                         Model    Model                         Model     Model
                Canada           0.585    0.587    0.213                0.163    0.101     0.055
                China            0.333    0.329    1.000                0.137    0.215     0.257
                Germany          0.201    0.208    0.137                0.070    0.049     0.035
                UK               0.178    0.136    0.073                0.034    0.027     0.019
                Taiwan           0.163    0.171    0.257                0.019    0.069     0.067
                Italy            0.163    0.058    0.102                0.015    0.024     0.026
                Japan            0.124    0.143    0.137                0.126    0.042     0.035
                Mexico           0.121    0.129    0.222                0.141    0.056     0.058
                France           0.094    0.069    0.055                0.026    0.017     0.014
                South Korea      0.087    0.084    0.125                0.023    0.032     0.032
               Notes: This Table depicts for the 10 most popular importing countries the share of im-
               porters that buy from that country and the share of import volume.



inputs of industry h and year t as
                                                                                      !
                                                 X               HIimportsChina
                                Chinainput
                                     ht      =         sm                 mt
                                                                         W orld/U S
                                                                                          ,
                                                 m∈h         HIimportsmt

where sm is the expenditure share of inputs from industry m in industry h. The terms in parentheses are
simply China’s share of other high-income country imports in industry m and year t, excluding imports from
the U.S.. We use Chinese market share in other high-income countries since it very unlikely that demand or
supply shocks for U.S. firms will drive changes in these aggregate import shares. Since firms often span multiple
industries, we assign changes in these input shocks as the weighted average of firm manufacturing sales across
industries in 1997. All time-series variation in this shock is therefore driven by changes in Chinese market share
in high-income countries in a firm’s inputs.
    Our approach is similar to Hummels et al. (2014), who construct firm-level shocks to Danish importers’
sourcing decisions by focusing on transport cost shocks to the set of countries and products the firm imported
in a pre-period. We do not use pre-period imports since it is critical for our instrument to identify firm-level
decisions to start importing from China so that we capture the large extensive margin changes. The spirit of our
identification strategy is most similar to Autor et al. (2013), who instrument for Chinese imports per worker in
the U.S. using Chinese exports to eight high-income countries. There are two important distinctions between
our approaches. First, we construct shocks to inputs, while their focus is on shocks to final goods. Second,
we use changes in Chinese market share in those high-income countries, rather than changes in the levels of
Chinese exports. Using Chinese market shares helps to address a potential concern with their identification
strategy–namely that correlated industry demand shocks in other high-income countries and the U.S. may have
increased imports from China in both places. Unlike the Autor et al. (2013) measure, our instrument does not
capture any industry growth, but instead relies solely on changes in Chinese imports’ relative importance in
an industry.
    We measure Chinese imports in other high-income countries using bilateral trade data from the UN Com-
trade database. We use BEA input-output tables to identify all inputs into a firm’s industry and to calculate
their respective expenditure shares. As discussed in section 3, changes in market demand (Bi ) may have a
significant impact in industry equilibrium. A key component of market demand is the price index, which was
significantly affected by changes in Chinese productivity. To the extent possible, we control for price changes
by deflating firm inputs and imports from other countries using the NBER industry deflators. The first-stage
estimates and additional details on the variables’ construction are in the Online Data Appendix.




                                                            46
Table B.3: Sensitivity of parameter estimates and counterfactual predictions to alternative values for
θ, κ, and σ

                                                                                                                                                Variation
                                                                              Variation in θ                    Variation in κ
                                                                                                                                                   in σ
                                                        Baseline     θ = 1.3      θ=2       θ = 2.85        κ=3      κ=4           κ=5       σ = 2.79 σ = 5
 Parameter estimates
 B                                                        0.127        0.125     0.126         0.126        0.101    0.120         0.131      0.238    0.075
 βcf                                                      0.021        0.028     0.018         0.013        0.035    0.023         0.019      0.017    0.032
 βdf                                                      0.146        0.153     0.144         0.136        0.374    0.202         0.100      0.006    0.338
 βlf                                                      0.893        0.891     0.894         0.891        0.787    0.869         0.910      0.959    0.802
   f
 βC                                                      -0.408       -0.404     -0.408       -0.407        -0.388   -0.393        -0.421     -0.467   -0.386
   f
 βdisp                                                    0.829        0.838     0.825         0.816        1.197    0.912         0.762      0.631    1.144
 Median fixed cost range across countries
  Minimum (in tsd USD)                                      9           13           8            6           17         11         8           5       15
  Maximum (in tsd USD)                                     46           64          41            28          136        58         38         28       114

 Counterfactual predictions
 Price index change (in percent)                         -0.198       -0.284     -0.175       -0.120        -0.420   -0.247        -0.163     -0.081   -0.385
 Change in third country sourcing by                       1.5          3.7        0.9         -0.7           0.1      1.1           1.8       -0.4      1.8
 new importers from China (in percent)
 Gross increase in U.S. sourcing                          0.143       0.408       0.071       0.000         0.007    0.092         0.167      0.000    0.129
 (in percent of total U.S. sourcing)
 Net change in U.S. sourcing                             -0.583       -0.618     -0.575       -0.554        -0.887   -0.655        -0.531     -0.362   -0.866
 (in percent of total U.S. sourcing)
Notes: This table presents Step 3 estimation results and counterfactual predictions for alternative parameter values for the firm-level trade elasticity θ,
the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution κ, and the elasticity of substitution σ.




                                      Table B.4: Cardinality of differences in bounds

 Cardinality of differences              0          1       2           3           4         5         6       7    8        9    10 - 25   ≥ 26
 in bounds
                  Baseline        13135942643       0   1071964       95198      9448       688          58     1     0        0      0        0
 Variation in θ θ = 1.3           14139846650       0   4953489      860028     150591     25464       3290    385   99        4      0        0
                  θ=2             12525286269       0    518536       32966      2134        91          4      0     0        0      0        0
                  θ = 2.85        12316320000       0       0           0          0         0           0      0    0         0      0        0
 Variation in κ κ = 3             12278719451       0    801733      72233       6067       341         173     1     1        0      0        0
                  κ=4             13105724437       0   1052804      93955       7993       780         29      2     0        0      0        0
                  κ=5             13976005487       0   1233767      110268      9505       915         56      2     0        0      0        0
 Variation in σ σ = 2.79          14623200000       0       0           0         0          0           0      0    0         0      0        0
                  σ=5             12664505296       0   3238325      544760     93137      15840       2403    189   24       26      0        0
Notes: This table displays the number of firm (productivity and fixed cost draws) and parameter combinations for which the cardinality of the
differences in the bounds reached a particular value. While the productivity and fixed cost draws are held fixed during the estimation process, the
parameter vector, δ, varies through the iterations of the estimation process. We allow the differences of the bounds to be less than 26, before we
would revert to evaluating the objective value of the firm’s problem at the bounds and a small number of random values for the countries in the
bound. Since this cardinality of the differences in the bounds is never very high, we always solve accurately the problem of the firm.




                                                                        47
