NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RISE AND FALL OF DEMAND FOR SECURITIZATIONS
Sergey Chernenko
Samuel G. Hanson
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 20777
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20777

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

This paper was previously circulated under the title “The Rise and Fall of Securitization.” We are grateful
to Manuel Adelino, Josh Coval, Richard Crump, Mihir Desai, Robin Greenwood, Stefan Lewellen,
David Lucca, Amiyatosh Purnanandam, David Scharfstein, Martin Schmalz, Andrei Shleifer, Erik
Stafford, Jeremy Stein, René Stulz, James Vickery and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, 2014 Fixed Income Conference, Harvard, the LBS Safe Assets and the Macroeconomy,
Michigan Ross, Penn State, Rice, the 2014 NBER Risk of Financial Institutions workshop, and the
SEC/Maryland Conference on the Regulation of Financial Markets for helpful comments. Hanson
and Sunderam gratefully acknowledge funding from the Division of Research at Harvard Business
School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Sergey Chernenko, Samuel G. Hanson, and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Rise and Fall of Demand for Securitizations
Sergey Chernenko, Samuel G. Hanson, and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 20777
December 2014
JEL No. G01,G12,G22,G23
ABSTRACT
Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and private-label mortgage-backed securities (MBS) backed
by nonprime loans played a central role in the recent financial crisis. Little is known, however, about
the underlying forces that drove investor demand for these securitizations. Using micro-data on insurers’
and mutual funds’ bond holdings, we find considerable heterogeneity in investor demand for securitizations
in the pre-crisis period. We argue that both investor beliefs and incentives help to explain this variation
in demand. By contrast, our data paints a more uniform picture of investor behavior in the crisis. Consistent
with theories of optimal liquidation, investors largely traded in more liquid securities such as government-guaranteed
MBS to meet their liquidity needs during the crisis.

Sergey Chernenko
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
818 Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210
sergey.chernenko@fisher.osu.edu
Samuel G. Hanson
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 361
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
shanson@hbs.edu

Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu

Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and private-label mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
backed by nonprime loans were at the heart of the recent financial crisis. Issuance of these
securitizations grew exponentially from 2003 to early 2007 before collapsing in mid-2007. Secondary
market prices for these products fell precipitously throughout late 2007 and 2008, generating large
losses for financial intermediaries and helping to trigger a full-blown systemic crisis in late 2008.
Despite general agreement on this broad narrative, there is little consensus about the deeper
forces that drove the rise and subsequent fall in investor demand for CDOs and nonprime MBS.
Broadly speaking, explanations for the pre-crisis run-up in demand point to distortions that affected
either investor beliefs or incentives. Beliefs-based explanations argue that a misunderstanding of the
risks of investing in securitizations helped drive investor demand, while incentives-based
explanations emphasize agency problems between professional investors and their principals.1
Explanations for the collapse in demand during the crisis argue that either fire sales or a
buyers’ strike amplified an initial fundamental shock due to declining home prices. In fire sales-based
explanations, the fundamental shock was amplified by forced sales from investors with high
valuations to others with low valuations, while in buyers’ strike-based explanations, it was amplified
by a refusal to trade due to adverse selection or other frictions.2
While theoretical explanations for the boom and bust abound, empirical work has been
hampered by a lack of data on the investors who bought securitizations.3 In this paper, we use new
micro-data on mutual funds’ and insurance companies’ holdings of fixed-income securities to shed
light on the forces that drove the rise and fall of demand for securitizations. Specifically, we study the
quarterly fixed-income holdings of mutual funds and insurance companies from 2003–2010. These
institutions are two of the largest investors in credit securities, owning close to 30% of all corporate

1

See Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009) and Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012) for beliefs-based explanations. For
incentive-based explanations, see Rajan (2005), Acharya and Richardson (2009), and Merrill, Nadauld, and Strahan (2014).

2

For theoretical models of fire sales, see Shleifer and Vishny (1992, 2011), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Lorenzoni
(2008), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Geanakopolos (2009), Stein (2012), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), and
Dávila (2014). See Dang, Gorton, and Holmstrom (2013), Hanson and Sunderam (2013), Milbradt (2012), and Morris and
Shin (2012) for models of buyers’ strikes.
3
For instance, He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010) use Flow of Funds data to assess the balance sheet adjustment of
different financial intermediaries in 2008. However, as the authors note, the Flow of Funds lacks the granularity needed to
track holdings of private securitizations. Similarly, Erel, Nadauld, and Stulz (2013) explore banks’ private securitization
holdings, but cannot explore variation across the type of underlying collateral due to the limits of bank regulatory data.

1

bonds and private securitizations.4 We use this data to pinpoint investor characteristics that were
associated with greater holdings of securitizations and to describe investors’ trading behavior in
securitizations. We then interpret our findings in light of the theoretical literature.
Our analysis focuses on nontraditional securitizations, which consisted of CDOs and MBS
backed by nonprime home mortgages. While traditional securitizations backed by prime residential
mortgages, commercial mortgages, and consumer debt had existed for decades, nontraditional
securitizations were a more recent innovation. And, as Figure 1(a) shows, the rapid growth in
securitization during the 2003–2007 boom was concentrated in nontraditional products.
We begin by showing that during the 2003–2007 boom there was considerable heterogeneity
across investors in their demand for nontraditional securitizations. At a macro level, while both
insurers and mutual funds increased the share of their portfolios allocated to nontraditional
securitizations, these increases did not keep pace with the broader credit market—i.e., as issuance
boomed, insurers and mutual funds became increasingly underweight relative to the market. Within
mutual funds and insurers, a simple variance decomposition of our micro-level holdings data
indicates that most variation in nontraditional securitization holdings was variation across investors
as opposed to common variation over time.
Which investor characteristics were associated with larger holdings of nontraditional
securitizations? We start with mutual funds and estimate cross-sectional regressions relating portfolio
weights in nontraditional securitizations to a variety of fund and manager characteristics. Among
mutual funds with the same objective, fund manager experience stands out relative to other fund
characteristics: experienced managers invested significantly less in nontraditional securitizations than
inexperienced managers.
What explains the relationship between fund manager experience and securitization holdings?
Perhaps inexperienced mutual fund managers faced incentives that were more misaligned with those
of their shareholders than the incentives faced by experienced managers. We find little evidence of
this in our data: inexperienced and experienced managers faced similar performance-flow
relationships, a common proxy for the strength of the risk-taking incentives faced by managers. In
4

According to the Flow of Funds, as of 2007Q2, the total outstanding amount of corporate and foreign bonds, which
include privately-issued securitizations, was $10.88 trillion. Of this, mutual funds (excluding money market mutual
funds) owned $0.84 trillion (7%), and insurers (both life and property and casualty) owned $2.13 trillion (20%).

2

addition, we examine pairs of regular mutual funds and variable annuity funds that had the same
investment objective and were run by the same fund manager. Because they are sold as part of an
insurance product, variable annuity funds face weaker performance-flow relationships and therefore
risk-taking incentives, than regular mutual funds. However, we find that there was little difference in
the holdings of nontraditional securitizations by regular mutual funds and variable annuity funds run
by the same manager.
Alternatively, as suggested by the growing literature on reinforcement learning, the greater
demand of inexperienced managers may have been due to differences in beliefs.5 Consistent with
this, we find that managers who were active during the credit market disruptions following the 1998
Russian default invested significantly less than other managers. Personal experience during the
market disruption mattered: the effect appears to be driven by managers whose funds suffered poor
returns or heavy outflows in 1998. Furthermore, prior experience appears to have moderated
optimism about house prices during the boom. We find that funds located in MSAs with stronger precrisis home price growth invested more heavily in securitizations, but there is suggestive evidence
that this effect was weaker for experienced managers. Overall, these results lend support to the idea
that beliefs, shaped in part by prior firsthand experiences, played an important role in driving mutual
fund demand for nontraditional securitizations.
Of course, these results do not rule out incentives-based explanations for the pre-crisis surge
in demand for nontraditional securitizations. Incentive misalignments may simply not have been
sufficiently severe for mutual funds. To analyze a setting where incentive misalignments may have
been more important, we turn to our data on insurance companies. Insurers are large regulated
financial intermediaries that were perhaps more likely to face the kinds of incentive conflicts that the
literature has highlighted.
We follow a similar procedure, estimating cross-sectional regressions relating insurers’
portfolio weights in nontraditional securitizations to a variety of firm characteristics. We find that
holdings of nontraditional securitizations were higher among larger insurers and insurance companies
that had fixed income portfolios managed by external managers. Among the largest 100 insurers,

5

See, for instance, Greenwood and Nagel (2009), Malmandier and Nagel (2011, 2014), and Campbell, Ramadorai, and
Ranish (2013).

3

which together comprise almost 90% of total assets, holdings of nontraditional securitizations were
concentrated among poorly capitalized insurers. These findings are consistent with the notion that
misaligned incentives played a role in driving insurer demand for nontraditional securitizations.
Among small insurers, the key principal-agent relationship was between the insurer, which may have
lacked the expertise necessary to directly invest in securitizations, and external portfolio managers.
Among larger insurers, the key principal-agent relationship was between creditors and equity holders.
How did investor demand for securitizations change after the onset of the crisis in mid-2007?
For both mutual funds and insurance companies, we find that trading in nontraditional securitizations
declined through the boom from 2003–2007 and was extremely low during the 2007–2009 bust. In
contrast, trading in corporate bonds remained relatively stable from 2003–2010. This is consistent
with the buyers’ strike narrative, which emphasizes market freezes due to adverse selection or other
frictions. However, we also show that mutual funds with large holdings of nontraditional
securitizations suffered larger outflows during the crisis. Consistent with theories of fire sales where
investors follow optimal liquidation strategies, funds met these redemptions primarily by selling
liquid government-guaranteed MBS and not by selling illiquid nontraditional securitizations.
Putting it all together, our micro-data on investor holdings of securitizations paints a
multifaceted picture of the boom in nontraditional securitization and a more uniform picture of the
bust. In the boom, there was significant heterogeneity across investors in the demand for
nontraditional securitizations. Among mutual funds, beliefs appear to have been a key driver of
holdings of nontraditional securitizations, while incentives appear to have played an important role
among insurers. In the bust, investors behaved similarly. They traded very little in nontraditional
securitizations, preferring to transact in more liquid securities to meet their liquidity needs.
A few brief notes on our approach are in order before proceeding. First, the aim of this paper
is not to advance one specific narrative of the financial crisis. Indeed, it seems unlikely that any one
theory alone can completely explain such a complex phenomenon. Second, our analysis is largely
descriptive. In the absence of clean natural experiments, we are generally not able to definitively
identify causal effects. Instead, we pursue a series of descriptive tests that help shed light on the
forces that drove investor demand. We carefully consider factors that may confound our
interpretations of these tests, but ultimately our tests remain descriptive. Overall, our goal is to
document a series of robust stylized facts that can inform future theoretical and empirical work about
the crisis. In this way, our approach is similar to that of Griffin, Harris, Shu, and Topalugua (2011),
4

who describe investor behavior in the dot-com era, and Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2014),
who study runs on short-term debt in the crisis.
The plan for the paper is as follows. Section I provides background on traditional and
nontraditional securitizations. Section II outlines competing theoretical narratives of the surge and
subsequent collapse in demand for nontraditional securitizations. Section III explains the data sources
we use in the paper. Section IV uses our holdings data to explore the drivers of the boom, while
Section V sheds light on the mechanics of the bust. Section VI offers some concluding observations.
I. Background on Securitization
This section provides a brief background on securitization. Securitizations are created by
pooling and tranching—assembling a pool of cash-flow-generating financial assets such as loans or
debt securities and then issuing claims of various priorities backed by that pool.
In the United States, the securitization of home mortgages dates to the late 1960s and early
1970s, when various Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), corporations that were implicitly or
explicitly guaranteed by the U.S. government, began issuing securities backed by residential
mortgage pools. Only “conforming” mortgages, which must meet certain requirements for size, credit
scores, loan-to-value ratios, and documentation, are eligible to be included in GSE mortgage pools.
Because the GSEs guarantee the timely payment of principal and interest on the underlying loans,
investors in GSE-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (GSE MBS) bear little credit risk. The
market for GSE MBS grew exponentially during the 1980s and 1990s, eventually overtaking the
market for U.S. Treasuries to become the single largest debt market in the U.S. (Fabozzi [2005]).
The 1980s saw the advent of several types of private securitizations that were not backed by
the U.S. government, which we broadly refer to as “traditional securitizations.” They include:


Commercial Backed Mortgage Securities (CMBS): The securitization of commercial
mortgages into CMBS was pioneered by investment banks in the early 1980s. However,
this market grew to prominence only in the early 1990s when the Resolution Trust
Corporation began using it to sell off the commercial real estate loans of failed depository
institutions. The CMBS market grew rapidly throughout the 1990s and 2000s.



Consumer Asset-Backed Securities (ABS): The securitization of non-mortgage consumer
debt, including credit card, automotive, and student loans, began in the late 1980s. These
markets developed rapidly, and by 2000 over 30% of outstanding consumer debt had been
5

securitized according to the Flow of Funds. The market for consumer ABS grew more
slowly from 2003–2007, with the fraction of consumer debt that had been securitized
falling to 25% by 2007Q2.


Prime non-GSE RMBS: Beginning in 1977, investment banks began securitizing prime
“jumbo” residential mortgages that conformed to all GSE MBS criteria other than the size
limit (Fabozzi [2005] and Gorton [2008]).

The boom in securitization from 2003–2007 prominently featured new types of
securitizations, which developed much later than these traditional securitizations. We label this
second set of securitizations “nontraditional.” They include:


Nonprime RMBS: The securitization of subprime and Alt-A home mortgages began in the
mid-1990s. Alt-A mortgages are not prime due to high loan-to-value ratios or a lack of
sufficient documentation. Subprime mortgages are not prime because the borrower has a
low credit score. The origination and securitization of nonprime mortgages exploded
during the boom from 2003–2007.6



Collateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs): CDOs are securitizations backed by a portfolio
of fixed income assets. CDOs are classified as collateralized bond obligations (CBOs),
collateralized loan obligations (CLOs), or ABS CDOs. CBOs are collateralized by
corporate bonds and were the most common type of CDO until the late 1990s and early
2000s. However, this market grew slowly during the 2003–2007 period. CLOs invest
primarily in senior secured loans to highly leveraged firms. CLO issuance boomed from
2003–2007. ABS CDOs use bonds from other securitizations as collateral. ABS CDOs,
particularly those using nonprime RMBS as collateral, grew explosively over the course
of the boom. Many of the most dramatic losses by large financial intermediaries
announced during 2007 and 2008 were linked to ABS CDOs.7

6

See Fabozzi (2005), Gorton (2008), and Ashcraft and Schuermann (2008) for further background on nonprime MBS.
See Shivdasani and Wang (2013) for further background on CLOs. See Barnett-Hart (2009) and Cordell, Huang, and
Williams (2012) for more detail on ABS CDOs.

7

6

II. Narratives of the Boom and Bust
In this section, we discuss different explanations for the surge and subsequent collapse in
demand for nontraditional securitizations. Our aim in this paper is not to advance a specific narrative
of the crisis or to definitively test one narrative against another. Instead, we approach the data with a
flat prior, with the goal of documenting a series of robust stylized facts that can be used to refine
these different explanations and inform future research about the forces that drove investor demand
for securitizations.
A. Narratives of the boom
Explanations of the pre-crisis surge in demand for securitizations can be grouped into two
broad categories: those that highlight distorted beliefs and those that highlight distorted incentives.8
A.1 Beliefs
In the context of the 2003–2007 securitization boom, beliefs-based explanations argue that
investors misunderstood the risks of investing in nontraditional securitizations. Many have suggested
that investors treated all AAA-rated securitizations as though they were virtually risk-free. For
instance, Gerardi, Lehnert, Sherlund, and Willen (2008) and Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012)
argue that investors neglected the risk of a substantial nationwide downturn in house prices and
therefore believed that a diversified exposure to residential mortgages was almost riskless. Coval,
Jurek, and Stafford (2009) suggest that investors focused on credit ratings which reflected expected
losses but neglected the systematic risk embedded in securitizations. Ashcraft, Goldsmith-Pinkham,
and Vickery (2010) and Rajan, Seru, and Vig (2013) argue that investors and rating agencies failed to
update their models of loan default in the face of deteriorating loan underwriting standards, thus
neglecting the risks associated with lending to riskier households.
Simple versions of the distorted-beliefs explanation for the boom tend not to emphasize
heterogeneity among investors or across securities. In these simpler narratives, all investors
incorrectly assessed the risks of securitizations, driving up the prices of all AAA-rated securitizations

8

We do not focus on explanations of the boom that emphasize demand for “money-like” assets as in Caballero and Farhi
(2013) and Gorton and Metrick (2010a, b). Similarly, we bypass explanations focusing on the role of international
demand for safe assets as in Bernanke (2005), Bernanke, Bertaut, DeMarco, and Kamin (2011), Caballero (2009), and
Shin (2012). Since our data only included U.S.-based investors, it is not geared towards addressing these questions.

7

in lock step. In more nuanced versions of this narrative, particular subsets of investors may have been
more susceptible to distorted beliefs. For instance, Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012) argue that
unsophisticated investors were shocked by the swift decline of nationwide home prices. Consistent
with this, anecdotal accounts suggest that demand from smaller, less sophisticated investors such as
small insurance companies and pension funds played an important role in fueling the boom.
A.2 Incentives
Incentives-based narratives of the boom emphasize agency problems within the financial
sector. In these explanations, sophisticated actors within financial institutions correctly understood
that securitizations were risky. However, because of the incentives they faced, these agents purchased
more securitizations than their ultimate principals would have if acting on their own behalf. These
explanations differ primarily in where they locate the critical agency conflict within the financial
system. Furthermore, incentives-based explanations frequently highlight heterogeneity across
investors because some may have faced worse incentive distortions than others.
For instance, the mutual fund literature typically argues that agency problems between fund
managers and investors stem from the performance-flow relationship (Chevalier and Ellison [1997]).
Since expected fund inflows are a convex function of past performance, managers face incentives to
take on risk to maximize their expected future compensation, even if this does not maximize expected
fund returns. Thus, according to the incentives view, the more convex the performance-flow
relationship a fund manager faced, the larger her holdings of securitizations would have been.
This type of incentive problem may also arise for insurers because they sometimes outsource
the management of their portfolios. Because insurers cannot perfectly observe risk taking by external
assets managers and risk-adjust their performance, these managers may have an incentive to boost
perceived performance by taking excessive risks. This problem may have been particularly acute for
highly-rated securitizations because they tend to perform well outside of adverse, low-probability
economic states (Acharya, Pagano, and Volpin [2013] and Adrian and Shin [2014]).
Agency problems between external capital providers and managers at financial institutions
can also take the form of risk-shifting as in Jensen and Meckling (1976). In these narratives,
managers acting on behalf of existing shareholders purchased highly-rated securitizations to capture

8

the yield associated with bearing tail risk, increasing the expected payoff to equity, while reducing
total firm value at creditors’ expense (Landier, Sraer, and Thesmar [2011]).9,10 These problems may
have been exacerbated by poorly-designed regulatory capital rules that did not properly capture
systematic risk, giving regulated intermediaries incentives to load up on highly-rated securitizations
(Acharya and Richardson [2009]; Merrill, Nadauld, and Strahan [2014]). For instance, if the conflict
between equity and creditors is stronger for less well-capitalized insurers, they may have been more
likely to hold nontraditional securitizations.11
Note that both the distorted beliefs and incentives narratives provide reasons why some
investors may have had elevated demand for nontraditional securitizations. The large literature on
limits to arbitrage initiated by DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990a) and Shleifer and
Vishny (1997) suggests that other investors may have been reluctant to aggressively lean against
these demand shocks. Indeed, they may even have had incentives to “ride” a bubble rather than
leaning against it as in DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990b) and Abreu and
Brunnermeier (2002). The limited offsetting response by arbitrageurs would then explain why these
demand shocks raised equilibrium prices, increasing incentives for issuance.
B. Narratives of the bust
In contrast to the disagreement that exists about the drivers of the boom in securitizations,
there is wider consensus about the market collapse from mid-2007 to 2009. The frictionless null
hypothesis is that the precipitous drop in the secondary market prices of securitizations during the
crisis reflected bad news about fundamental values. Most narratives of the bust go beyond the
frictionless null and emphasize mechanisms that amplified the reaction of prices to the bad
fundamental news. While there is less consensus on the specific mechanisms that were at work, the
two that have received the most attention in the theoretical literature are fire sales and buyers’ strikes.
9

Beltratti and Stulz (2012), Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2011), and Erel, Nadauld, and Stulz (2013) argue that incentive
conflicts between shareholders and managers have little power to explain the performance of banks during the crisis.
10
The “too big to fail” version of this story focuses on the government’s role as an implicit creditor of large financial
institutions. Under this explanation, these institutions bought securitizations to rationally maximize the value of their
implicit government guarantees. For instance, see Acharya, Cooley, Richardson, and Walter (2009), Acharya and
Richardson (2009), Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2013), and Iannotta and Pennacchi (2012).
11
The literature on risk-taking incentives in insurance companies is less well developed than the comparable literature on
mutual funds. Important exceptions include Becker and Ivashina (2014), who show that within rating insurers tend to hold
riskier corporate bonds, and Koijen and Yogo (2013), who study regulatory capital arbitrage by insurers.

9

B.1 Fire sales
In

fire

sales-based

explanations,

binding

leverage

constraints

forced

financial

intermediaries—who were the natural holders of securitizations and had the highest valuations—to
sell to other investors with lower valuations. The resulting decline in prices further tightened leverage
constraints, leading to further forced sales. Thus, fire sales are a natural amplification mechanism
whereby some initial moderately bad news could have ultimately had a severe impact on prices. A
critical feature of these explanations is that the decline in the prices of securitizations was associated
with increased trading activity: the identity of the marginal investor changed because natural holders
were forced to sell their holdings to others.12
B.2 Buyers’ strikes
In “buyers’ strike” explanations for the collapse of nontraditional securitization markets,
uncertainty about the ultimate value of securitizations rose dramatically, causing prices to enter a
downward spiral characterized by a near absence of trade. Precipitous price declines and a collapse of
trading volume may be explained by a variety of frictional amplification mechanisms. In Diamond
and Rajan (2012), for instance, institutions that would have otherwise sold assets at fire-sale prices
instead refused to do so due to a risk-shifting problem. By contrast, Dang, Gorton, and Holmstrom
(2013) and Hanson and Sunderam (2013) rely on adverse selection mechanisms. In these models, bad
news lowered prices and raised uncertainty about asset valuations; as a result, the scope for adverse
selection between informed and uninformed investors became too large, and trade collapsed.
Milbradt (2012) presents a model where trade froze because financial intermediaries wished to avoid
recognizing losses that would tighten their capital constraints. In his model, prices fall until the
potential profits from transacting exceed the shadow cost of the tightening capital constraints.
Thus, different explanations for the bust have very different implications for aggregate trading
patterns. The fundamentals-driven narrative suggests no reason for trading behavior to change with
the onset of the financial crisis, while the fire sales narrative suggests increased trade at the beginning
of the crisis, and the buyers’ strike narrative suggests a collapse of trade.
12

Merrill, Nadauld, Stulz, and Sherland (2014) provide evidence that some insurers sold some nonprime RMBS at fire
sale discounts. However, the aggregate volume of transactions they study is quite small. Relatedly, Ellul, Jotikasthira,
Lundblad, and Wang (2014) find that P&C insurers who were subject to mark-to-market accounting were more likely to
sell downgraded securitizations than life insurers who were subject to historical cost accounting.

10

III. Data
A. Mutual fund and insurance holdings
Our primary data set is the Thomson Reuters eMAXX database of quarterly security-level
holdings of asset-backed securities by U.S.-domiciled mutual funds and insurance companies.
Thomson Reuters obtains par value holdings data from regulatory filings—Schedule D for insurance
companies and Forms N-CSR(S) and N-Q for mutual funds—as well as directly from these investors.
Our sample period runs from 2003Q1–2010Q4, which is long enough to allow us to study changes in
the demand for securitizations during the boom as well as during the crisis. Our sample of investorquarter observations conditions on having at least one securitization in the portfolio, including GSE
MBS. Thus, the investors that are missing from the sample are those that by regulation or by choice
never hold securitizations.
Because the types of distortions in beliefs and incentives posited by the theoretical literature
are likely to operate at relatively low frequencies, in most of our cross-sectional analyses we collapse
our data to investor-year observations by taking an equal-weighted average within each year. Our
analysis of trading behavior during the crisis uses quarterly data because annual data would fail to
fully capture the dynamic response of trading to liquidity shocks.
B. Securities
We supplement our holdings data by collecting detailed security-level data from a number of
sources. To differentiate between traditional and nontraditional securitizations, we collect
comprehensive security data from the three major credit rating agencies—Fitch, Moody’s, and
S&P—and from Bloomberg. Using this data, we classify securitizations into the six broad collateral
types discussed in Section I: (1) GSE MBS, (2) CMBS, (3) consumer ABS, (4) prime private-label
RMBS, (5) nonprime private-label RMBS, and (6) CDOs. Our focus is on explaining the demand for
the nontraditional securitizations that were at the heart of the credit boom and crisis. We therefore
calculate the nontraditional share, the share of nonprime RMBS and CDOs in a given investor’s
overall bond portfolio. In addition, we collect data on the security’s coupon or spread at issuance
from Moody’s and Bloomberg, the initial credit rating from Fitch, Moody’s and S&P, and the time
series of outstanding amounts from Bloomberg.

11

C. Mutual funds
We also collect data on the characteristics of the investors in our eMAXX data. We obtain
mutual fund investment objectives, net assets, returns, and flows from the CRSP Mutual Fund
Database.13 Our cross-sectional analyses focus on bond and hybrid mutual funds, excluding index
funds, equity funds, government bond funds, money market funds, and municipal bond funds. We
obtain biographic data on the portfolio managers of mutual funds from Morningstar, including their
start and end dates managing different funds. We measure each manager’s experience as the number
of years since the first time we observe them managing a mutual fund in the Morningstar data.
D. Insurance companies
We obtain insurance company data from AM Best, including information on insurers’ assets,
capitalization, and AM Best’s financial strength rating for individual insurers.14 Overall, our data on
insurance companies is similar to our data on mutual funds, except that we do not have biographic
data on insurer portfolio managers.
E. Summary statistics and aggregate holdings
Table 1 provides summary statistics for our main data on mutual funds and insurers. Panel A
covers mutual funds and the unit of observation is a fund-year. The median fund has net assets of
$256 million and total par bond holdings of $195 million. It is managed by two portfolio managers
who average roughly eight years of experience between them. The median fund in our data invested
about 1% of its bond portfolio in nontraditional securitizations. Highlighting the importance of crosssectional heterogeneity, the distribution of nontraditional share is highly right-skewed with an
average of 4%.
Panel B of Table 1 reports summary statistics for insurance companies. Because most
insurance groups centrally manage the investment portfolios of their subsidiaries, we calculate
summary statistics and perform our analyses at the insurance group level. Specifically, we use
organizational hierarchy information from AM Best to aggregate holdings and firm characteristics up

13

To do so, we construct a fund-level link between eMAXX and CRSP. We are able to link 84% (2,355 out of 2,813) of
mutual funds in eMAXX to CRSP.
14
We are able to match 84% (3,630 out of 4,302) of insurance companies in eMAXX to AM Best. We drop insurer
separate accounts, which appear in eMAXX in some years but not others, from our baseline sample.

12

to the group level. The size distribution of insurance firms is highly right-skewed with the mean and
median firms having $5,652 and $153 million in assets. The mean group had 2% of its aggregate
bond portfolio invested in nontraditional securitizations.
Combining our eMAXX holdings data with data from the Flow of Funds and SIFMA, Table 2
reports the fractions of different categories of private credit securities held by insurers and mutual
funds. Panel A reports holdings of all private credit securities, which include corporate bonds, foreign
bonds, and privately issued ABS. In 2003Q2, insurers owned 26% of private credit securities. This
share trended down to 20% by 2010Q4. At the same time, mutual funds’ share of private credit
securities trended up from 7% in 2003Q2 to 11% in 2010Q4. Thus, our data capture two of the
largest investors in credit assets. We use these numbers as a benchmark for assessing the overall
weight of insurers and mutual funds within private credit securities markets.
We next report holdings of traditional consumer ABS and CMBS. Both insurers and mutual
funds were underweight traditional consumer ABS. However, insurers were overweight CMBS,
holding approximately one-third of outstanding CMBS from 2003–2010. This is consistent with
insurers’ long-standing expertise in commercial real estate. According to the Flow of Funds, insurers’
market share of all commercial mortgages, not including CMBS, averaged 28% from 1952–2000.
Panel B of Table 2 shows the evolution of outstanding amounts and holdings of private-label
RMBS and CDOs. This panel shows that outstanding RMBS and CDOs grew rapidly during the
boom. Although both insurers and mutual funds increased the fraction of their portfolios invested in
these securities, they did not keep up with the overall market and became more underweight as
issuance boomed. For example, while the share of nonprime RMBS in the overall market for private
credit securities grew from 8% in 2003Q2 to 17% in 2007Q2, nonprime RMBS rose from only 4.2%
to 5.4% over this period as a share of insurance companies’ portfolios. We see similar patterns for
mutual funds. These results apply across the capital structures of securitizations: in untabulated
results, we find that insurance companies and mutual funds were not tilting their portfolios towards
tranches with a particular rating. Approximately 80% of their holdings were rated AAA, which is
roughly the share of issuance volume that was AAA-rated.

13

Overall, the aggregate evidence suggests that demand for nontraditional securitizations did
not primarily come from the mutual funds and insurers. 15 Though these investors do not seem to have
driven the overall growth of nontraditional securitization, they were still important holders of these
products, with about $157 billion in total holdings as of 2007Q2. In the next section, we undertake a
detailed analysis of the cross-sectional determinants of insurance company and mutual fund holdings.
To the extent that these investors were affected by the same distorted incentives and beliefs as other
investors, the cross-sectional patterns in their holdings should shed light on drivers of the boom in
nontraditional securitization more generally.
IV. The Boom
In this section, we use our data to explore the forces that shaped investor demand during the
2003–2007 securitization boom. As discussed in Section II, the two main explanations we explore are
those emphasizing distorted incentives and those highlighting distorted beliefs.
A. The importance of investor heterogeneity
The market for private securitizations grew explosively between 2003 and 2007. Figure 1(a)
shows the dramatic growth of private securitizations, which was concentrated in nontraditional
securitizations. Issuance of nontraditional securitizations almost quadrupled from $98 billion in
2002Q4 to $420 billion at the peak in 2006Q4. By comparison, issuance of traditional securitizations
roughly doubled from $103 billion in 2002Q4 to $200 billion at its peak in 2007Q2.
As this surge in issuance was taking place, there was surprisingly little adjustment in the
prices of securitizations. Figure 1(b) plots the quarterly time series of average credit spreads for
AAA-rated securitizations backed by different types of collateral from 2003Q1–2007Q4. We
compute value-weighted averages of new-issue spreads, restricting attention to the spreads on
floating rate notes indexed to one-, three-, and six-month LIBOR to avoid benchmarking issues.
During the boom, credit spreads on AAA-rated nontraditional securitizations were
significantly wider than those on other AAA-rated assets, including traditional securitizations and
corporate bonds. The difference in spreads between traditional and nontraditional AAA-rated bonds,

15

The National Association of Insurance Commissioners also finds that insurer holdings of CDOs were quite low. See
http://www.naic.org/capital_markets_archive/110218.htm.

14

while moderate in absolute terms, was economically meaningful relative to typical credit spreads.
Indeed, spreads on AAA-rated nonprime RMBS and CDOs were closer to those on BBB-rated
corporate bonds than to those on AAA-rated corporate bonds. During the height of the boom from
2004Q1–2007Q2, AAA-rated spreads averaged 9 basis points (bps) for consumer ABS, 22 bps for
nonprime RMBS, and 34 bps for CDOs. This can be compared with corporate bond spreads that
averaged 4 bps for AAA-rated bonds and 37 bps for BBB-rated bonds.16
At the same time, we find little cross-sectional dispersion of spreads within a given rating and
collateral class. For instance, from 2004Q1–2007Q2 the cross-sectional standard deviation of spreads
among AAA-rated consumer ABS averaged 10 bps, whereas the cross-sectional dispersion for AAArated CDOs averaged 12 bps. Thus, the bulk of variation in credit spreads within a given rating was
across collateral classes as opposed to within collateral class.17
The wide spreads on nontraditional securitizations are an underappreciated fact about the
boom. Conventional descriptions of the boom often neglect heterogeneity across investors and across
securities, implicitly assuming that all investors treated all AAA-rated securitizations as nearly
riskless. However, the price variation we observe suggests that investor heterogeneity was important.
While some buyers may have treated all AAA-rate securitizations the same, they were infra-marginal.
Indeed, the marginal investor appears to have differentiated between the risks of traditional and
nontraditional securitizations. Of course, this fact does not imply that investors got prices “right”
during the boom. Given the size and systematic character of the ex-post losses, spreads should
presumably have been an order of magnitude larger. However, the wider spreads on nontraditional
securitizations suggest that some investors understood the ordinal ranking of risk across products.
Our investor-year panel of holdings underscores the importance of investor heterogeneity in
their attitudes towards nontraditional securitizations. Table 3 reports a simple variance
decomposition. Panel A shows the fraction of variation in nontraditional share among mutual funds
that can be explained by different fixed effects. Most variation in investors’ portfolio allocations to
nontraditional securitizations was variation across investors, as opposed to common variation over

16

Merrill, Nadauld, and Strahan (2014) also find that spreads on private securitizations were wider than those on
comparably–rated corporate bonds during the 2003–2007 boom.
17
Thus, our results do not contradict those in Adelino (2010), who finds that, in the cross-section of AAA-rated subprime
RMBS, new-issue credit spreads have very little predictive power for future downgrades or default.

15

time. Specifically, time fixed effects can explain less than 2% of total variation in the portfolio share
of nontraditional securitizations. Investment-objective fixed effects or objective-by-time effects can
explain less than 20% of total variation. Fund fixed effects, on the other hand, explain more than 60%
of total variation. The remaining columns show that some of the fund-level variation can be
explained by similarities among different funds in the same family. However, in large families with at
least 10 funds, there was significant within-family variation, suggesting that heterogeneity across
individual portfolio mandates and managers played an important role.
Panel B of Table 3 performs a similar exercise for insurers. As with mutual funds, variation
across insurers was crucial, and common variation over time can explain less than 1% of total
variation in the portfolio share of nontraditional securitizations. We perform the variance
decomposition analysis using firm instead of group-level data to show that there was relatively little
within-group variation: group fixed effects capture almost as much cross-sectional variation (47%) in
nontraditional share as do firm fixed effects (58%). This means that we are unlikely to lose much
interesting variation when conducting portfolio holdings analysis using group-level data.
The variation in securitization prices across collateral types and the variation in portfolio
shares across investors both suggest that there was important heterogeneity in investor attitudes
towards securitizations. To better understand the factors that drove investor demand, we now
examine the cross-sectional variation in our holdings data.
B. What explains mutual funds’ securitization holdings?
We first examine the cross-sectional determinants of mutual fund holdings of nontraditional
securitizations. In Table 4 we estimate cross-sectional regressions relating nontraditional share, the
portfolio weight in nontraditional securitizations, to a variety of fund and manager characteristics. We
estimate separate regressions for each year from 2004–2009. The regressions include investment
objective fixed effects to isolate variation across funds with the same investment objective.
The strongest and most consistently significant driver of mutual fund holdings of
nontraditional securitizations appears to have been portfolio manager experience, measured as the
number of years each manager has been managing mutual funds. Using the start dates for fundmanager pairs in our Morningstar data, we calculate the first time each manager appears. We then
compute the manager’s experience as the difference between December 31, 2004 and this date. For
team-managed funds, we take the average level of experience across individual managers. We label
16

managers as experienced if they were above the median level of experience on December 31, 2004.18
Except for 2009, where it is near zero, the coefficient on experience is negative and
statistically significant. The coefficient is largest in magnitude in 2007, when the nontraditional share
of experienced managers was 3.3% less than the nontraditional share of inexperienced managers.
This effect is economically large compared to the average nontraditional share of 4.5%.
Figure 2(a) depicts this finding graphically, plotting the average nontraditional share of funds
managed by experienced versus inexperienced managers. Both experienced and inexperienced funds
started with about a 3% portfolio weight in nontraditional securitizations. Starting in 2004, all
managers increased their nontraditional share, but inexperienced managers increased their
nontraditional share by far more than experienced managers. The nontraditional share of
inexperienced managers peaked at 8% while that of experienced managers peaked at 5%.19
The distribution of mutual fund right-size is skewed, with the 250 largest funds, or about one
third of our sample, accounting for about 90% of aggregate bond holdings. To make sure that our
results are not driven by many small funds, in Panel B of Table 4 we estimate our regressions for the
subsample of the 250 largest funds. We obtain very similar results for the subsample of large funds.
B.1 What drives the effect of manager inexperience?
One interpretation of the important role of manager experience is that it reflects incentive
problems. For instance, Chevalier and Ellison (1997) argue that the shape of the relationship between
fund flows and past performance determines the risk-taking incentives facing the fund and show that
performance-flow is stronger in younger funds.20
However, Table 5 suggests that inexperienced bond mutual fund managers did not face
stronger or more convex performance-flow relationships. We estimate monthly regressions of fund
flows (scaled by lagged assets) on lagged fund returns and their interaction with a manager’s
experience. To capture the dynamics of investor learning about manager skill, in these performance18

By measuring experience as of 2004, we reduce concerns that funds wishing to invest in securitizations endogenously
chose the younger managers in response to the boom.
19
It is also possible to measure manager age using our Morningstar data. In untabulated results, we find that it is
experience and not age that matters. Although younger managers tend to have higher nontraditional shares, especially
around the peak of the credit boom, the difference is much smaller at around 1%.
20
Chevalier and Ellison (1999) argue that because younger managers are more likely to be terminated for bad
performance, they in fact face a more concave payoff function and therefore should take less risk.

17

flow regressions we update a manager’s experience each month, and consider a manager to be
experienced if she is above the median of the experience distribution at that time. Consistent with the
prior literature, we find that fund flows respond strongly to past performance. However, when we
interact past performance with experience, we do not find a stronger performance-flow relationship
for inexperienced managers. If anything, performance-flow sensitivity appears to be slightly stronger
for experienced managers, although the economic magnitude of this effect is small. Figure 2(b)
depicts these results graphically.21
If not differences in incentives, what explained the strong tendency of inexperienced
managers to invest in nontraditional securitizations? It could be that past experiences have a strong
effect on managers’ beliefs as in theories of reinforcement learning. This idea is explored by
Greenwood and Nagel (2009), Malmandier and Nagel (2011, 2014), and Campbell, Ramadorai, and
Ranish (2013). For example, Greenwood and Nagel (2009) find that young managers were more
heavily invested in technology stocks at the peak of the technology bubble. In the context of bond
markets, managers who have not managed through a credit cycle or experienced sharp movements in
interest rates might be less likely to fully appreciate the tail risk exposure of securitizations.
In Table 6, we find evidence consistent with this reinforcement learning view. In Panel A,
each column defines the experienced dummy as a different cutoff for the first year that the manager
started to manage mutual funds. The effect of experience seems to be highly nonlinear—in our data it
appears to matter most when a manager has at least seven to eight years of experience. These are the
managers who were active during the dislocations of fall 1998, which saw turbulent fluctuations in
credit spreads following Russia’s default and perhaps learned about tail risk from that episode.
In Panel B, we restrict attention to the subset of experienced managers who managed any
fund, not necessarily the one in question, during 1998. The regressions in Panel B show two
interesting results. First, managers whose funds suffered poor returns or heavy outflows in 1998
steered clear of nontraditional securitizations in 2007.22 Second, the subsequent effect of a bad 1998

21

We have also examined fund tracking error and do not find any evidence that inexperienced managers have larger
tracking error. Thus, the higher nontraditional share of inexperienced managers does not appear to be part of a broader
pattern of deliberate risk taking which would be reflected in a larger tracking error.
22
To capture managers’ firsthand experience of bad outcomes, we take the minimum returns or flows across all funds
managed by a given manager in 1998. For team-managed funds, we then take the minimum across individual managers.

18

outcome is weaker for managers who had already accumulated significant experience by 1998.

23

Focusing on column (1), less experienced managers whose funds had performed well in 1998
allocated 6% more of their portfolios to nontraditional securitizations in 2007 than other managers.
The reinforcement learning story also suggests that experience may affect the way managers
reacted to the surge in house prices during the boom. Specifically, more experienced managers may
have been less influenced by positive recent house price appreciation than less experienced managers.
Table 7 offers some suggestive evidence of this. We regress the nontraditional share in 2007 on the
lagged change in house prices in the MSA where the fund manager was located. The coefficient on
local house price appreciation is statistically and economically significant. A one-standard-deviation
change in annualized house price appreciation over the 2003–2006 period is associated with a 1.2%
higher nontraditional share, suggesting that local real estate conditions may have affected managers’
attitudes towards nontraditional securitizations. In column 4, we control for the interaction of local
price appreciation and manager experience. Although the interaction term is not statistically
significant, the pattern of coefficients is suggestive. The interaction between experience and house
price appreciation offsets more than half of the direct effect of house price appreciation.
In summary, our evidence suggests a role for reinforcement learning, whereby investors are
more likely to understand certain risks only once they have personally experienced bad outcomes.
This adds a dynamic component to recent narratives suggesting that investors bought securitizations
because they neglected tail risks (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny [2012]). Specifically, risks that
investors have not experienced for many years would be more likely to be neglected than risks that
investors have recently experienced. In other words, the process of “collective forgetting” that
contributes to booms and busts may be path dependent.
B.2 Isolating the effects of performance flow
While differences in incentives generated by performance flow do not appear to be driving
our results on manager experience, they could still be an important determinant of mutual fund
investments in nontraditional securitizations. The ideal experiment to isolate the effect of incentives

23

It is also possible that the crisis was a period during which investors learned a lot about the ability of fund managers
active at the time, explaining the importance of being active during 1998. However, it does not explain why managers
who performed worse in 1998 would hold fewer nontraditional securitizations.

19

would hold fixed fund managers’ information and investment opportunity set while varying their
risk-taking incentives. This suggests comparing the investment decisions one manager makes for two
funds with the same investment objective but different performance-flow sensitivities.24
Variable annuities provide a laboratory to approximate this ideal experiment. Variable
annuities are an insurance contract whose value depends on the performance of the investment
selected by the owner of the insurance contract. The underlying investment options are typically
mutual funds. Variable annuity funds are regulated and structured just like regular mutual funds
under the Investment Company Act of 1940. Indeed, for many variable annuity funds, there is also a
regular mutual fund with the same manager and mandate. For example, Hartford High Yield HLS
Fund is a variable annuity fund in our data, and the Hartford High Yield Fund is the corresponding
regular mutual fund. The two funds have the same investment goal and investment strategy and are
managed by the same team of three portfolio managers. The only difference between the two is that
the variable annuity fund serves as an “underlying investment option[s] for certain variable annuity
and variable life insurance separate accounts of Hartford Life Insurance Company and its affiliates.”
Because they are sold as a part of an insurance product, variable annuity funds are likely to
face weaker performance-flow relationships than regular mutual funds. Table 8 shows this is the case.
CRSP has little coverage of variable annuities prior to 2008Q3. As a result, we can only look at the
performance-flow relationship after the crisis. Specifically, we use monthly data for the January 2009
to June 2013 period. We include all bond and hybrid funds and do not limit the sample to funds in our
eMAXX data. Comparing the coefficients on past returns interacted with fund-type dummies, the
performance-flow relationship for regular mutual funds is about twice as strong as that for variable
annuity funds. The performance-flow relationship is depicted graphically in Figure 3(a).
Given such a large difference in the performance-flow relationship, the incentives story would
predict that regular funds would engage in more risk taking than comparable variable annuity funds.
To study the effects of these differences in performance flow on nontraditional share, we construct a
sample of fund pairs with the same investment objective where one fund is a variable annuity fund,
and its paired fund is a regular mutual fund managed by the same portfolio manager. We start with a

24

In untabulated results, we find no effect of the estimated performance-flow sensitivity in simple direct tests.
Specifically, funds that faced stronger performance-flow relationships did not have higher nontraditional shares.

20

sample of 328 variable annuity funds in our eMAXX data as of 2003Q4. We then manually search
for a regular mutual fund that is offered by the same fund adviser.
We are able to find matching funds for 158 variable annuity funds. Figure 3(b) shows the time
series of nontraditional share for matched pairs. Nontraditional shares track each other quite closely.
Figure 3(b) does not control for differences in size that could, in principle, affect nontraditional share.
However, controlling for size does not affect our results. Despite significant differences in the
performance-flow relationship, Figure 3(b) shows that managers made similar investment decisions
in their regular and variable annuity funds, suggesting that, for these managers, investments in
nontraditional securitizations were not driven by the incentives they faced.
Overall, our analysis of mutual fund holdings suggests that beliefs played an important role
determining holdings of nontraditional securitizations. Of course, these results do not rule out
incentives-based explanations for the pre-crisis run-up in investor demand for nontraditional
securitizations. Mutual funds may not have faced the relevant kinds of incentive distortions.
Therefore, we next turn to our data on insurance company holdings.
C. What explains insurers’ securitization holdings?
Insurance companies are the single largest institutional holder of credit securities. Moreover,
since they are heavily regulated financial intermediaries, their holdings may give us insight into the
incentive problems generated by such regulation.25
Following the same approach as in Table 4, Table 9 examines the cross-sectional
determinants of insurers’ nontraditional share over time. Three main facts emerge from the table.
First, life insurers tended to hold more nontraditional securitizations than property and casualty
(P&C) insurers. This may reflect the fact that payouts on life insurance policies are more predictable
than payouts on P&C policies. Thus, life insurers effectively have a more stable funding base than
P&C insurers, enabling them to take more risk as in Hanson, Shleifer, Stein, and Vishny (2014).
Second, larger insurers tended to hold more nontraditional securitizations than did smaller

25

The experience of insurance company portfolio managers could have also played a role in driving their holdings of
nontraditional securitizations. In untabulated results, we find some suggestive evidence consistent with this: public
insurance companies that experienced worse stock returns during the 1998 crisis invested less in nontraditional
securitizations in the mid-2000s. However, because our data on insurers lacks detailed biographical information on
portfolio managers, we cannot perform the same detailed analysis for insurers that we do for mutual funds.

21

insurers. A one-standard-deviation increase in size was associated with a 0.9% higher nontraditional
share, or about half of the average share of 2%. This may reflect the fact that there are fixed costs
involved in investing in securitizations because it requires trading expertise and analytical
infrastructure that is quite different from that required for corporate bonds. Larger insurers have
larger portfolios over which they can amortize these fixed costs.26
The third main fact is consistent with the idea that investing in securitizations requires
specialized knowledge and infrastructure: insurers with portfolios run by external managers held
more nontraditional securitizations. This may reflect the fact that insurers could economize on their
investing infrastructure by outsourcing part of their portfolio management to external managers. But
it may also reflect an incentive conflict: if insurers could not perfectly risk-adjust performance,
external managers may have been able to increase their compensation by taking excessive risks.
Since they perform well in most states of the world, nontraditional securitizations may have been a
particularly good avenue for such risk taking.
The insurance industry is even more concentrated than the mutual fund industry. In our data,
the top 100 insurers held approximately 90% of total assets. (The cutoff for inclusion in the top 100
insurers has been stable over time at around $8 billion in total assets.) Since these large insurers
likely had the scale necessary to invest in securitizations internally, it may be the case that there were
different determinants of holdings of nontraditional securitizations among large insurers than among
small insurers. To assess this possibility, Panel B of Table 9 replicates Panel A, restricting the sample
to the top 100 insurers by size. Two main differences stand out. First, large insurers that used external
managers did not hold more nontraditional securitizations than those using internal managers. This is
consistent with the idea that larger insurers had the expertise necessary to effectively monitor their
external managers and prevent excessive risk taking.
Second, among large insurers, those with lower capitalization levels invested significantly
more in nontraditional securitizations. We hold the definition of capitalization constant over time to
ensure that the results are not driven by shifts in the set of insurers that have low capital ratios. The
economic magnitude is meaningful. A one-standard deviation increase in capitalization was
26

An alternative explanation is that the effect of size reflects a too-big-too-fail problem. Large insurers may have held
nontraditional securitizations because they expected government bailouts. However, the number of insurers large enough
to expect such treatment is likely too small to drive our regression results.

22

associated with a 1.7% decrease in nontraditional share, relative to a mean share of 3.8%.
These results are consistent with the idea that risk-shifting was an important driver of
nontraditional securitization holdings among large insurers. Equity holders are residual claimants on
the value of an insurer’s asset portfolio net of policyholder claims. An insurer’s capitalization level
may reflect the strength of the agency conflict between its equity holders and its creditors, including
state guarantee funds. To combat this problem, regulators require insurance companies to maintain
minimum levels of capital on a risk-adjusted basis. However, to the extent that these regulations are
imperfect, poorly-capitalized insurers could have had stronger risk-shifting incentives and therefore
have been more likely to hold nontraditional securitizations.
Table 9 lends support to the idea that incentive problems played a role in driving insurer
demand for nontraditional securitizations. Heterogeneity among insurers is important: different
incentive problems appear to matter for different insurers. Among smaller insurers, the key principalagent relationship was between the insurer, which may have lacked the expertise necessary to directly
invest in securitizations, and external portfolio managers. Among larger insurers, the key principalagent relationship appears to have been between debt and equity holders.
In summary, our evidence suggests that both distorted beliefs and distorted incentives are
likely part of the explanation for the pre-crisis surge in demand for nontraditional securitizations.
Heterogeneity across investors is important: beliefs appear to have played an important role among
mutual funds, while incentives appear to have played an important role among insurance companies.
V. The Bust
How did investor demand react once the financial crisis arrived in mid-2007? Did investors
holding nontraditional securitizations hold onto them or sell them? And did investors with limited
exposure to nontraditional securitizations step in as liquidity providers or stay on the sidelines? To
answer these questions, we turn to the collapse of the market for securitizations from 2007–2009.
A. Aggregate trading patterns
As discussed in Section II, different explanations for the bust have different implications for
aggregate trading patterns. The fundamentals-driven narrative suggests little reason for trading
behavior to change with the onset of the financial crisis. In contrast, the conventional fire-sales
narrative suggests increased trade at the beginning of the crisis, while the buyers’ strike narrative
suggests a collapse in trading volume.
23

In Figure 4, we begin by analyzing the time series of aggregate transactions by insurance
companies. The figure shows the time series of aggregate insurer transactions by collateral type. We
plot turnover, defined as the total par value of transactions (the sum of buys and sells) normalized by
total average par holdings. Thus, if insurers sold all of their subprime RMBS holdings and bought
subprime RMBS with the same par value, subprime RMBS turnover would be 200%. We take a fourquarter moving average to smooth the resulting series. As reference points, we also plot turnover for
GSE MBS, which are relatively liquid, and corporate bonds, which are relatively illiquid.
Figure 4 shows that, during the boom, insurers traded nontraditional securitizations less
frequently than GSE MBS but more frequently than corporate bonds. Pre-crisis turnover in nonprime
RMBS and traditional consumer ABS was close to turnover in GSE MBS, while CMBS and CDOs
traded far less frequently. As the crisis set in during mid-2007 and early 2008, trade in all types of
private securitizations fell substantially. In contrast, turnover of GSE MBS and corporate bonds
remained relatively stable throughout the crisis.
In untabulated results, we find similar aggregate trading patterns for mutual funds. We focus
on insurers because eMAXX provides data on actual insurer transactions. For mutual funds, we do
not directly observe transactions and must impute transactions from changes in holdings, adjusted for
the change in each security’s amount outstanding due to defaults and prepayments.27 The results for
mutual funds are similar to those for insurance companies. Turnover in nonprime RMBS fell from
27% in 2007Q2 to 14% in 2008Q4. Turnover in CMBS and CDOs was relatively stable before the
start of the crisis in 2007Q3 and experienced large declines during the crisis. Finally, turnover of
GSE MBS picked up during the crisis.
Overall, the aggregate trading patterns in our data seem more consistent with the buyers’
strike than with the fire-sales narrative of the fall of nontraditional securitization. Trading volume
plummeted at the same time that prices collapsed. In contrast, simple versions of the fire-sales story
suggest that outsized declines in prices were mediated by high volumes of secondary market trade.
One major caveat to this interpretation is that we do not observe the full universe of
27

While the overall par dollars of nontraditional securitizations held by mutual fund and insurers fell during the crisis,
this primarily reflected prepayments and defaults as opposed to trade. When the collateral in a securitization prepays or
defaults, the par holdings of all investors in the securitization decline. We use security-level data from Bloomberg on par
outstandings to verify that the decline in holdings was driven by default and prepayments. Specifically, insurers and
mutual funds held a constant fraction of the amount outstanding, but the total outstanding declined.

24

securitization holders or transactions: we only observe trades where at least one party was an insurer
or mutual fund. However, as noted above, insurers and mutual funds hold a large fraction of total
credit assets. To the extent that fire sales resulted in the aggregate transfer of security holdings from
highly-levered intermediaries such as hedge funds and broker-dealers to the broad class of investors
who operate with lower leverage, such as mutual funds and insurers, our data should capture at least
one side of the transaction. Nonetheless, it remains possible that there were widespread fire sales
which led to a significant reallocation of securitization holdings amongst highly-levered
intermediaries, but not between leveraged intermediaries and the investors our data cover.28
If mutual funds and insurers transacted little in nontraditional securitizations, how did they
meet their liquidity needs during the crisis? To answer this question, we explore the cross-sectional
variation in trading patterns. Specifically, we ask whether distressed mutual funds and insurers were
more likely to sell nontraditional securitizations than others. Even though these investors sold little in
the aggregate, cross-sectional results may help to shed light on how other investors might have traded
in response to liquidity shocks during the crisis.
B. Cross-sectional trading patterns
We begin by analyzing the trading behavior of mutual funds. For mutual funds, we have a
simple proxy for liquidity shocks: fund flows. In untabulated results, we find that mutual funds with
higher nontraditional shares experienced larger outflows during the crisis. Investors started
withdrawing from funds with high nontraditional shares during the second half of 2007, and by the
height of the crisis in the second half of 2008, a one standard deviation change in nontraditional share
(about 9%) was associated with about 6.3% larger (annualized) outflows.
How did mutual funds facing redemptions meet their liquidity needs during the crisis? Table
10 asks which types of securitizations funds bought and sold in response to inflows and outflows. We
examine net purchases of consumer ABS, GSE MBS, CMBS, and nontraditional securitizations, each
28

Amplification could also occur in a manner similar to the traditional fire-sale mechanism, but involving little secondary
market trade. For instance, an initial decline in RMBS prices could have changed the marginal investor in RMBS from
specialized trading desks or investment vehicles to corporate headquarters within a financial institution. If headquarters
responded by imposing stricter capital requirements on RMBS positions, this may have led to a further decline in quoted
prices, which may have led headquarters to impose even stricter requirements. The resulting spiral could have amplified
the drop in prices even in the absence of secondary volume. Anecdotally, there were several large transactions involving
the transfer of securitizations within the same conglomerate from structured investment vehicles and other specialized offbalance sheet vehicles to a firm’s balance sheet during the crisis (e.g., Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez [2013]).

25

scaled by the fund’s lagged holdings of that securitization type. To ensure our results are not driven
by outliers, we winsorize the dependent variable at the 5th and 95th percentiles.29 As a reference point,
if funds simply responded to inflows by proportionately expanding their portfolios, we would expect
the coefficient on inflows to be one. Similarly, if funds responded to outflows through proportionate
liquidation, the coefficient on outflows would be negative one.
Table 10 shows that mutual funds experiencing inflows increased their holdings of each
securitization type roughly proportionately. GSE MBS holdings expand slightly more than one-forone, while nontraditional securitization holdings expand less than one-for-one. However, mutual
funds experiencing outflows concentrated their liquidations in GSE MBS. For all other securitization
types, the coefficient on outflows is generally not statistically different from zero and is significantly
different from the proportional liquidation benchmark of negative one. Moreover, as shown by the
generally small and statistically insignificant interactions of inflows and outflows with the crisis
dummy, funds’ liquidity management practices were fairly similar in both the pre-crisis and crisis
periods.30 Thus, there is little evidence that mutual funds suffering outflows were forced to sell large
volumes of nontraditional securitizations during the bust. Instead, distressed mutual funds appear to
have been far more active sellers of GSE MBS.
We next turn to insurance company transactions in Table 11. As in our analysis of mutual
funds, the dependent variables are net purchases of consumer ABS, GSE MBS, CMBS, and
nontraditional securitizations, each scaled by the firm’s lagged holdings of that securitization type
and winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles. We use the percent change in the size of the insurer’s
overall fixed income portfolio as our proxy for liquidity shocks. This is similar to our use of fund
flows in our analysis of mutual fund transactions.
Table 11 shows the types of securitizations insurers bought or sold when their overall
portfolios grew or shrank. The results are qualitatively similar to the results of our mutual fund

29

We obtain qualitatively similar results if use median regressions, which are less influenced to outliers, or if we cap the
dependent variable at 100%.
30
The two exceptions are the coefficients on outflows interacted with crisis in the regressions of consumer ABS and GSE
MBS that do not include objective-time fixed effects. Both suggest increased propensity to meet outflows during the crisis
through sales of GSE MBS and consumer ABS. Figure 4 shows that turnover of consumer ABS recovered quickly after
falling at the height of the crisis in late 2008.

26

analysis.31 Insurers with growing portfolios tended to buy all types of securitizations, with GSE MBS
showing the largest response. This pattern continued in the crisis, though insurers with growing
portfolios stopped purchasing nontraditional securitizations. Insurers with shrinking portfolios tended
to sell all types of securitizations, with GSE MBS showing the largest response and nontraditional
securitizations showing the smallest response. These patterns continued in the crisis. There is little
evidence that distressed insurers were forced to sell nontraditional securitizations during the bust. As
with mutual funds, insurers appear to be much more active in transacting in more liquid markets.
Overall, these results point to the importance of liquidity management in a fire-sale context.
Mutual funds and insurers that faced liquidity needs during the crisis largely transacted in the most
liquid securitization market: the market for GSE MBS. This suggests that, if there were large volumes
of forced sales at distressed prices in secondary securitization markets, they likely took place in the
market for GSE MBS. Consistent with this interpretation, spreads on GSE MBS were very high in the
fall of 2008, even after the government had explicitly guaranteed the GSEs. Indeed, some have
argued that the first round of large-scale asset purchases by the Federal Reserve was particularly
effective because it provided liquidity in the market for GSE MBS at a time when prices were
distressed (see, for instance, Sack [2009] and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen [2013]).
VI. Conclusion
Nontraditional securitizations—nonprime RMBS and CDOs—were at the heart of the recent
financial crisis. The demand for these securities helped feed the housing boom during the early and
mid-2000s, while rapid declines in their prices during 2007 and 2008 generated large losses for
financial intermediaries, ultimately imperiling their soundness and triggering a full-blown crisis.
There are many anecdotal narratives and theoretical models of the rise and fall of demand for
securitizations, but little systematic empirical evidence. Using micro-data on insurers’ and mutual
funds’ holdings of both traditional and nontraditional securitizations, this paper begins to shed light
on the economic forces that drove the demand for securitizations before and during the crisis.

31

The coefficients in Table 11 are generally smaller in magnitude than the proportional benchmarks of one and negative
one. This appears to reflect extreme outliers in the independent variable, overall portfolio growth. We recover coefficients
closer to one when we exclude quarterly portfolio growth rates outside [-25%, 25%]. In addition, it could be the case that
insurers transacted heavily in the Treasury market, which our data does not cover.

27

We document a number of robust stylized facts about the demand for nontraditional
securitizations. First, heterogeneity across securitization types and investors is key to understanding
the crisis. Beliefs appear to have been an important driver of mutual fund holdings of nontraditional
securitizations. Although they did not face stronger performance-flow relationships, inexperienced
mutual fund managers invested significantly more in these products than experienced managers.
Consistent with the idea that beliefs—shaped by past firsthand experiences—played an important
role, managers who had suffered through the market dislocations of 1998 invested substantially less
in nontraditional securitizations than those who had not.
For insurance companies, incentives appear to have played an important role, though the
nature of the relevant incentive conflict seems to have varied across small and larger insurance firms.
Among small insurers, the key principal-agent relationship was between the insurer, which may have
lacked the expertise necessary to directly invest in securitizations, and external portfolio managers.
Among larger insurers, the key principal-agent relationship was between debt and equity holders.
Overall, our evidence suggests that different motivations are important for understanding the holdings
of different investor types.
While investor heterogeneity is important in the boom, the story of the bust is more uniform.
In our data, the bust is characterized by a decline in aggregate trading volume for nontraditional
securitizations. Consistent with the idea that adverse selection and other frictions contributed to a
buyers’ strike in these markets, prices fell significantly, even though very little trade took place.
Insurers and mutual funds that needed liquidity transacted largely in the market for GSE MBS. Our
results underscore the importance of optimal liquidity management in the context of fire sales.

28

References
Abreu, Dilip, and Markus K. Brunnermeier, 2002, Synchronization risk and delayed arbitrage, Journal of
Financial Economics 66, 341-360.
Acharya, Viral V. and Matthew P. Richardson, 2009, Causes of the financial crisis, Critical Review 21, 195210.
Acharya, Viral V., Thomas Cooley, Matthew Richardson, and Ingo Walter, 2009, Manufacturing tail risk: A
perspective on the financial Crisis of 2007-09, Foundations and Trends in Finance 4, 247-325.
Acharya, Viral V., Marco Pagano, and Paolo Volpin, 2013, Seeking alpha: Excess risk taking and competition
for managerial talent, NBER Working Paper 18891.
Acharya, Viral V., Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo A. Suarez, 2013, Securitization without risk transfer, Journal
of Financial Economics 107, 515-536.
Adelino, Manuel, 2010, Do investors rely only on ratings? The case of mortgage-backed securities, Working
Paper.
Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin, 2014, Procyclical leverage and value-at-risk, Review of Financial Studies
27, 373-403.
Ashcraft, Adam B., and Til Schuermann, 2008, Understanding the securitization of subprime mortgage credit,
Foundations and Trends in Finance 2, 191-309.
Ashcraft, Adam B., Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, and James Vickery, 2010, MBS ratings and the mortgage credit
boom, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 449.
Barnett-Hart, Anna Katherine, 2009, The story of the CDO market meltdown: An empirical analysis, Harvard
College Undergraduate Thesis.
Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2014, Reaching for yield in the bond market, forthcoming at the Journal of
Finance.
Beltratti, Andrea, and Rene M. Stulz, 2012, The credit crisis around the globe: Why did some banks perform
better? Journal of Financial Economics 105, 1-17.
Bernanke, Ben S., 2005, Monetary policy in a world of mobile capital, Cato Journal 25, 1-12.
Bernanke, Ben S., Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin, 2011, International capital
flows and the returns to safe assets in the United States, 2003–2007, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System International Finance Discussion Paper 1014.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a financial sector, American
Economic Review 104: 379-421.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding liquidity, Review of Financial
Studies 22, 2201-2238.
Caballero, Ricardo. 2009, The ‘Other’ Imbalance and the Financial Crisis, Working Paper.
Caballero, Ricardo and Emmanuel Farhi, 2013, A model of the safe asset mechanism (SAM): Safety traps and
economic policy, Working Paper.
Campbell, John, Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish, 2014, Getting better or feeling better? How equity
investors respond to investment experience, Working Paper.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives, Journal of
Political Economy 105, 1167-1200.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Career concerns of mutual fund managers, The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 114, 389-432.

29

Cordell, Larry, Yilin Huang, and Meredith Williams, 2012, Collateral damage: Sizing and assessing the
subprime CDO crisis, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 11-30.
Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek, and Erik Stafford, 2009, Economic Catastrophe Bonds, American Economic
Review 99: 628-66.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary B. Gorton, and Bengt Holmstrom, 2013, Ignorance, debt, and financial crises, Working
Paper.
Dávila, Eduardo, 2014, Dissecting fire sales externalities, New York University Working Paper.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann, 1990a, Noise trader
risk in financial markets, The Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-738.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann, 1990b, Positivefeedback investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation, Journal of Finance 45, 374-397.
Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2012, Illiquid banks, financial stability, and interest rate
policy, Journal of Political Economy 120, 552-91.
Ellul, Andrew, Chotibhak Jotikasthira, Christian T. Lundblad, and Yihui Wang, 2014, Mark‐to‐market
accounting and systemic risk: Evidence from the insurance industry, Economic Policy 29, 297-341.
Erel, Isil, Taylor Nadauld, Rene M. Stulz, 2013, Why did holdings of highly-rated securitization tranches
differ so much across banks? Review of Financial Studies 27, 404-453.
Fabozzi, Frank J., 2005, The structured finance market: An investor’s perspective, Financial Analysts Journal,
27-40.
Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, and René M. Stulz, 2011, Bank CEO incentives and the credit crisis, Journal of
Financial Economics 99, 11-26.
Geanakopolos, John, 2009, The leverage cycle, in D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and M. Woodford, eds.: NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2009, pp. 1-65 (University of Chicago Press).
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2012, Neglected risks, financial innovation, and
financial fragility, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 452–468.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Andreas Lehnert, Shane M. Sherlund, and Paul Willen, 2008, Making sense of the
subprime crisis, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 39(2), 69-159.
Gorton, Gary B., 2008, The Panic of 2007, in Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System,
Proceedings of the 2008 Jackson Hole Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2008.
Gorton, Gary B., and Andrew Metrick, 2010a, Haircuts, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 92(6).
Gorton, Gary B., and Andrew Metrick, 2010b, Regulating the shadow banking system, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 2010, 261-312.
Greenwood, Robin, and Stefan Nagel, 2009, Inexperienced investors and bubbles, Journal of Financial
Economics 93, 239–258.
Griffin, John, Jeffrey Harris, Tao Shu, and Selim Topalugua, 2011, Who drove and burst the tech bubble? The
Journal of Finance 66(4), 1251-1290.
Hanson, Samuel Gregory, and Aditya Vikram Sunderam, 2013, Are there too many safe securities?
Securitization and the incentives for information production, Journal of Financial Economics 108,
565–584.
He, Zhiguo, In Gu Khang, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2010, IMF Economic Review 1, 118-156.
Iannotta, Giuliano, and George Pennacchi, 2012, Bank regulation, credit ratings, and systematic risk, Working
Paper.

30

Jensen, Michael, and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and
ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy K. Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2009, Did securitization lead to lax
screening? Evidence from subprime loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 307-362.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy 105, 211-248.
Koijen, Ralph, and Motohiro Yogo, The cost of financial frictions for life insurers, American Economic
Review, forthcoming.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, 2013, The ins and outs of LSAPs, Kansas City Federal
Reserve Symposium on Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel, and Dmitry Orlov, Sizing up Repo, (joint with Stefan Nagel of U.
Michigan and Dmitry Orlov, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Landier, Augustin, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2011. The risk-shifting hypothesis, IDEI Working Paper
699.
Lorenzoni, G., 2008, Inefficient credit booms, Review of Economic Studies 75, 809-833.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel, 2011, Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences affect risktaking?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373-416.
Merrill, Craig B. Taylor Nadauld, and Philip E., Strahan, 2014, Final demand for structured finance securities,
Working Paper.
Merrill, Craig, Taylor Nadauld, Rene M Stulz, and Shane M Sherlund, 2014, Were there fire sales in the
RMBS market? Ohio State University Working Paper.
Milbradt, Konstantin, 2012, Level 3 assets: Booking profits, concealing losses, Review of Financial Studies
25, 55-95.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin, 2012, Contagious adverse selection, American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 4, 1-21.
Rajan, Raghuram, 2005, Has financial development made the world riskier?, Proceedings of the Jackson Hole
Conference organized by the Kansas City Fed.
Rajan, Uday, Amir Seru, and Vikrant Vig, The failure of models that predict failure: Distance, incentives and
defaults, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Sack, Brian, 2009, The Fed's expanded balance sheet, Remarks at the Money Marketeers of New York
University, New York City.
Shin, Hyun Song, 2012, Global banking glut and loan risk premium, Mundell-Fleming Lecture, IMF
Economic Review 60 (2), 155-192.
Shivdasani, Anil and Yihui Wang, Did structured credit fuel the LBO boom?, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium
approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1366.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance, 52(1), 35-55.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, 2011, Fire sales in finance and macroeconomics, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 25, 29-48.
Stein, Jeremy, 2012, Monetary policy as financial-stability regulation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127,
57-95.

31

Figure 1
Issuance and Spreads on Traditional and Nontraditional Securitizations
This figure shows quarterly issuance and credit spreads on traditional and nontraditional
securitizations. The underlying data is from SDC. Panel A plots quarterly issuance of traditional
and nontraditional securitizations. Traditional securitizations include CMBS, prime RMBS,
consumer ABS, and other ABS. Nontraditional securitizations include non-prime RMBS and
CDOs. Panel B plots the credit spreads on newly issued AAA-rated securitizations versus the
spreads on corporate bonds. Each quarter we compute the value-weighted average credit spread
on securitizations, based on the underlying collateral. We compute this average for traditional
consumer asset-backed securities backed by credit card loans, automotive loans, student loans, and
other personal loans (“Consumer ABS”); private residential mortgage backed securities (RMBS)
backed by subprime and Alt-A mortgages (“Non-Prime RMBS”); commercial mortgage backed
securities (CMBS); and collateralized debt obligations (“CDOs”). To avoid benchmarking issues
we restrict attention to the spreads on floating rate notes indexed to 1-, 3-, and 6-month LIBOR.
For reference we plot the average secondary spreads over LIBOR (based on interest rate swaps) on
3-year AAA and BBB-rated corporate bonds from Barclays.
(a) Traditional vs. Nontraditional Issuance

(b) Credit Spreads on AAA-rated Tranches
100
Spread (in basis points)

Proceeds ($ billion)

400

300

200

100

80
60
40
20
0

0

2003q2

1988q4
1992q4
1996q4
2000q4
2004q4
2008q4
1990q4
1994q4
1998q4
2002q4
2006q4
Traditional

2004q2
2003q4

2005q2
2004q4

AAA Consumer ABS
AAA Non-Prime RMBS
AAA Corporate

Nontraditional

32

2006q2
2005q4

2007q2
2006q4

AAA CMBS
AAA CDOs
BBB Corporate

2007q4

Figure 2
Mutual Fund Manager’s Experience and Nontraditional Share
Panel A reports the average nontraditional share of mutual funds managed by experienced
versus inexperienced portfolio managers. We split mutual funds into two groups based on the
median value of the fund manager’s experience. Manager experience is measured as of 2004Q4. For
team-managed funds we take the average of individual managers. Panel B reports the strength of
the performance-flow relationship in mutual funds managed by experienced versus inexperienced
managers. Fund flows are winsorized at the first and ninety-ninth percentiles. We first adjust
monthly fund returns and net flows for objective-month fixed effects. The figure then shows the
mean of adjusted fund flows by decile of adjusted performance. Each month we define experienced
funds are those with fund managers above the median of experience across all funds at that point
time.
(a) Nontraditional Share

(b) Performance-Flow Relationship
.005

.08

0

.06

Fund flows

Nontraditional share

.07

.05

-.005

.04

.03
-.01
.02

1
2003q4 2004q4 2005q4 2006q4 2007q4 2008q4 2009q4 2010q4
Inexperienced

Experienced

2

3

4

5
6
7
Decile of performance

Inexperienced

33

8

Experienced

9

10

Figure 3
Variable Annuity versus Regular Mutual Funds
This figure reports the strength of the performance-flow relationship and holdings of nontraditional securitizations by variable annuity and regular mutual funds. Panel A reports the
strength of the performance-flow relationship for variable annuity versus regular mutual funds.
The sample consists of all bond and hybrid funds in CRSP Mutual Fund Database. The sample
period is January 2009–June 2013. Fund flows are winsorized at the first and ninety-ninth
percentiles. We first adjust monthly fund returns and net flows for objective-month fixed effects.
The figure then shows the mean of adjusted fund flows by decile of adjusted performance. This
adjustment is done separately for variable annuity and regular mutual funds. Panel B reports the
nontraditional share of variable annuity and regular mutual funds. The sample consists of matched
pairs of variable annuity and regular mutual funds that have the same investment objectives and
are managed by the same portfolio managers. We form the sample of matched pairs as of 2003Q4.
(a) Performance-Flow Relationship

(b) Nontraditional Share
.07

160

1.000

0.500

0.000

140
.05
120
.04
100
.03

.02

-0.500
1

2

3

4

5
6
7
Decile of performance

Regular Mutual Funds

8

9

80
2003q4 2004q4 2005q4 2006q4 2007q4 2008q4 2009q4 2010q4

10

Regular Mutual Funds
# Fund Pairs

Variable Annuity Funds

34

Variable Annuity Funds

# Fund Pairs

Nontraditional Share

Fund flows (%)

.06

Figure 4
Insurance Company Portfolio Turnover
We aggregate all buy and sell transactions in a given collateral type across all insurance
companies and scale it by the average value of aggregate holdings during quarters t − 1 and t. In
other words, aggregate turnover in collateral type c in quarter t is
T urnoverc,t =

Buyc,t + Sellc,t
0.5 · (Holdc,t + Holdc,t−1 )

The figure plots the four-quarter moving average. For private securitizations and GSE MBS, we
calculate aggregate transactions and holdings using eMAXX data. For corporate bonds, aggregate
transactions are from Mergent FISD, while aggregate holdings are from the Federal Reserve’s Flow
of Funds Accounts.
(a) Consumer ABS

(b) Nonprime RMBS

.3

.3

.25

.25

.2

.2

.15

.15

.1
.1
.05
.05
2003q4

2004q4

2005q4

GSE MBS

2006q4

2007q4

Corporates

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

2003q4

Consumer ABS

2004q4

2005q4

GSE MBS

2006q4

2007q4

Corporates

(c) CMBS

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

Nonprime RMBS

(d) CDO
.3

.3

.25
.2
.2

.15
.1
.1

.05

0
2003q4

2004q4

2005q4

GSE MBS

2006q4

2007q4

Corporates

2008q4

2009q4

2010q4

CMBS

2003q4

2004q4

2005q4

GSE MBS

35

2006q4

2007q4

Corporates

2008q4

2009q4
CDO

2010q4

Table 1
Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for mutual funds and insurance companies in our
data. The sample of funds consists of bond and hybrid mutual funds. In Panel B, we aggregate
data across all subsidiaries of each insurance group. Capitalization and strong rating are reported
as of 2003.
N
Mean
Median
SD
Min
Max
Panel A: Mutual Funds
TNA (millions)
6,227
1,521
287
6,926
1
236,621
Bond holdings par (millions)
6,227
1,041
217
4,066
0
175,956
Family TNA (billions)
6,227
118.62
27.13
253.22
0.00
1, 551.55
Team managed (dummy)
6,227
0.66
1.00
0.47
0.00
1.00
# fund managers
6,227
2.76
2.00
2.46
1.00
21.00
Experience (years)
6,227
8.49
7.87
4.51
0.00
29.06
ABS share (%)
6,227
2.98
0.52
6.05
0.00
79.10
Agency share (%)
6,227
24.49
17.12
25.96
0.00
100.00
CMBS share (%)
6,227
4.71
0.51
9.78
0.00
92.17
Nontraditional share (%)
6,227
4.50
0.91
8.90
0.00
100.00
Fund age (years)
6,227
15.96
13.63
11.95
0.15
83.80
Expense ratio (%)
6,227
0.89
0.85
0.40
0.00
3.74
Share of retail classes (%)
6,227
63.91
90.45
41.73
0.00
100.00
Family age (years)
6,227
41.53
33.79
25.01
0.54
86.14
Family equity share (%)
6,227
47.80
50.59
26.24
0.00
100.00
Family taxable share (%)
6,227
39.79
32.74
25.44
0.00
100.00
Family ETF share (%)
6,227
0.49
0.00
5.43
0.00
86.20
Family muni share (%)
6,227
8.30
7.02
8.78
0.00
97.63
Family retail share (%)
6,227
61.85
68.26
33.04
0.00
100.00
Panel B: Insurance Firms
Assets
5,648
8,711
342
38,494
1
894,085
Nontraditional share (%)
5,648
2.17
0.48
4.32
0.00
71.89
Life
5,648
0.36
0.00
0.48
0.00
1.00
Capital/Assets
5,648
0.32
0.32
0.18
0.01
0.95
Strong rating
5,648
0.37
0.00
0.48
0.00
1.00
Mutual
5,648
0.27
0.00
0.45
0.00
1.00
External manager
5,648
0.72
1.00
0.42
0.00
1.00

36

37

Insurance
$
%
1,755 25.9%
1,829 25.5%
1,927 25.6%
2,002 24.8%
2,060 24.1%
2,088 23.6%
2,127 22.6%
2,097 20.8%
2,132 19.6%
2,145 18.5%
2,143 18.3%
2,085 18.7%
2,146 18.4%
2,226 19.1%
2,288 20.0%
2,353 19.9%

Mutual
Funds
$
%
504
7.4%
531
7.4%
560
7.4%
594
7.4%
631
7.4%
660
7.5%
706
7.5%
764
7.6%
837
7.7%
886
7.7%
958
8.2%
956
8.6%
1,035
8.9%
1,121
9.6%
1,181 10.3%
1,243 10.5%

Panel A
Traditional consumer ABSb
Mutual
Market
Insurance
Funds
$
%
$
%
$
%
701 10.3%
93 5.3% 22 4.4%
721 10.0% 100 5.5% 20 3.8%
726
9.7% 101 5.3% 25 4.4%
729
9.0%
98 4.9% 24 4.1%
762
8.9%
90 4.4% 24 3.8%
781
8.8%
89 4.3% 28 4.3%
794
8.4%
84 4.0% 23 3.3%
836
8.3%
76 3.6% 24 3.1%
870
8.0%
64 3.0% 27 3.2%
894
7.7%
68 3.2% 26 2.9%
894
7.6%
85 4.0% 34 3.6%
835
7.5%
75 3.6% 27 2.8%
808
6.9%
68 3.2% 26 2.5%
798
6.8%
70 3.1% 23 2.1%
744
6.5%
75 3.3% 32 2.7%
690
5.8%
68 2.9% 28 2.3%
Market
$
%
313 4.6%
343 4.8%
368 4.9%
394 4.9%
439 5.1%
506 5.7%
553 5.9%
614 6.1%
697 6.4%
758 6.5%
741 6.3%
718 6.4%
703 6.0%
671 5.8%
647 5.7%
617 5.2%

Insurance
$
%
108
6.1%
119
6.5%
130
6.7%
145
7.2%
153
7.4%
168
8.1%
185
8.7%
189
9.0%
195
9.1%
216 10.1%
222 10.4%
223 10.7%
221 10.3%
227 10.2%
220
9.6%
208
8.8%

CMBSc
Mutual
Funds
$
%
10 2.0%
11 2.0%
11 2.0%
13 2.1%
15 2.3%
21 3.2%
19 2.7%
24 3.2%
38 4.5%
41 4.6%
48 5.0%
50 5.3%
48 4.7%
52 4.6%
58 4.9%
59 4.8%

Data on the outstanding quantity of CMBS, which consists of MBS collateralized by commercial mortgages and multifamily residential mortgages,
is from Table L.219 ‘Multifamily Residential Mortgages’ and Table L.220 ‘Commercial Mortgages’ of the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds Accounts.

c

Data on the outstanding quantity of traditional consumer ABS, which consists of ABS collateralized by credit card debt, automotive loans, student
loans, manufactured housing and equipment loans, is from SIFMA at
http://www.sifma.org/uploadedFiles/Research/Statistics/StatisticsFiles/SF-US-ABS-SIFMA.xls.

b

Data on the outstanding quantity of all private credit securities, which include corporate bonds, foreign bonds, and privately issued ABS, is from
table L.212 ‘Corporate and Foreign Bonds’ of the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds Accounts. Data on the holdings of insurers (which includes both
P&C and life insurers) and mutual funds (which excludes money market mutual funds) is also from Table L.212.

a

2003Q2
2003Q4
2004Q2
2004Q4
2005Q2
2005Q4
2006Q2
2006Q4
2007Q2
2007Q4
2008Q2
2008Q4
2009Q2
2009Q4
2010Q2
2010Q4

Market
$
%
6,776 100.0%
7,178 100.0%
7,524 100.0%
8,071 100.0%
8,541 100.0%
8,852 100.0%
9,415 100.0%
10,103 100.0%
10,879 100.0%
11,577 100.0%
11,698 100.0%
11,170 100.0%
11,676 100.0%
11,654 100.0%
11,432 100.0%
11,816 100.0%

All private credit securities

a

This table reports estimates of the outstanding balance of US asset-backed securities by underlying collateral type. The sources
for estimated outstanding are listed in the footnotes. For each collateral type, we compute aggregate par holdings by insurers and mutual
funds using our eMAXX holdings data. For the market, % refers to the share of a given collateral type in the aggregate outstanding
amount of all private credit securities. For insurance and mutual funds, % refers to the shares of a given collateral type in the aggregate
portfolios of insurance firms and mutual funds.

Table 2
Outstanding Asset-Backed Securities and Holdings
of Insurers and Mutual Funds by Underlying Collateral Type, 2003–2010

38

Insurance
$
%
29
1.6%
22
1.2%
29
1.5%
51
2.5%
55
2.7%
62
3.0%
69
3.2%
74
3.5%
73
3.4%
84
3.9%
83
3.9%
82
3.9%
74
3.4%
67
3.0%
62
2.7%
54
2.3%

Mutual
Funds
$
%
6
1.3%
5
0.9%
10
1.7%
10
1.7%
11
1.7%
13
2.0%
12
1.7%
15
1.9%
19
2.2%
25
2.8%
23
2.4%
22
2.3%
18
1.8%
16
1.5%
20
1.7%
22
1.8%
Market
$
%
563
8.3%
601
8.4%
765
10.2%
929
11.5%
1,139
13.3%
1,349
15.2%
1,579
16.8%
1,808
17.9%
1,852
17.0%
1,895
16.4%
1,729
14.8%
1,563
14.0%
1,437
12.3%
1,311
11.2%
1,221
10.7%
1,131
9.6%

Insurance
$
%
73
4.2%
56
3.1%
65
3.4%
83
4.2%
96
4.7%
109
5.2%
117
5.5%
122
5.8%
115
5.4%
130
6.1%
138
6.4%
136
6.5%
126
5.9%
125
5.6%
119
5.2%
107
4.6%

Panel B
Nonprime RMBSb
Mutual
Funds
$
%
8
1.6%
8
1.5%
10
1.8%
14
2.4%
16
2.5%
18
2.7%
14
2.0%
16
2.1%
19
2.3%
17
1.9%
18
1.9%
16
1.7%
13
1.3%
11
1.0%
13
1.1%
14
1.1%
Market
$
%
279
4.1%
302
4.2%
347
4.6%
391
4.8%
454
5.3%
517
5.8%
627
6.7%
795
7.9%
961
8.8%
1,005
8.7%
1,004
8.6%
1,018
9.1%
987
8.5%
936
8.0%
872
7.6%
838
7.1%

Insurance
$
%
21
1.2%
20
1.1%
21
1.1%
23
1.1%
21
1.0%
24
1.2%
24
1.1%
23
1.1%
21
1.0%
21
1.0%
27
1.3%
27
1.3%
26
1.2%
26
1.2%
25
1.1%
24
1.0%

CDOsc
Mutual
Funds
$
%
4
0.8%
5
0.9%
6
1.0%
5
0.9%
3
0.5%
2
0.4%
2
0.2%
2
0.2%
2
0.3%
2
0.3%
4
0.4%
2
0.2%
2
0.2%
1
0.1%
2
0.1%
2
0.1%

Data on the outstanding quantity of CBOs, CDOs, and CLOs is from SIFMA at
http://www.sifma.org/uploadedFiles/Research/Statistics/StatisticsFiles/SF-Global-CDO-SIFMA.xls.
SIFMA provides data on global CBOs, CDOs, and CLOs outstandings. Based on SIFMA’s issuance data by currency, we assume that 75% of
outstanding CDOs and CLOs are USD-denominated.

c

Data on the outstanding quantity of nonprime RMBS, which includes subprime and Alt-A RMBS, is from SIFMA at
http://www.sifma.org/uploadedFiles/Research/Statistics/StatisticsFiles/sf-us-nonagency-outstanding-sifma.xls.

b

Data on the outstanding quantity of prime RMBS is from SIFMA at
http://www.sifma.org/uploadedFiles/Research/Statistics/StatisticsFiles/sf-us-nonagency-outstanding-sifma.xls.

a

2003Q2
2003Q4
2004Q2
2004Q4
2005Q2
2005Q4
2006Q2
2006Q4
2007Q2
2007Q4
2008Q2
2008Q4
2009Q2
2009Q4
2010Q2
2010Q4

Market
$
%
297
4.4%
276
3.8%
314
4.2%
351
4.3%
388
4.5%
425
4.8%
462
4.9%
499
4.9%
525
4.8%
552
4.8%
518
4.4%
484
4.3%
436
3.7%
389
3.3%
350
3.1%
311
2.6%

Prime RMBSa

Table 2(continued)
Outstanding Asset-Backed Securities and Holdings
of Insurers and Mutual Funds by Underlying Collateral Type, 2003–2010

Table 3
Nontraditional Share Variance Decomposition
This table reports the R2 from the regressions of nontraditional share on various fixed effects. Panel A reports the results for bond and hybrid mutual funds in our data; Panel B reports
the results for insurance firms. The sample period is 2003–2010.

Panel A: Mutual Funds

Constant
Adjusted R2
N

Constant
Adjusted R2
N

Fund family
Objective
with at least
Date
Objective
× date
Fund
All
5 funds 10 funds
0.045∗∗∗
0.045∗∗∗
0.045∗∗∗ 0.045∗∗∗ 0.045∗∗∗ 0.047∗∗∗
0.040∗∗∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.014
0.167
0.191
0.621
0.361
0.282
0.198
6,227
6,227
6,227
6,227
6,227
4,262
2,341
Panel B: Insurance Firms
Date
Firm
Group
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
0020
0020
0020∗∗∗
(0000)
(0000)
(0000)
0002
0665
0504
15,538
15,538
15,538

39

Table 4
Mutual Funds’ Nontraditional Share
This table reports the results of cross-sectional regressions of mutual funds’ nontraditional
share on portfolio manager’s experience and fund characteristics
NTS sharei = αobjective(i) + β · Experienced manageri + γ 0 Xi + εi
where each observation is the average of quarterly observations in a given year. Panel A reports
the results for the full sample, while Panel B reports the results for the subsample of top 250 funds
by par value of bond holdings. These funds account for about 90% of all mutual fund bond holding
in the data. Manager experience is measured as of 2004. Experienced manager is a binary variable
equal to 1 for funds with above median experience. Retail share is the share of retail share classes
in fund assets. Family retail share is the share of retail share classes in fund family assets. Family
ETF, equity, and taxable shares are the shares of ETFs, equity funds, and taxable bond funds in
fund family assets. The omitted category is municipal funds. Objective fixed effects are included.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%,
5%, and 1%.
2003
Experienced manager
Log(TNA)
Log(Family TNA)
Log(Fund age)
Log(Family age)
Expense ratio
Share of retail classes
Family retail share
Family ETF share
Family equity share
Family taxable share
Constant
N
Adjusted R2

−0.002
(0.004)
0.000
(0.002)
−0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.004)
0.003
(0.004)
−0.012
(0.656)
−0.005
(0.011)
0.012
(0.011)
0.243
(0.227)
−0.024
(0.018)
0.010
(0.019)
0.021
(0.020)
790
0.289

2004

2005
2006
Panel A: All Funds
−0.007∗ −0.010∗∗ −0.018∗∗∗
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.005)
0.003∗
0.004∗
0.006∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
0.000
−0.001
−0.002
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
−0.005
−0.013∗∗ −0.011∗
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.007)
0.005
0.003
0.006
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.007)
0.452
−0.319
0.351
(0.565)
(0.889)
(0.824)
0.005
0.021∗∗
0.020∗
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.010)
−0.000
−0.022∗ −0.035∗∗
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.014)
0.013
0.016
0.031
(0.025)
(0.035)
(0.035)
−0.004
−0.007
0.007
(0.015)
(0.025)
(0.053)
0.026
0.026
0.044
(0.017)
(0.026)
(0.053)
−0.003
0.051
0.040
(0.018)
(0.034)
(0.058)
822
846
815
0.306
0.316
0.272

2007
−0.033∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.006∗∗
(0.003)
0.000
(0.003)
−0.009
(0.008)
−0.008
(0.009)
2.248
(1.943)
0.004
(0.013)
−0.003
(0.018)
0.046
(0.045)
0.019
(0.040)
0.080∗
(0.048)
0.031
(0.044)
790
0.182

2008
−0.023∗∗∗
(0.007)
−0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.003)
0.003
(0.007)
−0.018∗∗
(0.009)
1.418
(2.255)
−0.009
(0.012)
0.033∗
(0.019)
−0.106∗∗∗
(0.038)
0.015
(0.033)
0.091∗∗
(0.040)
0.035
(0.035)
784
0.171

2009

2010

−0.003
(0.006)
−0.005∗
(0.003)
−0.001
(0.003)
0.005
(0.005)
0.001
(0.008)
−1.361
(1.061)
0.014
(0.014)
−0.020
(0.024)
−0.114∗∗∗
(0.040)
0.034
(0.033)
0.069∗
(0.036)
0.027
(0.037)
718
0.093

−0.003
(0.006)
−0.003
(0.002)
−0.000
(0.002)
0.001
(0.004)
0.001
(0.007)
−1.177
(1.287)
0.021
(0.014)
−0.031∗
(0.019)
−0.096∗∗∗
(0.032)
0.010
(0.033)
0.031
(0.032)
0.045
(0.035)
662
0.062

(continued)

40

Table 4(continued)
Mutual Funds’ Nontraditional Share
2003
Experienced manager
Log(TNA)
Log(Family TNA)
Log(Fund age)
Log(Family age)
Expense ratio
Share of retail classes
Family retail share
Family ETF share
Family equity share
Family taxable share
Constant
N
Adjusted R2

−0.007
(0.007)
0.008∗
(0.005)
0.001
(0.004)
−0.001
(0.007)
−0.001
(0.015)
2.939∗∗
(1.332)
−0.029∗
(0.016)
0.046∗
(0.025)
−0.031
(0.023)
0.000
(0.027)
0.045
(0.028)
−0.084∗
(0.044)
250
0.343

2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Panel B: Top 250 Funds
−0.009 −0.017∗ −0.028∗∗ −0.037∗∗∗−0.014
(0.008) (0.009) (0.012) (0.013) (0.012)
0.004
0.003
0.012
0.007 −0.005
(0.004) (0.005) (0.007) (0.008) (0.009)
0.002
0.005 −0.005 −0.008 −0.002
(0.004) (0.005) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006)
−0.003 −0.014 −0.017 −0.012 −0.003
(0.009) (0.013) (0.014) (0.013) (0.010)
−0.000 −0.017
0.008 −0.006 −0.026∗∗
(0.013) (0.015) (0.016) (0.018) (0.013)
2.348∗ 1.119
1.014
1.645 −4.927
(1.374) (1.690) (2.084) (3.770) (3.318)
−0.006
0.006 −0.016 −0.043 −0.023
(0.014) (0.016) (0.020) (0.033) (0.029)
0.025
0.005 −0.040
0.006
0.074
(0.024) (0.024) (0.031) (0.049) (0.057)
−0.058∗∗∗−2.894∗∗ −1.663
0.143 −1.569∗
(0.022) (1.378) (1.184) (1.379) (0.807)
0.033
0.061
0.076
0.067
0.003
(0.030) (0.042) (0.072) (0.093) (0.089)
0.051∗ 0.071
0.056
0.104
0.052
(0.028) (0.048) (0.089) (0.120) (0.120)
−0.067
0.008
0.036
0.121
0.225∗∗
(0.047) (0.057) (0.084) (0.086) (0.111)
250
250
250
250
250
0.464
0.444
0.393
0.199
0.241

41

2009

2010

0.007
(0.011)
−0.012
(0.010)
−0.006
(0.005)
0.003
(0.008)
−0.003
(0.012)
−2.495
(3.816)
0.015
(0.035)
−0.037
(0.064)
−0.344
(0.361)
0.111
(0.087)
0.114
(0.097)
0.130
(0.102)
250
0.076

0.009
(0.007)
−0.005
(0.005)
−0.002
(0.003)
0.004
(0.005)
−0.000
(0.009)
2.199
(1.790)
0.005
(0.027)
−0.026
(0.044)
−0.029
(0.199)
0.120∗
(0.061)
0.129∗
(0.067)
−0.035
(0.053)
250
0.082

Table 5
Mutual Fund Manager’s Experience and Performance-Flow Relationship
This table reports the results of monthly performance-flow regressions:
F lowsi,t
= αobjective(i),t +β1 ·Ri,t−1 +β2 ·Ri,t−1 ·Experiencedi,t−1 +β3 ·Experiencedi,t−1 +γ 0 Xi,t−1 +εi,t
T N Ai,t−1
The sample of funds consists of bond and hybrid mutual funds. The sample period is 2003–2010.
Fund flows are winsorized at the first and ninety-ninth percentiles. Objective-date fixed effects are
included. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by fund. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

Reti,t−1
Log(TNA)i,t−1
Reti,t−1 × Log(TNA)i,t−1

(1)
0.321∗∗∗
(0.053)
−0.003∗∗∗
(0.000)
−0.008
(0.007)

Experiencedi,t−1
Reti,t−1 × Experiencedi,t−1

(2)
0.312∗∗∗
(0.053)
−0.003∗∗∗
(0.000)
−0.011
(0.007)
0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.051∗∗
(0.021)

Oldi,t−1
Reti,t−1 × Oldi,t−1
Constant
N
Adjusted R2

0.020∗∗∗
(0.001)
90,436
0.050

42

0.019∗∗∗
(0.001)
90,436
0.050

(3)
0.371∗∗∗
(0.062)
−0.003∗∗∗
(0.000)
−0.012
(0.008)

−0.000
(0.001)
−0.020
(0.025)
0.019∗∗∗
(0.001)
59,812
0.051

Table 6
Nonlinearity of Experience
Panel A reports the results of cross-sectional regressions of mutual funds’ nontraditional
share during 2007 on fund manager’s experience defined using different cutoffs
NTS sharei,2007 = αobjective(i) + β · Experienced manageri + γ 0 Xi + εi
Panel B reports the results of cross-sectional regressions of mutual funds’ nontrational share during
2007 on returns and fund flows experienced by fund’s manager(s) during 1998:
NTS sharei,2007 = αobjective(i) + β1 · Experiencei + β2 · Manager’s 1998 returnsi
+ β3 · Manager’s 1998 returns × Experiencei + γ 0 Xi + εi
The sample of funds in Panel B consists of funds with at least one portfolio manager who managed
a mutual fund during 1998. Fund manager’s identity is fixed as of the end of 2004. For each
manager, we measure the minimum returns and fund flows she experienced across all funds she
managed during 1998. For team managed funds we then take the minimum across all managers
with 1998 experience. Experienced dummy is equal to one for managers above the median of the
distribution of experience within the sample of managers who managed during a fund during 1998.
Same controls as in Table 4 are included but not reported. Objective fixed effects are included. *,
**, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
Panel A: Nonlinearity of experience
Started managing mutual funds before January 1
2001
2000
1999
1998
1997
1996
∗
∗∗∗
Experienced manageri
−0.002
−0.003
−0.004
−0.012
−0.031
−0.022∗∗∗
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
N
790
790
790
790
790
790
Adjusted R2
0.162
0.162
0.162
0.165
0.180
0.171
Panel B: 1998 outcomes
Returns
Flows
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Experiencedi
−0.068∗∗∗ −0.050∗∗∗ −0.041∗∗∗ −0.063∗∗∗ −0.042∗∗∗
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.015)
(0.012)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Bottom halfi
−0.063
−0.065
(0.015)
(0.016)
∗∗∗
Bottom halfi × Experiencedi
0.074
0.059∗∗∗
(0.017)
(0.018)
Bottom tercilei
−0.051∗∗∗
−0.048∗∗∗
(0.016)
(0.015)
Bottom tercilei × Experiencedi
0.048∗∗∗
0.027
(0.017)
(0.018)
Bottom quintilei
−0.038∗∗
(0.017)
Bottom quintilei × Experiencedi
0.036∗
(0.019)
N
512
512
512
506
506
Adjusted R2
0.251
0.234
0.221
0.253
0.237

43

1995
−0.027∗∗∗
(0.006)
790
0.174

(6)
−0.036∗∗∗
(0.011)

−0.029
(0.022)
0.012
(0.023)
506
0.220

Table 7
Mutual Funds’ Nontraditional Share and Local House Price Appreciation
This table reports the results of cross-sectional regressions of mutual funds’ nontraditional
share during 2007 on portfolio manager’s experience and local house price appreciation
NTS sharei = αobjective(i) +β1 ·Experienced manageri +β2 ·∆HP Ii +β3 ·∆HP Ii ·Experienced manageri +γ 0 Xi +εi
where each observation represents the average across the 2007 quarterly observations. Manager
experience is measured as of 2004. Experienced manager is a binary variable equal to 1 for funds
with above median experience. Local house price appreciation is the annualized change in the HPI
for the MSA in which the investment management firm is located. HPI is the all-transactions index
from the Federal Housing Finance Agency. The same controls as in Table 4, including objective FEs,
are included in the regressions but are not reported. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by
MSA. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

Experienced manager
∆HP I2005−>2006

(1)
−0.033∗∗∗
(0.009)
0.196∗
(0.115)

(2)
−0.033∗∗∗
(0.009)

(3)
−0.033∗∗∗
(0.009)

(4)
−0.014
(0.018)

0.237∗∗
(0.101)

0.350∗
(0.188)
−0.218
(0.191)
0.010
(0.054)
783
0.191

0.232∗∗
(0.097)

∆HP I2004−>2006
∆HP I2003−>2006
Experienced ×∆HP I2003−>2006
Constant
N
Adjusted R2

0.017
(0.056)
783
0.183

44

0.018
(0.054)
783
0.189

0.021
(0.053)
783
0.190

Table 8
Performance-Flow Relationship in Variable Annuity versus Regular Mutual Funds
This table reports the results of monthly performance-flow regressions for variable annuity
versus regular mutual funds:
F lowsi,t
= αobjective(i),t + β1 · Reti,t−1 + β2 · Reti,t−1 × V Ai + β3 · V Ai + εi,t
T N Ai,t−1
The sample consists of all funds with objective information in CRSP Mutual Fund Database. The
sample period is January 2009–June 2013. Fund flows are winsorized at the first and ninetyninth percentiles. Objective-month date fixed effects are included in all specifications. Columns
1-2 estimate pooled regressions across variable annuity and regular mutual funds. Columns 3-4
estimate separate performance-flow regressions for variable annuity funds in column 3 and regular
mutual funds in column 4. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by fund. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
Pooled
Variable annuityi
Log(TNA)i,t−1 ×Variable annuityi
Log(TNA)i,t−1 ×Mutual fundi
Reti,t−1 ×Variable annuityi
Reti,t−1 ×Mutual fundi

(1)
0.007∗∗
(0.003)
−0.008∗∗∗
(0.000)
−0.006∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.056∗∗∗
(0.016)
0.113∗∗∗
(0.017)

Reti,t−1 ×Log(TNA)i,t−1

(2)
0.007∗∗
(0.003)
−0.008∗∗∗
(0.000)
−0.006∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.072∗∗∗
(0.019)
0.129∗∗∗
(0.020)
−0.004∗
(0.002)

Log(TNA)i,t−1
Decile 1
Decile 2
Decile 3
Decile 4
Decile 5
Decile 7
Decile 8
Decile 9
Decile 10
Constant
N
Adjusted R2

0.045∗∗∗
(0.001)
546,305
0.062

45

0.044∗∗∗
(0.001)
546,305
0.062

Mutual
fund
(3)

Variable
annuity
(4)

−0.006∗∗∗
(0.000)
−0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
−0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
−0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
−0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
−0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)
−0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.013∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.046∗∗∗
(0.001)
437,405
0.064

−0.008∗∗∗
(0.000)
−0.001
(0.002)
0.002
(0.001)
−0.000
(0.001)
−0.000
(0.001)
−0.002∗
(0.001)
−0.002∗
(0.001)
−0.002∗∗
(0.001)
−0.001
(0.001)
0.003
(0.002)
0.053∗∗∗
(0.003)
108,900
0.083

Table 9
Insurance Companies’ Nontraditional Share
Each column reports the results of a cross-sectional regression of insurance companies’ nontraditional share on firm characteristics
NTS sharei = α + β 0 Xi + εi
where each observation represents an insurance group. We aggregate holdings across all insurance
firms within a given group, and then for each insurance group average quarterly observations within
a given year. We report the results for all insurers in Panel A and for the top 100 in Panel B. Size
is the log of the par value of the bond portfolio. Strong rating is a binary variable equal to one
for firms whose 2003 AM Best financial strength rating is above the median. At the insurance
firm level, external manager is a binary variable equal to one for firms whose bond portfolios are
managed by unaffiliated external managers. An insurance company and an asset management firm
are considered to be unaffiliated if they have different ultimate parents in Capital IQ. At the group
level, external manager is the asset-weighted average across subsidiaries. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
2003
Size
Life
Capital/Assets2003
Strong rating
Mutual
External manager
Constant
N
Adjusted R2
Size
Life
Capital/Assets2003
Strong rating
Mutual
External manager
Constant
N
Adjusted R2

0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.008∗∗
(0.003)
−0.018∗∗
(0.008)
−0.001
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
0.008∗∗
(0.003)
0.004
(0.006)
876
0.063
−0.001
(0.004)
0.005
(0.008)
−0.078∗∗
(0.034)
0.001
(0.007)
−0.007
(0.006)
−0.012
(0.009)
0.059
(0.045)
100
0.075

2004

2005
2006
2007
Panel A: All Insurers
0.003∗∗∗ 0.004∗∗∗ 0.004∗∗∗ 0.004∗∗∗
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.006∗∗
0.008∗∗
0.010∗∗
0.011∗∗∗
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
−0.014∗ −0.009
−0.013
−0.016
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.011)
−0.002
−0.001
0.001
0.002
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
−0.001
−0.004
−0.004
−0.005
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
0.007∗∗∗ 0.006∗∗
0.007∗∗
0.010∗∗
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
0.001
−0.004
−0.005
−0.007
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.007)
810
750
713
649
0.089
0.077
0.078
0.081
Panel B: Top 100 Insurers
0.003
0.006∗∗
0.006
0.008∗∗
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
−0.006
−0.012
−0.012
−0.007
(0.008)
(0.014)
(0.019)
(0.018)
−0.091∗∗∗ −0.124∗∗∗ −0.128∗∗ −0.107∗
(0.031)
(0.046)
(0.060)
(0.058)
0.000
−0.003
−0.006
−0.006
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.008)
0.001
0.002
0.008
0.002
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.016)
(0.019)
−0.007
−0.016∗ −0.017∗ −0.014
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.010)
0.020
0.008
0.022
−0.009
(0.033)
(0.039)
(0.049)
(0.052)
100
100
100
100
0.107
0.171
0.135
0.120

46

2008

2009

2010

0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.012∗∗∗
(0.004)
−0.026∗∗
(0.011)
−0.000
(0.004)
−0.005
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)
0.003
(0.009)
636
0.093

0.002∗∗
(0.001)
0.014∗∗∗
(0.005)
−0.030∗∗
(0.014)
−0.002
(0.004)
−0.006
(0.004)
0.003
(0.005)
0.015
(0.012)
622
0.065

0.002∗∗
(0.001)
0.013∗∗∗
(0.004)
−0.022∗∗
(0.011)
−0.001
(0.004)
−0.005∗
(0.003)
0.000
(0.005)
0.011
(0.011)
592
0.076

0.008∗
(0.005)
−0.014
(0.021)
−0.116∗
(0.060)
−0.018
(0.011)
−0.008
(0.020)
−0.024∗
(0.014)
0.018
(0.069)
100
0.085

0.006
(0.004)
−0.014
(0.015)
−0.115∗∗
(0.052)
−0.013
(0.010)
−0.010
(0.017)
−0.022∗
(0.011)
0.030
(0.058)
100
0.081

0.004
(0.003)
−0.008
(0.012)
−0.097∗∗
(0.038)
−0.009
(0.007)
−0.008
(0.012)
−0.017∗
(0.009)
0.025
(0.043)
100
0.109

Table 10
Mutual Fund Transactions
This table reports the results of the regressions of quarterly net purchases of different types of
securitizations on mutual fund flows
Net Purchasesi,s,t
= αobjective(i),t + β1 · Inf lowsi,t + β2 · Inf lowsi,t × Crisist
Holdingsi,s,t−1
+ β3 · Outf lowsi,t + β4 · Outf lows × Crisist + εi,s,t
where i indexes funds, s indexes types of securitizations, and t indexes quarters. Net purchases
are scaled by lagged holdings and winsorized at the fifth and ninety-fifth percentiles.
Fund
flows are scaled by lagged total net assets, and are winsorized at the first and ninety-ninth
percentiles. Inflows are equal to max(0, Fund flows). Outflows are equal to max(0, −Fund flows).
Crisis is 2007Q3–2009Q2. In models 1, 3, 5, and 7, that do not include objective-date fixed
effects, standard errors are adjusted for clustering by objective-date. In models 2, 4, 6, and 8,
that include objective-date fixed effects, robust standard errors are reported. The bottom panel
reports the p-values from the tests of proportional purchases and liquidations of different types
of securitizations in response to fund inflows and outflows. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

Crisis
Inflows
Inflows × Crisis
Outflows
Outflows × Crisis
Constant
N
Adjusted R2
βin = 1
βin + βin×crisis = 1
βout = −1
βout + βout×crisis = −1
Objective×date FEs

ABS
GSE MBS
CMBS
NTS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.047∗∗
−0.033∗∗
−0.022∗∗
−0.061∗∗∗
(0.021)
(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.011)
1.151∗∗∗ 1.144∗∗∗ 1.213∗∗∗ 1.388∗∗∗ 1.185∗∗∗ 1.325∗∗∗ 0.838∗∗∗ 1.037∗∗∗
(0.133) (0.121) (0.124) (0.119) (0.145) (0.141) (0.134) (0.127)
0.209
0.248
0.306
0.092 −0.170 −0.359
0.238
0.067
(0.307) (0.267) (0.256) (0.243) (0.245) (0.260) (0.246) (0.268)
0.035 −0.059 −1.334∗∗∗ −1.350∗∗∗ −0.277 −0.049 −0.304∗ −0.336∗∗
(0.191) (0.169) (0.179) (0.180) (0.211) (0.205) (0.174) (0.167)
−1.114∗∗∗ −0.537 −1.079∗∗∗ −0.619 −0.396 −0.482 −0.360
0.086
(0.346) (0.377) (0.398) (0.394) (0.342) (0.326) (0.325) (0.302)
0.152∗∗∗ 0.161∗∗∗ 0.097∗∗∗ 0.087∗∗∗ 0.159∗∗∗ 0.150∗∗∗ 0.177∗∗∗ 0.161∗∗∗
(0.005) (0.003) (0.007) (0.003) (0.007) (0.004) (0.008) (0.003)
13,132
13,132
17,779
17,779
12,570
12,570
14,125
14,125
0.022
0.068
0.034
0.081
0.019
0.060
0.017
0.086
0.26
0.24
0.09
0.00
0.20
0.02
0.23
0.77
0.19
0.10
0.02
0.02
0.93
0.88
0.71
0.66
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.78
0.23
0.00
0.01
0.22
0.06
0.22
0.00
X
X
X
X

47

Table 11
Insurance Company Transactions
This table reports the results of the regressions of quarterly net purchases of different types of
securitizations by insurance companies
Net Purchasesi,s,t
= αlif e(i),t + β1 · Growthi,t + β2 · Growthi,t × Crisist
Holdingsi,s,t−1
+ β3 · Contractioni,t + β4 · Contractioni,t × Crisist + εi,s,t
where i indexes insurance groups, s indexes types of securitizations, and t indexes quarters. Net
purchases are scaled by lagged holdings and winsorized at the fifth and ninety-fifth percentiles.
Change in the overall par value ofthe fixed income portfolio
is winsorized at the first and ninety

∆Bond holdingsi,t
∆Bond holdings
ninth percentiles. Growth is max 0, Bond holdings
. Contraction is −min 0, Bond holdings i,t .
i,t−1
i,t−1
In models 1, 3, 5, and 7, that do not include type-date fixed effects, standard errors are adjusted
for clustering by type-date. In models 2, 4, 6, and 8, that include type-date fixed effects, robust
standard errors are reported. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

Crisis
Growth
Growth × Crisis
Contraction
Contraction × Crisis
Constant
N
Adjusted R2
Type×date FEs

ABS
GSE MBS
CMBS
NTS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.012∗
0.003
−0.015∗∗
−0.019∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.006)
0.165∗∗∗ 0.160∗∗∗ 0.283∗∗∗ 0.282∗∗∗ 0.212∗∗∗ 0.203∗∗∗ 0.198∗∗∗ 0.180∗∗∗
(0.028) (0.018) (0.032) (0.015) (0.041) (0.019) (0.033) (0.018)
−0.052 −0.053 −0.020
0.012 −0.049 −0.029 −0.136∗∗∗ −0.122∗∗∗
(0.044) (0.038) (0.053) (0.030) (0.049) (0.039) (0.046) (0.031)
−0.136∗∗∗ −0.138∗∗∗ −0.177∗∗∗ −0.200∗∗∗ −0.154∗∗∗ −0.146∗∗∗ −0.058∗∗ −0.055∗∗
(0.035) (0.025) (0.029) (0.016) (0.039) (0.021) (0.029) (0.023)
−0.068 −0.065 −0.007 −0.045 −0.031 −0.028 −0.041 −0.023
(0.070) (0.059) (0.040) (0.036) (0.065) (0.039) (0.036) (0.039)
0.042∗∗∗ 0.044∗∗∗ 0.088∗∗∗ 0.089∗∗∗ 0.056∗∗∗ 0.053∗∗∗ 0.043∗∗∗ 0.039∗∗∗
(0.004) (0.002) (0.005) (0.001) (0.005) (0.001) (0.005) (0.001)
19,631
19,631
32,133
32,133
17,896
17,896
18,524
18,524
0.014
0.025
0.047
0.074
0.028
0.064
0.023
0.059
X
X
X
X

48

