                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             OPTION-BASED CREDIT SPREADS

                                      Christopher L. Culp
                                       Yoshio Nozawa
                                       Pietro Veronesi

                                      Working Paper 20776
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20776


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 2014, Revised September 2017

For their comments, we thank Pierluigi Balduzzi, Jack Bao, Hui Chen, Alexander David, Darrell
Duffie, Peter Feldhütter, Stefano Giglio, Zhiguo He, John Heaton, J.B. Heaton, Steven Heston,
Erica Li, Francis Longstaff, Monika Piazzesi, Juliana Salomao, Steve Schaefer, Yang Song,
Suresh Sundaresan, Andrea Vedolin, and seminar participants at Bocconi University, Stockholm
School of Economics, Bank of Canada, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, University of Maryland, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, the Einaudi
Institute for Economics and Finance, AQR, CICF, the 2014 NBER Asset Pricing meeting, the
2015 European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets, the 2016 European Finance
Association, London Business School, Boston College, Oxford University, and Copenhagen
Business School. We thank Bryan Kelly for helping with CME data. The views expressed herein
are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, nor any institutions with which any of the authors are affiliated. A previous
version of this paper was briefly circulated with the title “The Empirical Merton Model.”
Veronesi acknowledges financial support from the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance
and by the Center for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago Booth School of
Business. The views expressed herein are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Christopher L. Culp, Yoshio Nozawa, and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Option-Based Credit Spreads
Christopher L. Culp, Yoshio Nozawa, and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 20776
December 2014, Revised September 2017
JEL No. G0,G12,G13,G21,G24,G3

                                         ABSTRACT

We present a novel empirical benchmark for analyzing credit risk using “pseudo firms” that
purchase traded assets financed with equity and zero-coupon bonds. By no-arbitrage, pseudo
bonds are equivalent to Treasuries minus put options on pseudo-firm assets. Empirically, like
corporate spreads, pseudo-bond spreads are large, countercyclical, and predict lower economic
growth. Using this framework, we find that bond market illiquidity, investors’ over-estimation of
default risks, and corporate frictions do not seem to explain excessive observed credit spreads,
but, instead, a risk premium for tail and idiosyncratic asset risks is the primary determinant of
corporate spreads.

Christopher L. Culp                             Pietro Veronesi
Johns Hopkins Institute                         University of Chicago
 for Applied Economics                          Booth School of Business
Global Health and Study                         5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
 of Business Enterprise                         Chicago, IL 60637
3400 North Charles St.                          and NBER
Baltimore, MD 21218                             pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu
cculp@rmcsinc.com

Yoshio Nozawa
Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Avenue NW
Mail Stop 165
Washington D.C. 20551
yoshio.nozawa@frb.gov
1.        Introduction

The understanding of credit risk, its time variation, and its relation to the aggregate econ-
omy is critical to policy makers, market participants, and researchers. Yet, questions about
credit risk are hard to answer with purely empirical methods because corporate bonds are
complicated and often illiquid securities, the market values of the assets of firms issuing
bonds are not observable, leverage is endogenous, and the corporate bond market is replete
with market-microstructure idiosyncrasies. Fully empirical methodologies, moreover, do not
easily facilitate analyses of counterfactuals to learn from “what-if” experiments. Instead,
counterfactual experiments generally must be tackled by positing stylized structural models
of default risk, which give rise to other challenges arising from dependencies on highly pa-
rameterized models, model specifications (e.g., assumed distributions of shocks), and genuine
difficulties in estimation.

       In this paper we propose a novel, option-based methodology for analyzing credit risk.
We build fictitious firms, which we call “pseudo firms,” that have simple and empirically
observable balance sheets. Our pseudo firms have assets comprised of real traded securities,
and liabilities comprised of equity and zero-coupon bonds. In the absence of arbitrage, the
market value of a pseudo firm’s zero-coupon bond is equal to the value of a comparable
default-free bond minus the market value of a put option on the traded securities held as
assets by the pseudo firm.1 Using observed prices of traded put options and Treasuries, we
extract the empirical properties of zero-coupon bonds “issued” by pseudo firms, which we
call “pseudo bonds.”

       To be concrete, consider a pseudo firm that purchases the S&P500 (SPX) index portfolio
financed by issuing equity and zero-coupon debt with face value K and maturity T .2 The
asset value of this pseudo firm is At = SP Xt , which is observable. At maturity, the bond
holders of this pseudo firm receive the minimum between K (no default) or the assets of the
pseudo firm AT (default). The payoff to bond holders thus is min(K, AT ) = K − max(K −
AT , 0), which is the payoff of the risk-free debt K minus the payoff on a put option on the
SPX. The no-arbitrage value of the pseudo bond at t < T is:

                                 b (K, T ) = K Z
                                 B             b (T ) − Pb SP X (K, T ),                                 (1)
                                  t             t         t
   1
      The basic insight that corporate debt can be viewed as risk-free debt plus a short put option is at-
tributable to Merton (1974). We distinguish between this Merton insight – which requires no assumptions
about the distribution of the values of underlying assets owned by the pseudo firm – and the Merton model
for the valuation of risky corporate debt – which assumes underlying asset values are lognormally distributed
and thus uses the Black, Scholes, and Merton formula for the valuation of corporate debt.
    2
      SPXSM is a service mark registered by the Chicago Board Options Exchange. Our use of the abbreviation
SPX refers throughout the text to the S&P500 index generally.


                                                     1
where Zbt (T ) is the risk-free discount factor at time t corresponding to maturity T , and
PbtSP X (K, T ) is the value of an SPX put option at t with strike price K and maturity T .
Quantities denoted with “hats” indicate that their prices are observable from Treasuries and
traded option prices, which comprise the observed values of the liabilities of the pseudo firm,
b (K, T ). Although the pseudo firm is fictitious, we can nonetheless observe the values of
Bt

its assets and debt from traded securities and thus we have a fully observable balance sheet.3

       To illustrate, Panel A of Figure 1 plots the time series of two pseudo bond prices Bbt (Ki , T )
constructed from equation (1) using Treasuries and two different SPX put options traded
on the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE). Both put options have maturity dates of
T = 12/18/2009, and are distinguished only by their different strike prices, K1 = 800 and
K2 = 1150. The two strike prices imply two different leverage ratios Ki /At – i.e., low and
high leverage for K1 = 800 and K2 = 1150, respectively, where the value of assets At is the
value of the SPX index. The time series of leverage is plotted in Panel B.

       Panel A of Figure 1 shows that the low-leverage pseudo bond price steadily increases
over time (like any zero-coupon bond) except during the 2008 crisis, when the price drops
substantially as the SPX (i.e., the asset value of the first pseudo firm) declines by over 50%.
Nevertheless, this pseudo bond recovers in 2009 and eventually pays 100% of principal at
maturity. The pseudo bond issued by the high-leverage pseudo firm, however, displays a
larger price drop during the financial crisis, and the bond never fully recovers. Indeed, the
second pseudo firm eventually defaults, as the the value of the SPX on December 18, 2009
was AT = 1102.47 and hence AT /K2 = 95% – i.e. bond holders of the high-leverage pseudo
firm would have lost 5% of principal value.

       Panel C plots the time series of credit spreads implied by the two pseudo bond prices
Bb (K , T ) and Treasuries. Their dynamics highlight the variations in credit spreads during
  t   i

the financial crisis, a topic to which we return later. Indeed, for the first year or so, the two
credit spreads were increasing, albeit by relatively small amounts. September 2008 (when
Lehman failed and AIG was bailed out), however, was a clear turning point when spreads
of both pseudo firms – especially the high-leverage one – skyrocketed. The difference in
reactions of the credit spreads of the two pseudo firms (which are otherwise identical except
for leverage) highlights the increase of a firm’s financial fragility and sensitivity to shocks in
asset value changes resulting from leverage.

       Our methodology also allows us to exploit standard econometric tools to compute pseudo
bonds’ ex ante default probabilities – i.e., the probabilities pt (K) = P r[AT < K|Ft ], where
   3
   For completeness, note that equity holders of the pseudo firm are instead entitled to the residual payoff
max(AT − K, 0) at maturity T and to all cash dividends paid by SPX portfolio until then.


                                                     2
Ft reflects the information available at t. Panel D of Figure 1 plots these default probabilities
for the two pseudo firms discussed above. Both probabilities increase substantially during
the 2008 financial crisis, especially for the high-leverage pseudo bond. Although the leverage
ratio Ki /At is a major determinant of the default probability and credit spreads, a comparison
of Panels B, C, and D in Figure 1 also indicates the significantly non-linear relation between
leverage, credit spreads, and default probabilities.

       As this example illustrates, we can treat pseudo firms like any other real firm to learn
about credit risk. In this paper, we systematically analyze the empirical properties of pseudo
bond credit spreads (“pseudo spreads”) constructed as illustrated above. We begin by ana-
lyzing pseudo firms with two types of assets: (i) the SPX (as in the previous illustration); and
(ii) shares of individual stocks that comprise the SPX. We refer to the pseudo bonds issued
by firms (i) and (ii) as SPX and single-stock pseudo bonds, respectively. In a later section,
we show that our results extend to pseudo firms holding other assets, such as commodities,
foreign currencies, and fixed income securities.

       Average credit spreads on pseudo bonds are large and similar in magnitude to credit
spreads on actual comparable corporate bonds, especially for bonds with high credit ratings.
For example, credit spreads of two-year SPX pseudo bonds corresponding to the default
probabilities for Aaa/Aa and A/Baa bonds are 0.42% and 1.19%, respectively.4 The spreads
of single-stock pseudo bonds for those two default probabilities are 0.68% and 1.71%. These
spreads are very similar to the average credit spreads observed for actual Aaa/Aa and A/Baa
corporate bonds – i.e., 0.71% and 1.21%, respectively. For high-yield (HY) debt, SPX pseudo
bond spreads range between 2.09% (for Ba-rated bonds) and 4.96% (for Caa-rated bonds),
whereas single-stock pseudo bond spreads range between 3.08% and 8.62%. These spreads
are close to actual corporate bond spreads, which are 2.93% for Ba-rated bonds and 9.56%
for Caa- rated bonds, respectively.

       In addition, pseudo credit spreads are high not only for medium-term bonds (i.e., two
years to maturity in our implementation) but also for very short-term pseudo bonds. For
example, investment-grade (IG) SPX pseudo bonds with 30 and 91 days to maturity have
average credit spreads of 0.52% and 0.45%, respectively, which are very close to observed
average credit spreads of 0.61% and 0.60% on actual IG-rated firms’ commercial paper.
Pseudo spreads thus are consistent with the puzzling hefty credit spreads of short-term
paper issued by corporations with a seemingly negligible probability of default over such
   4
    We use the credit ratings nomenclature of Moody’s Investors Service (Moody’s) throughout this paper.
Nevertheless, the credit ratings that we later assign to pseudo bonds are not intended to match the ratings
that actually would have been assigned by Moody’s or any other rating agency to such bonds (if they existed)
based on their own ratings criteria.


                                                     3
short time horizons. These results suggest a good deal of integration between corporate
bond and options markets.

       Given that the magnitudes of spreads between pseudo bonds and corporate bonds are
similar, we examine popular explanations for the high and time-varying credit spreads of
corporate bonds.5 Although illiquidity of corporate bonds is often cited as an explanation
for high credit spreads (e.g. Bao, Pan and Wang (2013)), we find that pseudo bonds are
much more liquid than corporate bonds, which suggests that illiquidity is not the whole
story. Similarly, our empirical tests on pseudo bonds’ default probabilities suggest that high
credit spreads are unlikely due to investors’ systematic over-prediction of default frequencies
or the magnitudes of losses given default (e.g. Feldhütter and Schaefer (2016)).

       Our empirical results also suggest that large credit spreads are unlikely to be solely
attributable to theories of corporate behavior, such as early and/or optimal default (e.g.,
Black and Cox (1976), Leland and Toft (1996)), large bankruptcy costs (e.g., Leland (1994)),
agency costs (e.g., Leland (1998), Gamba, Aranda, and Saretto (2013)), strategic default
(e.g., Anderson and Sundaresan (1996)), asymmetric information, uncertainty and learning
(e.g., Duffie and Lando (2001), David (2008)), corporate investment behavior (e.g., Kuehn
and Schmid (2014)), and the like. As the SPX example above shows, our pseudo firms are
simple entities in which asset values are observable, information is symmetric, managerial
frictions do not exist, leverage and default boundaries are exogenous, and default only occurs
at maturity. Yet, independently from the type of underlying assets, our pseudo bonds display
properties that are surprisingly close – qualitatively and quantitatively – to those of real
corporate bonds.

       Instead, we find evidence that idiosyncratic asset uncertainty has a substantial indepen-
dent impact on credit spreads. Because we can observe both the assets and liabilities of
pseudo firms, we can measure idiosyncratic uncertainty as the residual volatility from a mar-
ket model on equity, and find that pseudo credit spreads are strongly positively related to
residual volatility, even after controlling for ex ante default probabilities and losses condi-
tional on default. Our results indicate the presence of a hefty risk premium associated with
idiosyncratic tail risk.

       Finally, we exploit our option-based methodology to provide further evidence and inter-
pretations of the forces that shape the credit spreads around the business cycle, especially
during the 2008 - 2009 financial crisis. In particular, we follow Gilchrist and Zakrajsek
   5
    The literature refers to the high credit spreads of corporate bonds as the “credit spread puzzle” – i.e.,
the observation of actual credit spreads that are well in excess of the spreads implied by mainstream risky
debt valuation models, such as the Merton (1974) model.


                                                     4
(2012) in their analysis of corporate credit spreads (the “GZ spread”) and show that pseudo
credit spreads also strongly covary with the business cycle and that higher spreads strongly
predict lower future economic growth. The simplicity of the payoff structure of our pseudo
bonds further allows us to decompose the pseudo spread into expected loss and residual
risk-premium components. We find that the risk-premium component also predicts lower
future economic growth, especially for long time horizons. Our empirical results are broadly
consistent with the findings of Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) for corporate credit spreads,
and suggest that the business cycle variation of credit spreads is affected by time-variation
in the insurance premium that investors require to hold securities with large tail risk over
the business cycle. Consistent with this interpretation, we find that the difference between
single-stock pseudo spreads and the SPX pseudo spreads – an index of a risk premium for
idiosyncratic tail risk – also predicts lower future growth.

    We finally extend our empirical results to study the impact of bankruptcy costs and to
include other types of assets that our pseudo firms can buy, including commodities, foreign
currencies, and coupon bonds (by using swaptions). Although the data coverage is not as
good as with SPX and single-stock pseudo bonds, we find similar average credit spreads,
especially for highly rated pseudo bonds. We also find that credit spreads of such pseudo
firms with different types of underlying assets display strong covariation over time, especially
during the 2008 financial crisis, highlighting that similar factors affect variations in spreads.

  Our paper is related to the large literature that sprang from both the insight and valuation
model of Merton (1974). We do not attempt an exhaustive survey here, but instead refer
readers to Lando (2004), Jarrow (2009), and Sundaresan (2013). Huang and Huang (2012)
discuss the deficiencies of the lognormal Merton model and show that numerous structural
models calibrated to match true default probabilities generate credit spreads that are still
too small compared to the data. Chen et al. (2009), Bahmra et al. (2010), and Chen (2012)
show that models featuring habit formation and/or macro-economic risk are partly able to
reconcile the evidence. Most of this literature focuses on long-term debt but cannot explain
short-term credit spreads. Zhou (2001) and Duffie and Lando (2001) obtain high short-
term credit spreads in models featuring jumps in asset values and asset value uncertainty,
respectively. Gomes and Schmid (2016) propose a general equilibrium model to link credit
spread fluctuations to the business cycle. The approaches of all of these papers, however,
are very different from ours, as we do not use any parametric model and instead go straight
to the data and analyze the credit spreads of our pseudo firms through traded options.

   A small number of papers document the link between out-of-the-money put options and
credit spreads (e.g., Cremers, Driessen and Maenhout (2008) and Car and Wu (2011)). These


                                               5
papers concentrate on using options of individual firms to match bond spreads of those firms.
Our approach is different, as we use options to create fictitious securities that resemble bonds
only in terms of their payoff functions. Although we use individual stocks for some part of
our analyses (but we also use indices and other non-equity assets), we do not match pseudo
bonds with issuers’ actual bonds. Our goal is rather to study pseudo bonds as economic
equivalent benchmarks that are driven by the same macroeconomic shocks to assets and
uncertainty which affect corporate bond prices.

       Our approach is most closely related to Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009), who study
the valuation of collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and use traded SPX options as the
basis for measuring credit spreads on put spreads (i.e., long-short positions in put options
with different strike prices that resemble tranches of CDOs). They show that the credit
spreads in their SPX-based tranches are smaller than the spreads on corresponding CDO
tranches. Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012) estimate a structural model of default
to address the same question, and find that CDO spreads were fairly priced when compared
to the estimated model’s predictions. Although similar in spirit (i.e., we also use put options
to learn about credit spreads), our approach is not limited to learning about the credit risk of
CDOs and instead uses pseudo firms to analyze the properties of corporate credit spreads.6

       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2. describes our data and our main empirical
results. Section 3. exploits pseudo firms as a testing ground to study potential sources of
high credit spreads. Section 4. discusses the relation between pseudo credit spreads, economic
growth, and credit supply shocks. Section 5. provides extensions to our results. Section 6.
concludes. A Technical Appendix contains various extensions.



2.        Option-Based Credit Spreads

2.1.       Data

We rely on data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) for individual stock
prices and values of the SPX index.

       Our daily prices on SPX index options and options on individual stocks from January 4,
1996, through July 31, 2015, are from the OptionMetrics Ivy database. For SPX options in
   6
    Although our paper is also related to the literature that compares corporate bonds to “synthetic” corpo-
rate bonds, as given by risk free bonds plus credit default swaps (e.g. Duffie (1999), Longstaff et al. (2005)),
such synthetic bonds, however, do not facilitate the same kind of analysis that we undertake here.



                                                       6
the period from 1990 through 1995, we use data from Market Data Express (MDR). To filter
our data, we generally follow the approach of Constantinides, Jackwerth, and Savov (2013)
for SPX options in order to minimize the effects of quotation errors and the methodology of
Frazzini and Pedersen (2012) for individual equity options. To be conservative, we use bid
prices for options to calculate our pseudo bond prices.

   We construct our corporate bond panel data using the Lehman Brothers Fixed Income
Database, TRACE, the Mergent FISD/NAIC Database, and DataStream. In the event
of overlaps across the four databases, we prioritize sources in the order just shown. For
filtering, we broadly adopt the same approach as Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) (GZ), and
hence consider all U.S. corporate bonds with the exception of bonds with embedded options
(e.g., puttable bonds), subordinated debt, and bonds with floating-rate coupons. As in GZ,
however, we include callable bonds but adjust credit spreads for the predicted call premium.
We obtained the GZ spread data until June 2015 from the authors’ web site.

   For credit derivatives, we use five-year CDX indices from JP Morgan and single-name
credit default swap (CDS) spreads from Markit. We use price/spread data on both the North
American IG and HY CDX indices, denoted CDX.IG and CDX.HY, respectively.

   We obtain our risk-free and commercial-paper rates from the Federal Reserve Economic
Data (FRED) database, where the latter are used to measure short-term credit spreads.


2.2.     Default Probabilities and Pseudo Ratings

To facilitate a consistent comparison of pseudo spreads with actual spreads on corporate
bonds, we assign pseudo bonds to different pseudo rating categories according to their default
probabilities. For every t and pseudo bond i with maturity τ and face value Ki , we use past
data to compute default probabilities pbi,t (τ ) = P r[Aτ < Ki |Ft ]. Technical Appendix C
describes the full procedure, which can be summarized for SPX pseudo bonds as follows:


  (i) We assume that log asset growth is ln (At+τ /At ) = µt,τ + σt,τ ετ where the distribution
       of εt is unspecified;

 (ii) We use data before t to estimate volatility σt,τ by fitting a GARCH(1,1) model and
       expected future growth µt,τ through a predictive regression;

(iii) Based on data prior to t, we compute the historical frequency distribution of shocks:
       εs,τ = (ln(As+τ /As ) − µs,τ ) /σs,τ (see Figure A1 in the Technical Appendix);


                                               7
(iv) We utilize the historical shock distributions to estimate probabilities of default pbi,t (τ ) =
         P r[At+τ < Ki |Ft] = P r[ετ < Xi |Ft] (where Xi = (ln(Ki /At ) − µt,τ )/σt,τ )) by comput-
         ing the frequencies with which εs,τ < Xi occur in the historical sample data. For the
         example in the introduction, the results of our methodology are shown in Panel D of
         Figure 1. We follow a similar methodology when assets are comprised of non-SPX
         securities with only minor modifications based on data availability and, for individual
         stocks, some issues with survivorship bias for which we must account.

 (v) As a final step, for every t we assign each bond i with maturity τ to a pseudo rating
     category by comparing its estimated default probability pbi,t (τ ) with historical average
         default frequencies across credit rating bins estimated from Moody’s historical bond
         default dataset to reflect booms and recessions for various horizons τ .7

(vi) In addition to default probabilities, we exploit parameters µt,τ , σt,τ and the shock
         distribution as computed in step (iii) to recover the asset value distribution conditional
         on time-t information, and estimate the loss-given-default of each pseudo bond on an
         ex ante basis by computing the average of 1 − At+τ /Ki conditional on At+τ < Ki .


2.3.       Pseudo Bond Credit Spreads by Maturity and Credit Rating

Columns two to six of Table 1 report the average credit spreads of pseudo bonds (Panels
A and B) and corporate bonds (Panel C) for maturities ranging from 30 days to two years
across credit ratings. We consider five pseudo rating categories: Aaa/Aa, A/Baa, Ba, B,
and Caa-. We also define two broad pseudo rating categories: IG (which includes categories
Aaa/Aa and A/Baa); and HY (which includes Ba, B, and Caa-). The broader IG and HY
categories are useful in situations where insufficient data is available in the more granular
categories.8 Moreover, corporate bond quotes are unreliable at short maturities and we thus
rely on 30- and 91-day commercial paper quotes, which are only available for IG issuers.

       The results in Table 1 show that, irrespective of maturity, IG and HY pseudo credit
spreads are very similar to IG and HY credit spreads of corporate bonds, respectively. Com-
paring Panel C with Panels A and B across rows, the matching between pseudo bonds and
corporate bonds is especially close for highly rated bonds, although SPX pseudo bonds have
somewhat lower credit spreads than both HY single-stock pseudo bonds and HY corporate
   7
    We rely solely on the methodology described herein – and not rating agency criteria – for this exercise.
   8
    For example, short-horizon pseudo bonds have sufficient data to cover the IG category as a whole but
insufficient granularity in strike prices to differentiate across IG sub-categories. For single-stock pseudo
bonds, we do not have reliable data to cover the 30-day maturity at all.



                                                     8
bonds (see Section 3.3. for a discussion). In all cases, however, pseudo spreads are far higher
than those implied by the lognormal Merton model, which are zero for IG bonds and between
0.13% to 0.8% for HY bonds (results not reported).

   The left panels of Figure 2 compare option-based pseudo credit spreads, corporate bond
spreads, and credit spreads implied by the lognormal Merton model (in Panel A) for two-year
bonds. Single-stock pseudo spreads and average corporate spreads are very close across all
rating categories. SPX pseudo credit spreads, however, are somewhat smaller than the other
two, and this disparity becomes more pronounced for lower credit ratings. In Section 3.3.
we show this difference is due to the additional idiosyncratic risks on a portfolio of bonds
vis-a-vis a bond based on a diversified pool of assets.

   These empirical results on pseudo firms shed further light on the substantial risk premia
that investors require to hold securities with large tail risks. Indeed, from Table 1 option
prices are consistent with the puzzling empirical regularity that 1- and 3-month commercial
paper issued by highly rated IG companies – with negligible probabilities of default – exhibit
a large 0.6% spread over Treasuries on average. Indeed, three-month single-stock and SPX
pseudo bonds have 0.75% and 0.45% credit spreads, respectively, which are in line with
commercial paper spreads and suggestive of a tail risk premium.


2.4.    Pseudo Bond Credit Spreads over Time

The last four columns of Table 1 provide a closer look at two-year bonds. (Similar results
hold for other maturities.) First, we see that high pseudo spreads are not merely an artifact
of recessions or the 2008 crisis, but are also high in boom times. In fact, comparing Panels A
and B with Panel C, the business cycle variation of pseudo credit spreads is comparable to
corresponding variations in actual corporate bond spreads. Indeed, Panels C and E of Figure
2 show that the matching between pseudo spreads and corporate spreads is close during
both booms and recessions, with the notable difference again that SPX pseudo spreads are
uniformly lower than spreads on single-stock pseudo bonds and actual corporate bonds.

   Figure 3 presents the time series of monthly credit spreads for two-year IG and HY pseudo
bonds and actual corporate bonds. We focus on the broad IG and HY categories in order
to compare credit spreads on pseudo bonds, actual corporate bonds, and the Markit CDX
IG and HY indices. Credit spreads on both SPX and single-stock pseudo bonds, actual
corporate bonds, and the CDX indices rose substantially during the 2008 financial crisis,
especially for HY bonds, and then reverted to more normal levels by 2010. Interestingly,


                                              9
the increase in HY pseudo spreads in 2008 was virtually identical to the rise in corporate
bond and CDX spreads, thus suggesting that nothing anomalous was happening in the HY
credit market during that period. By contrast, IG corporate bond spreads increased far more
than both CDX and pseudo bond spreads during the financial crisis, which suggests some
potential impairments of IG-rated bonds at that time.

   The correlations across the corporate, CDX, and pseudo spreads are reported in the left
corners of the four panels. With the exception of IG single-stock pseudo bonds and corporate
bonds (whose pairwise correlation is just 11% – mostly because pseudo bond spreads were so
high in the 1990s compared to corporate bond spreads), the correlations across all of these
credit spread measures are high, ranging from 38% between IG-rated SPX pseudo bonds
and IG corporate bonds (Panel A) to 93% between HY-rated SPX pseudo bonds and the
CDX.HY index (Panel C).


2.5.    Leveraged Equity as Assets of Pseudo Firms

One important advantage of analyzing the credit spreads of our pseudo firms in lieu of real
firms is that we can observe the explicit asset values underlying the pseudo firms and therefore
directly study the relation between credit spreads and the statistical properties of underlying
asset values. Our methodology, moreover, allows us to side-step the vexing endogeneity issues
of corporate financial and capital structure decisions, such as a firm’s choice of leverage. For
instance, the right-hand panels of Figure 2 strongly suggest that endogenous leverage has a
large impact on the size of credit spreads. These three panels plot average credit spreads
against firms’ book leverage ratios and indicate that, as leverage increases towards 90%,
pseudo credit spreads increase substantially, as Merton’s insight predicts. Corporate bond
spreads, however, increase by much less. Because the left-hand panels of the figure show
that pseudo spreads match corporate spreads well when we control for default probabilities
(i.e., credit ratings), the large difference in credit spreads on the right-hand panels is likely
the result of the endogeneity of leverage in real firms. In other words, as we would expect,
only firms with low amounts of high-risk assets increase their leverage substantially.

   On the issue of leverage, however, one legitimate question is whether using equity of
real firms as assets for pseudo firms may somehow cloud our inferences about the sources
of observed high credit spreads. Indeed, real firms’ equity is itself leveraged, which in turn
thickens the tails of equity return distributions as compared to distributions of the firms’
underlying assets. Even if we properly match the default probabilities of pseudo firms in
Table 1, the loss-given-default of pseudo firms may, in principle, be higher as a result of our


                                               10
use of equity rather than the underlying firms’ assets.

   We find that this is not the case empirically. First, Panel A of Table 2 reports the credit
spreads of pseudo firms whose assets are not stocks of levered firms. Specifically, Column 5
shows that the pseudo spreads of the subset of pseudo firms defined on stocks of unlevered
firms are in fact higher than those defined on stocks of levered firms, reported again in
Columns 3 and 4 for convenience. Such large pseudo credit spreads are consistent with our
findings about endogenous leverage as discussed above – i.e., those firms with no leverage
choose not to issue debt exactly because if they did, their credit spreads would be very large
as a result of the riskiness of their assets.

   In similar fashion, Columns 6 to 8 of the same panel show that pseudo spreads are high
even when we use other non-equity based assets, such as commodities, foreign currencies,
and fixed income securities, especially for highly rated pseudo firms and when we adjust for
loss-given-default (in Panels C and D). We discuss these results further in Section 5.1.

       Second, Panel B of Table 2 shows that the loss-given-default of pseudo firms are in fact
lower than those of real firms across credit rating categories, which suggests that the tails of
equity return distributions are, if anything, too small when compared to the real potential
losses on corporate bonds. The main channel through which our use of equity (instead of the
underlying firms’ assets) would induce larger tails thus does not actually hold in the data.

       Finally, we show in the Technical Appendix that matching the corporate bonds of a
real firm to pseudo bonds obtained from options on the equity of the same firm with the
same credit rating results in pseudo spreads that are comparable to actual corporate bond
spreads. Both spreads, however, are higher than CDS spreads on the same reference entity.
The empirical evidence thus confirms the non-zero nature of the CDS-bond basis (see, e.g.,
Culp, van der Merwe, and Stärkle (2016) for a survey) but also shows a comparable CDS-
pseudo bond basis.9 Although our focus is not on comparing the spread of a bond issued by
a given firm with the pseudo spread computed from the equity of that firm (e.g., comparing
spreads on Apple-based pseudo bonds with bonds issued by Apple Inc.), these results provide
some comfort that our methodology is robust.

       In the Technical Appendix, we also ascertained (as a theoretical matter) through simu-
lations based on Merton’s lognormal model that the impact on credit spreads from equity
   9
    We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting the comparison of pseudo spreads with CDS spreads and
bond spreads on a firm-by-firm basis. We remark, however, that it is difficult to secure a large sample of
matched corporate bonds, pseudo bonds, and CDSs on a firm-by-firm basis. Because most firms in the SPX
index are highly rated, we need deep out-of-the-money options to obtain pseudo bonds that match the high
credit rating of the issuer, and such data is generally not available.


                                                   11
rather than underlying assets is very small, especially for highly rated firms. Instead, we
find that Merton’s lognormal debt valuation model implies a far larger negative skewness and
kurtosis of log returns than what we observe in real firms’ equity returns, which is consistent
with our finding that the loss-given-defaut of pseudo bonds is smaller than loss-given-default
on corporate bonds.

   In sum, using equity as the assets on pseudo firms’ balance sheets does not seem to induce
any particular bias on pseudo credit spreads, despite the impact of leverage on most actual
firms’ equity values. On the contrary, by including equity on our pseudo firms’ balance
sheets, we can examine realistically the various sources of credit spread levels and dynamics
by using actual market-determined data and our observations of both assets and liabilities
of pseudo firms, to which we now turn.



3.       Empirical Determinants of Credit Spreads

As shown in Table 1 and in Figure 3, pseudo credit spreads are large and share cyclical
properties that are similar to those of real corporate bonds. We now exploit the simplicity
of our pseudo firms to provide further insights on the determinants of credit spreads.


3.1.       Corporate Bond Market Illiquidity

Illiquidity in the corporate bond market is often considered to be a critical determinant
of large credit spreads. We can assess this notion using our option-based pseudo bonds.
Specifically, following Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011), we use the Roll (1984) measure of market
liquidity. The Roll measure reflects the degree to which bid and ask prices bounce up and
down, with the logic being that large reversals indicate relatively less market liquidity and
higher sensitivities of bid and offer prices to large orders. To quantify the bid-ask bounce,
the Roll measure uses the negative autocovariance of log price changes.

     Specifically, the market illiquidity measure for pseudo bond i in month t is
                                             q
                            Illiquidityt =       −Covt(∆pBid→Ask
                                                         i,t,d   , ∆pAsk→Bid
                                                                     i,t,d+1 )                            (2)

where ∆pBid→Ask
        i,t,d   ≡ log Aski,t,d − log Bidi,t,d−1 and ∆pAsk→Bid
                                                      i,t,d   ≡ log Bidi,t,d − log Aski,t,d−1.
We compute this Roll-like measure for all pseudo bonds that have more than 10 return
observations in a month.10 We calculate the portfolio-level Roll measure as the kernel-
 10
      This formula slightly differs from Roll (1984) (unlike equation (3), in which we use Roll’s exact formu-


                                                      12
weighted average (see       the Technical Appendix) of the pseudo bonds for which we can
compute the Roll measure. In addition, we compute the bid-ask spreads, calculated as
  Ask    Bid    M id
(Bi,t − Bi,t )/Bi,t  . The portfolio bid-ask spread is the kernel-weighted average across
pseudo bonds.

    For corporate bonds, bid and ask spreads are not available. Roll’s (1984) original illiq-
uidity measure uses daily transaction prices and is computed as
                                         q
                       Illiquidityt = 2 −Covt(∆pTi,t,d
                                                   ransaction
                                                              , ∆pTi,t,d+1
                                                                     ransaction
                                                                                )                      (3)

where pTi,t,d
          ransaction
                     is the log transaction price of corporate bond i on day d. We then compute
the Roll measure for all corporate bonds that have more than 10 return observations in a
month, and the portfolio-level Roll measure is the value-weighted average of all corporate
bonds for which the Roll measure can be calculated.

   The last two columns of Table 1 show our results. Comparing Panels A and B to Panel
C, it appears that pseudo bonds – especially those based on the SPX – have far greater
market liquidity than real corporate bonds, which is not surprising. Single-stock pseudo
bonds have market liquidity measures that are somewhat closer to those of real corporate
bonds, except for lower-rated bonds for which corporate bonds still show far lower market
liquidity. Overall, these results suggest that market liquidity alone is unlikely to be the main
source of large credit spreads.11


3.2.     Over-Prediction of Default Probabilities

Apart from the relative illiquidity of the corporate bond market, another possible explanation
of excessive observed credit spreads is that investors over-estimate the probabilities of default
of corporate bonds (see, e.g., Feldhütter and Schaefer (2016)). We can use our pseudo firms
as a laboratory to test this hypothesis. In fact, because we assign default probabilities to
pseudo bonds using a well-defined rule (see Section 2.2.), we can test whether ex post default
frequencies are similar to ex ante probabilities. Figure 4 presents the results of this test using
lation.) Because we have available bid and ask prices for pseudo bonds, we can compute the round-trip
liquidity/execution cost without imputing a transaction to be performed at the bid or ask with 50-50 prob-
ability, which was a computational assumption adopted by Roll (1984).
   11
      Panel A of Table 1 also shows that highly rated bonds are more liquid than lower rated bonds, which
may be surprising given that highly rated bonds use put options that are further out-of-the-money, and
hence more illiquid. The reason for this result is that we follow Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) and use log
prices for our estimates of the Roll measure, and highly rated bonds have higher prices. Thus, highly rated
bonds may have a lower “dollar” liquidity but a higher “percent” liquidity.




                                                    13
data from 1970 to 2014.12

   Panel A of Figure 4 shows that the average ex post frequencies of default for single-stock
pseudo bonds (the circles in the figure) are very close to the ex ante default probabilities
(the 45 degree line). The confidence intervals are relatively tight, moreover, thanks to
the diversification across the 500 firms in the SPX index, and they encompass the ex ante
default probabilities. Panel B shows the same results for the SPX pseudo bond. In this case,
point estimates of ex post default frequencies are different from the ex ante probabilities
but are still within the confidence bands. The confidence intervals for SPX pseudo bonds
are wide, however, because SPX pseudo bonds are built from a single pseudo firm that
has only SPX shares as assets – i.e., we do not have a cross-section of firms over which to
average defaults. Thus, the mean ex post default rate is noisy, and the confidence bands are
large.13 Nevertheless, the overall evidence shows that our ex ante default probabilities are
not excessive and that over-prediction of default probabilities does not explain large credit
spreads.


3.3.     Idiosyncratic Tail Risks

As discussed above, we do not see compelling empirical evidence that high credit spreads
are the result of illiquidity in the corporate bond market or over-prediction of default prob-
abilities. Theories of corporate behavior, such as those summarized in the introduction,
moreover, do not apply to our pseudo firms, and thus also are not likely explanations for the
large credit spreads.

   The high credit spreads of pseudo bonds are consistent, however, with the large litera-
ture documenting that out-of-the-money equity put option prices are especially high. Our
approach documents that such “overpricing” of put options is quantitatively consistent with
observed credit spreads on actual corporate bonds, which provides a strong indication that
options and bonds markets are well integrated and that the same forces shape risk premia
in both markets. In particular, it appears that bond holders require hefty premia to hold
securities with large tail risks, just as they do for options.14
  12
       We do not need options to compute ex post default frequencies of pseudo bonds, as default at t + τ
only depends on whether At+τ < Ki,t . Thus, for every month t and given estimates of µt,τ and σt,τ , for
each probability p on the x−axis of Figure 4 we back out the threshold Ki,t so that the ex ante probability
pbi,t (τ ) = p. We then compute the ex post average frequencies with which default occurs at time t + τ . The
sample 1970 to 2014 is chosen to match the Moody’s sample.
    13
       Intuitively, out of our 45-year SPX sample we only have 22 independent observations over which we can
compute default frequencies for two-year pseudo bonds. At this frequency, just one observation is sufficient
to generate over a 2% average default frequency, but with large standard errors.
    14
       Out-of-the-money equity put options became especially expensive after the October 1987 market crash.


                                                     14
    The results in Table 1 show that the average credit spread of single-stock pseudo-bonds
is higher than the credit spreads on SPX pseudo bonds. This may appear puzzling at first
because the SPX carries mostly systematic risk. The result is in fact rather intuitive and
highlights the types of risk that impact corporate bond credit spreads. To illustrate, fixing
a strike price K common to all bonds, Jensen’s inequality implies:
                                                                 X
     Payoff of SPX-Pseudo Bond = K − max(K −                         wi Ai,T , 0)
                                              X
                                          >       wi (K − max(K − Ai,T , 0))
                                          = Average of Payoffs of Single-Stock Pseudo Bonds

Thus, for a given K, the value of the portfolio of pseudo bonds is always lower than the value
of a bond on the SPX index portfolio. Clearly, because in this example K is the same for
both the SPX and single-stock pseudo bonds, the default probability of the SPX bond may
be lower than the average default probabilities of single-stock pseudo bonds. As such, an
adjustment for this valuation misalignment should be made. The results in Table 1 highlight
that such an adjustment, however, is insufficient to curtail the idiosyncratic risk component
that affects average spreads on a portfolio of corporate bonds.15

    To dig deeper into the importance of idiosyncratic risk on credit spreads, we exploit our
single-stock pseudo bonds and directly investigate the impact of idiosyncratic asset volatility
on credit spreads. In general, a firm’s credit spread depends on its probability of default, the
loss-given-default, and the risk premium.16 Idiosyncratic uncertainty may affect the former
two quantities, but should not affect the third. We now show that, empirically, it does.

    Whether and how idiosyncratic asset volatility impacts credit spreads is hard to address
using actual corporate bond data, because asset values are non-observable and, hence, mea-
suring idiosyncratic asset value volatility is problematic. In contrast, pseudo firms have
observable balance sheets, and thus we can measure the idiosyncratic volatility of their asset
It is thus possible that the SPX results may not hold on a pre-1987 sample. If so, a potential interpretation
of our results is that the 1987 market crash made investors in options acutely aware of tail risk in the same
manner that previous debt crises – such as the 1931 depression – made bond investors aware of the same
type of tail risk. We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this interpretation.
   15
      Interestingly, the average spread of components of CDX index is higher than CDX spread itself, but the
difference is not as high as the on observed for pseudo bonds.
   16
      For instance, Chen et al. (2009) show that within a lognormal Merton model, modified to have a given
loss-given-default (LGD) in case of default (as opposed to K − Ai,t+τ ), it is possible to write the credit
spread as
                                          1                                 √ 
                              cst (τ ) = − log 1 − LGD × N N −1 (pt (τ )) − θ τ
                                          τ
where N (.) is the cumulative normal distribution, pt (τ ) is the default probability, and θ is the market price
of risk. Controlling for pt (τ ) and LGD, idiosyncratic uncertainty should not affect the credit spread as θ
should not depend on it.


                                                      15
values from the standard deviation of the residuals from the basic market model.17 For each
time t, we then sort these single-stock pseudo bonds according to their pseudo credit ratings
and then, for each credit rating category, we sort pseudo bonds into low, medium, and high
idiosyncratic asset volatility categories. Table 3 reports the results.

   Panel A indicates that for all rating categories except Aaa/Aa, credit spreads for pseudo
bonds with high-volatility assets are higher than spreads on pseudo bonds with low-volatility
assets. The magnitudes are large, moreover, especially for lower-rated bonds. For instance,
a Ba-rated pseudo bond has 2.33% spread in the low-volatility bin but a 3.95% spread in
the high-volatility bin. These magnitudes are larger than the differences in average credit
spreads between A/Baa and Ba rated bonds (shown in Table 1). In contrast to other credit
ratings, Aaa/Aa credit spreads are decreasing in volatility. Although this result is interesting,
the data are sparse and results are noisy within this category. Panel B demonstrates that,
conditional on individual credit ratings, higher asset volatility corresponds to lower leverage.

   Panel C shows that pseudo bonds of firms with higher idiosyncratic asset volatilities have
higher losses-given-default, where the latter is computed as described in Section 2.2. Given
the results in Panel B, higher idiosyncratic volatility is correlated with a fatter left-tail of
the asset value return distribution, which in turn increases the loss-given-default for a given
default probability.

   To test whether the loss-given-default or idiosyncratic volatility is responsible for higher
credit spreads, we run the following pooled regression:
                                                   d
   Pseudo Spreadi,t = 0.109 + 0.532 pbi,t + 0.007 LGD it + 0.045 log (IdioVolit ) + εi,t

                             (2.97) (10.92)         (0.13)             (3.89)

where Pseudo Spreadi,t is the pseudo credit spread of pseudo firm i at time t, pbi,t is its ex ante
                      d
default probability, LGD it is its ex ante loss-given-default, and IdioVolit is its idiosyncratic

volatility. Values below the parameter estimates are t-statistics. This result shows that
even controlling for the ex ante default probability – which is the best predictor of the credit
spread – and the ex ante loss-given-default, the residual idiosyncratic volatility is significantly
positively related to credit spreads. This finding suggests that idiosyncratic volatility may
increase credit spreads through a risk premium component, in addition to the impact on
                                         d .
default probability pbi,t and tail risk LGD it


   Our panel regression results are consistent with the idea that the average spread of a
portfolio of single-stock pseudo bonds is higher than the spread on SPX pseudo bonds because
  17
    In addition to the market model, we also used the Fama French three-factor model to compute idiosyn-
cratic volatility and found essentially the same results.


                                                  16
idiosyncratic risk impacts spreads over and beyond how they impact default probabilities
and loss-given-default. Indeed, we find that the average credit spreads on HY single-stock
pseudo bonds are strongly affected by the ratio of idiosyncratic volatility to total volatility,
Rt = Average IdioVolt /Average TotalVolt, as shown in the following time-series regression:

   Single-Stock Pseudo SpreadHY
                             t       = 0.71 + 0.65 × SPX Pseudo SpreadHY
                                                                      t  + 0.04 Rt + εt
                                         (0.54) (9.70)                            (2.40)


   In other words, the average spread of the HY single-stock pseudo bonds is strongly
dependent on the average spread of the HY SPX pseudo bonds, but also on the ratio of
idiosyncratic volatility vis-a-vis total volatility. A higher fraction of idiosyncratic risk relative
to total risk thus is associated with higher average credit spreads. The R2 of the regression
is 67.4%.

   To gauge the importance of idiosyncratic risk, we run a regression of the difference in the
average single-stock HY spreads and the average HY SPX spread on the ratio of idiosyncratic
volatility to total volatility Rt and find a significant slope coefficient (t-stat = 2.62) and
R2 = 27%. Idiosyncratic risk thus explains about 27% of the variation of the excess credit
spreads on HY single-stock pseudo bonds when compared to HY SPX bonds. Interestingly,
the idiosyncratic volatility ratio Rt declined substantially during the 2008 – 2009 financial
crisis, when both SPX and single-stock pseudo spreads skyrocketed. The difference between
the two, however, dropped, highlighting that the dramatic increases in credit spreads during
the crisis were not likely driven by idiosyncratic risk and more likely due to a rise in aggregate
risk and risk premia. Finally, we do not find a comparable relation for IG pseudo bonds,
which is consistent with the results about Aaa/Aa-rated bonds in Table 3. Overall, our
results suggest that idiosyncratic asset risk is an important determinant of average corporate
credit spreads and the cost of corporate debt capital.

   We end this section with a tantalizing interpretation of our empirical results – namely,
the impact of “diversification” on the cost of debt for a conglomerate as compared to a
portfolio of single-segment firms. Taking the SPX as the “conglomerate” and the single
stocks as single-segment firms, ceteris paribus, option prices suggest that we should see
a diversification premium in the cost of debt. This simple interpretation of our results
side-steps all the empirical issues concerning the endogeneity of leverage (i.e., safer, more
diversified conglomerates may lever more) and shows that a diversification premium arises as
idiosyncratic uncertainty commands a risk premium on its own (see e.g., Villalonga (2004)).




                                                 17
4.      Pseudo Spreads and Economic Growth

We now exploit our pseudo bonds to discuss and shed further light on recent findings in
the empirical macro-finance literature about the relation between credit spreads and future
economic growth. In an important recent paper, Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) (GZ) show
that a measure of the credit spread – the “GZ spread” – strongly predicts future economic
growth. In addition, a measure of bond mispricing – the excess bond premium – also inde-
pendently predicts future economic growth. We now show that our pseudo credit spreads
predict future economic growth as well as the GZ spreads.


4.1.     Pseudo Credit Spread Indices

To compare our results to GZ spreads, we use our previous results to build two simple pseudo
spread indices, one for single-name spreads and the other for SPX spreads. We calculate the
pseudo spread index as the equally weighted average of IG and HY pseudo spreads in Table
1 for pseudo bond maturities of 183, 365 and 730 days. The equal weighting of IG and HY
indices enables us to compute the value of an index with equal representation of IG and HY
pseudo firms, which is important because our options data are far more widely available for
options close-to-the-money and hence for HY pseudo firms.

     Panel A of Figure 5 plots the time series of the GZ spread as compared to the SPX and
single-stock pseudo spread indices. As shown, the three series are very highly correlated,
with the SPX pseudo bond series mostly lying on top of the GZ spread series. The single-
stock pseudo spread is a bit higher in some parts of the sample, which is not surprising given
the discussion in Section 3.3.

     Following GZ, we run the following predictive regression
                  p
                  X
  ∆h Yt+h = α +         βi ∆Yt−i + γ1 Pseudo Spreadt + γ2 GZ Spreadt + Controls t + εt+h   (4)
                  i=1

where ∆h is the “h-period” lag operator, and the number of lags p is determined by the Akaike
Information Criterion. We only insert the component of the GZ Spreadt that is orthogonal to
the Pseudo Spreadt whenever the latter is included in the regression. Our control variables
are the term spread, the real Federal Funds rate, and the option-implied “fear index” as
measured by the CBOE’s VIX index, which has been shown to be an important predictor
of future economic growth. This latter control is especially important in our specification
because pseudo spreads are based on option prices and we want to ensure they do not just
pick up the level of uncertainty as reflected by the market generally but rather tail risk.

                                               18
   Table 4 shows that, like the GZ spread, both the single-name (Panel A) and the SPX
pseudo spreads (Panel B) predict future growth. The pseudo spread indices are significant
across all specifications with no controls (besides lags) for payroll growth, unemployment
changes, and industrial production growth. The results are weaker for GDP growth when
using single stocks, and insignificant using SPX pseudo bonds. Adding controls does not
generally affect our inferences, and, in fact, the adjusted R2 increases only marginally. (The
full specification with controls is in Table A9 in the Technical Appendix.)

   To compare our results to the corporate based GZ spread, Table 4 also reports the
results of the predictive regression (4) with GZ spreads as a predicting variable, as well
as its orthogonal component to the pseudo spread index when the latter is also included.
The results show that in most cases, pseudo spreads and GZ spreads have about the same
explanatory power (R2 ) of future economic activity. At the 12-month horizon, however,
the single-stock pseudo spread index has a substantially higher R2 for unemployment and
industrial production growth (with no controls) and for industrial production growth and
GDP growth (with controls).

   At the three month horizon, moreover, the orthogonalized component of the GZ spread
does not enter significantly in most specifications, showing that GZ spread does not seem
to add information to the pseudo spreads. (The converse is also true.) At the 12-month
horizon, however, the orthogonalized component of GZ spread enters significantly, and the
R2 increases substantially compared to the case in which either only the pseudo spread or
the GZ spread is used in the regression. This increase in R2 at the 12-month horizon when
both indices are included indicates that the option-based and the corporate-based spreads
do not exactly capture the same frequency of variation of future economic activity, and they
reinforce each other in the predictive regression. Indeed, Panel A of Figure 5 suggests that
pseudo spreads move at a slightly higher frequency than the GZ spread, which shows that
GZ spreads are likely related to lower-frequency shifts in the macro economy.18

   Tables A10 and A11 in the Technical Appendix show the results in the two subsamples
before and after June 2005. Although the SPX pseudo spreads occasionally loses significance
in the first subsample when all controls are used in the regression, both the GZ spread and
the single-name pseudo spreads are mostly significant across the two subsamples. The special
environment of the 2007 - 2009 financial crisis does not seem to be driving the results, but
there is a difference between SPX spreads and single-name spreads, as we further comment
in Section 4.3.
  18
    Indeed, the AR(1) and AR(12) coefficients of GZ spreads are 0.97 and 0.45, respectively, against the
0.82 and 0.12 of single-stock pseudo spreads, and 0.88 and 0.36 of SPX spreads, respectively.



                                                  19
4.2.     Expected Loss and Risk Premium

The simplicity of the payoff structure of our pseudo bonds enables us to decompose the
pseudo credit spread into an “expected loss” and a residual “risk premium” and thus gauge
the source of the predictability of (pseudo) credit spreads onto future economic activity.
More specifically, for each pseudo bond i at time t with maturity T = t + τ we can use
information up to t to estimate the expected loss:

                                                               d (τ ) × K
                        Expected Lossit (K, T ) = pbit (τ ) × LGD it


                                                                      d (τ ) is the estimated ex
where pbit (τ ) is the estimated ex ante probability of default, and LGD it

ante percent loss-given-default (see Section 2.2.). Because the expected payoff of the pseudo
bond is K − Expected Lossit (K, T ), we can compute the actuarially fair, non-risk-adjusted
value of each pseudo bond as

                       b P (K, T ) = Z
                       B             b (T ) × (K − Expected Loss (K, T ))
                        it            t                         it


where the superscript P indicates that this value is not risk adjusted. The credit spread
           b P (K, T ) thus only reflects the compensation for expected future losses, and we
defined on Bit
refer to this spread just as the “Expected Loss Spread” for short. We can finally compute
the component of the pseudo credit spread that is a risk premium as a residual:

         Pseudo Bond Risk Premiumit = Pseudo Spreadit − Expected Loss Spreadit                       (5)

As for the pseudo spread indices, we construct an equally weighted pseudo risk premium
index as the average of the six indices that we can compute across the two credit qualities
(IG and HY) and the three maturities (183, 365, and 730 days).

   The pseudo risk premium computed above is the analog quantity in our setting of the
excess bond premium introduced by GZ, which in their paper is a measure of “mispricing”
that is embedded into credit spreads.19 Given the simplicity of our pseudo bonds, our
approach allows us to compute a pseudo risk premium in a simple, ex ante fashion. Clearly,
by its very definition and similarly to the GZ excess bond premium, an unusually high
(pseudo) credit spread is interpreted as a high risk premium. Panel B of Figure 5 plots the
three series.
  19
    For each bond i at t, the GZ excess bond premium is given by GZ EBPit = GZ spreadit −
predicted GZ spreadit , where the “predicted GZ spread” is obtained from a panel predictive regression on
a set of predictors run over the whole sample. The EBP index is obtained as the average across firms. In
untabulated results, we find that the GZ EBP also has independent predictive ability in our sample, as in
the original GZ. As in Table 4, the R2 are comparable to those of the pseudo spreads.



                                                   20
   Table 5 shows the results of the same predictive regressions as in Table 4, except that
we now decompose the pseudo spread index into “Pseudo Risk Premium” and “Expected
Loss Spread.” First, the results show that the Expected Loss Spread is strongly significant
across specifications. Because the expected loss spread only depends on ex-ante default
probability and loss-given default but not directly on spreads, this result shows that higher
risk indeed negatively predict future growth. Second, the results also show that, except for
SPX pseudo bonds at the three-month horizon (Panel B, left columns), the Pseudo Risk
Premium exhibits a strong independent predictive ability of future economic growth. In
other words, an unusually high pseudo risk premium predicts a slowdown of future growth.
The last row of each panel also shows that the increase in (adjusted) R2 of adding the
risk premium is rather substantial economically. For instance, at the 12-month horizon for
single-stock spreads, the addition of the risk premium over expected losses increases the R2 by
18%, 20%, 31% and 18% for Payroll Growth, Unemployment Change, Industrial Production
Growth and GDP Growth, respectively.


4.3.    Single-Stock and SPX Pseudo Spreads

The comparison of Panel A and Panel B of Table 4 also suggests that noticeable differences
in predictive power exist between the two pseudo spread indices themselves (recall though
the samples for the two indices are slightly different). Indeed, this is to be expected from
the discussion in Section 3.3., as the single-stock pseudo spread should be more affected by
idiosyncratic tail risk than the SPX index. To investigate the role of idiosyncratic tail risk,
we run the following predictive regressions, whose results are reported in Table 6:
                               p
                               X
             ∆h Yt+h = α +           βi ∆Yt−i + γ1 SPX Spreadt                             (6)
                               i=1
                             +γ2 Pseudo Spread Differencet + Controls t + εt+h             (7)

where the “Pseudo Spread Difference” is either literally the difference between single-stock
and SPX pseudo spreads (i.e. Single-Stock Spreadt − SPX Spreadt ) (Panel A), or the differ-
ence in the spreads’ risk premium components computed in (5) (Panel B).

   The results are illuminating. First, Panel A shows the pseudo spread difference
(Single Stock Spreadt − SPX Spreadt) is strongly significant across specifications. The addi-
tion of this spread difference, moreover, substantially increases the R2 of the SPX predictive
regressions, as shown in the last line of the panel. For instance, at the 12-month horizon
including the pseudo spread difference increases the R2 by 13% for Payroll Growth, 14% for
Unemployment Change, 19% for Industrial Production, and 7% for GDP growth. Given the

                                               21
interpretation offered in Section 3.3. for the difference in average single stock pseudo spreads
and SPX spread, it appears that priced idiosyncratic tail risk is a strong predictor of future
economic activity.

   Panel B presents the results from a comparable regression, but with the difference in
pseudo-risk premia computed as in (5). The risk premium difference also enters strongly
significant in the regression, although the improvement in R2 is not as high as with the
spread. For instance, at the 12-month horizon, the risk premium difference increases the R2
by 8%, 9%, 14%, and 4% for Payroll Growth, Unemployment Change, Industrial Production
Growth, and GDP growth, respectively.

  To shed further light on the source of this predictability, Table A14 in the Technical
Appendix documents that in the first subsample (Jan 1996 - Jun 2005), the pseudo spread
difference is a significant predictor of future growth, but it loses significance in the second
subsample (Jul 2005 - Jun 2015). The SPX spread is instead strongly significant especially
in the second subsample. Given that the second subsample is dominated by the 2007 -
2009 financial crisis, this result is consistent with our findings in Section 3.3. that during
the financial crisis idiosyncratic risk declined substantially, and thus that the variation in
pseudo spreads was mostly due to systematic factors.


4.4.    Intermediary Credit Constraints and Pseudo Bond Spreads

The previous sections show that option-based credit spreads and their risk-premium com-
ponents strongly predict future economic activity. A natural interpretation of this empirical
regularity is that in downturns risk premia increase, which in turn gives rise to higher pseudo
credit spreads through the insurance premia that market participants are willing to pay to
purchase put options. As the converse occurs in expansions, pseudo spreads predict future
growth. The similarity between pseudo bonds and real corporate bonds – both are securities
with large tail risk which pay less in downturns – may suggest that a similar risk-premium
channel explains the predictability of real corporate bonds on future growth (see Table 4).

    In the wake of the financial crisis, the recent literature ascribe the “excessively” high
or low credit spreads to credit supply shocks to financial intermediaries. For instance, GZ
interpret the predictability of the excess bond premium of future economic growth as evi-
dence that a contraction in credit causally and adversely affects economic growth. The risk
premium channel and the credit supply channel need not be in contradiction, however. In-
deed, because option trading is often undertaken by intermediaries and dealers, it is possible


                                              22
that intermediaries’ credit constraints may impact the quoted prices of the put options on
which our pseudo spreads are based. For instance, Chen, Joslin, and Ni (2016) suggest that
increases in put option prices during the financial crisis may be due to financial interme-
diaries purchasing “catastrophe insurance” to hedge the risk of potentially binding credit
constraints in downturns.

   This interpretation of the increase in put option prices resulting from intermediaries’
hedge purchases is of course still consistent with the interpretation of time-varying premia
for tail risk during the business cycle. Indeed, the willingness of intermediaries to purchase
“catastrophe insurance” due to potentially binding credit constraints is akin to the desire
of risk-averse agents to purchase downside insurance because of hightened risk aversion.
Either way, higher credit spreads reflect an increase in the demand for compensation to bear
relatively higher perceived downside risk (i.e. tail risk.) The additional insight is that this
tail insurance risk premium may arise from credit supply contractions and not simply from
changes in investor risk aversion that is independent of credit supply considerations.

     To further support the risk premium argument, we see in Figure 5 that option-based
credit spreads declined substantially before the 2008 financial crisis. Such credit spread com-
pressions are interpreted in some of the literature as credit market being “frothy” and are
a precursor to a deep recession (see, e.g., Krishnamurthy and Muir (2016)). Our results
indicate that pseudo bond spreads were also low before the credit crisis and it is unclear why
excessive credit supply would affect the value of traded put options. Declines in market par-
ticipants’ risk aversion or expectations of future losses seem to also be plausible explanations
to the compressed credit spreads, option-based or not.



5.      Extensions

In this section we extend our main results to consider other types of assets that our pseudo
firms may purchase, and to introduce bankruptcy costs.


5.1.     Other Types of Underlying Assets

In this section we consider additional types of assets that pseudo firms may purchase by
issuing zero-coupon bonds and equity. We previewed some of the results in Section 2.5., and
we dig deeper here.



                                              23
   Commodities. Let our pseudo firm purchase a commodity, such as crude oil, financed
by issuing zero coupon bonds and equity. The same argument as in the Introduction implies
that the benchmark value of a zero-coupon bond issued by our pseudo firm is given by
expression (1), but now with a put option on oil, Pbtoil (K, T ), instead of an SPX option,
PbtSP X (K, T ). Options on physical oil do not generally have available data, and so we use
options on light, sweet (a.k.a. West Texas Intermediate) crude oil futures contracts listed
by CME instead. By selecting options with the same expiration dates as the underlying
futures, such options are essentially worth max(K − AT , 0) at maturity, where AT is the
price of physical crude. Although options on futures are American-style, we rely only on
deep out-of-the-money options whose early exercise premia are negligible.

   In addition to oil, we consider corn, soybeans, natural gas, and gold as additional pseudo
firm assets, for which CME futures options have sufficient coverage in the time series and
across strike prices. Although the start dates of the commodity samples range from February
1985 for corn to October 1992 for natural gas, the strike price coverage was insufficient for
us to compute pseudo spreads prior 1995 for HY bonds and before 2000 for IG bonds. Even
then, a large number of missing observation remains in the data.

   Foreign Currencies. Assume that our pseudo firm purchases foreign currency (e.g.
Euros) in the spot market by financing the purchase with zero-coupon bonds and equity. The
values of zero-coupon bonds are given by (1), but with put options on Euros, PbtEuro (K, T ),
instead of SPX options, PbtSP X (K, T ). We obtain currency options data from JPMorgan on
nine currencies (CAD, EUR, NOK, GBP, SEK, CHF, AUD, JPY, NZD), as well as options
on currency futures from CME. The JPMorgan currency options data are only available in
specific buckets of implied volatilities, which suggests that the data are interpolated to some
degree. The available strike prices, moreover, only enable us to compute pseudo bond prices
for very low credit ratings, and even then only starting in 1999 for Caa-, 2001 for B, and 2007
for Ba (the latter only for a brief period). The CME currency futures options data do not
provide sufficient coverage for two-year options to be useful in our main tables, but results
for 1-year CME-based currency pseudo bonds are available in the Technical Appendix. The
sample for CME currency options starts in 1985, but limited strike coverage only allows us
to compute low-rated bond spreads for most of the sample.

   Fixed Income Securities. We also consider a pseudo firm that purchases a fixed-
coupon bond Bt (c, M) with unitary principal, coupon rate c, maturity date M, and a LIBOR-
equivalent credit quality. The pseudo firm finances its purchase of Bt(c, M) by issuing zero-
coupon bonds, also with unitary principal, and a maturity date of T . The asset value of the
pseudo firm at T is AT = BT (c, M). Thus, the payoff of the zero coupon bond issued by the


                                              24
pseudo firm at maturity T is

         Pseudo bond payoff at T = 1 − max(1 − AT , 0) = 1 − max(1 − BT (c, M), 0)

The payoff max(1 − BT (c, M), 0) is the same as the payoff on a payer swaption (i.e., an
option to enter into a swap as the fixed-rate payer) with a unitary notional amount, fixed
swap rate c, maturity T and tenor M − T .20 Thus, the value of the pseudo bond before
maturity is
                                             b (T ) − Pb swap (T, c, M)
                                  b (T, 1) = Z
                                  Bt          t         t

where Pbtswap (T, c, M) is the observable traded value of a payer swaption. By choosing dif-
ferent strike swap rates c we obtain different leverage levels – i.e., lower strike swap rates
correspond to lower values of the underlying bond Bt(c, M). Swaption data are from ICAP
beginning in July 2002.


5.1.1.    Results


Panel A of Table 2 shows that for high credit ratings, the credit spreads of pseudo firms with
assets consisting of commodities, currencies, and fixed income securities are similar to SPX
and single-stock credit spreads, ranging from 0.32% and 0.51%. For lower credit ratings, the
credit spreads of commodity and fixed-income pseudo firms are smaller than those of real
corporate bonds. We discuss why below.

    The time series of credit spreads across asset classes also show a good deal of comovement.
We construct two simple factors for IG and HY pseudo bonds as the average of standardized
pseudo credit spreads across the five asset classes (i.e., SPX, single stocks, commodities,
currencies, and fixed income).21 Regressions of individual IG spreads on the pseudo-spread
factor yield R2 s that range from 52% (fixed income) to 66% (SPX). The comovement is even
higher for HY spreads, with R2 s ranging from 65% (commodities) to 83% (SPX). Given the
different nature of the underlying assets of the pseudo firms, this high level of comovement
is an additional indication of common risk factors (e.g., investor risk aversion to tail risk
independent of asset classes and systemic considerations) affecting credit spreads.22
  20
     We assume the credit quality of the swaption counterparty and underlying swap counterparty are also
LIBOR-equivalent.
  21
     Because of missing observations and different samples, it is difficult to run standard principal component
analysis. The average standardized credit spread is a simple alternative. See the Technical Appendix.
  22
     Recent research has documented a common factor in idiosyncratic volatility (e.g. Herskovic et al. (2016)).
The common comovement of pseudo spreads thus is consistent with our empirical findings in Section 3.3. of
a priced idiosyncratic risk embedded in pseudo spreads.




                                                      25
    Figure 6 plots standardized credit spreads for pseudo bonds with two years to maturity
for IG and HY credit ratings. The comovement across credit spreads with different types of
underlying assets is evident from the figure, especially around the 2008 crisis. This evidence
provides further support that spreads are affected by a common time-varying risk premium
affecting spreads of bonds with different types of collateral.

   To assess the differences in credit spreads across types of assets in more detail, Panel
B of Table 2 shows the loss-given-default of real corporate bonds and pseudo bonds. Real
corporate bonds have around 60% losses on average in case of default. We compute the
loss-given-default of each pseudo bond with ex ante default probability pbi,t (T ) as the average
percentage loss (Ki − Ai,T )/Ki conditional on a default (i.e., Ai,T < Ki .)23 We find that
loss-given-default are between 25% and 50% for single-stock pseudo firms, between 10% and
15% for SPX pseudo firms, between 11% and 17% for commodities pseudo firms, around 5%
for currency pseudo firms, and around 2.4% for fixed-income pseudo firms. These results
are consistent with the fact that commodities, currencies, and fixed-income securities have
much thinner tails than single stocks and the SPX index, which explains the difference in
credit spreads shown in Panel A.


5.2.     Bankruptcy Costs and Loss Given Default

As shown in Panel B of Table 2, the average loss-given-default of corporate bonds are higher
than the loss-given-default of pseudo bonds. As a second extension, we now introduce
bankruptcy costs and find a portfolio of put options to yield loss-given-default of pseudo
bonds closer to those of real bonds.

    Specifically, let κi be pseudo firm i’s bankruptcy costs. Then, the payoff at T of the
pseudo bond with face value K can be written as

              Bond payoff at T = K − (1 − κi ) max (K − Ai,T , 0) − κi K 1Ai,T <K

where 1Ai,T <K is the indicator function for default, Ai,T < K. That is, the payoff to bond
holders is K if there is no default, but it is (1 − κi )Ai,T in case of default. Thus, the
loss-given-default LGD (as a fraction of principal) is LGD(κi ) = κi Ai,T /K.

    A portfolio of options can approximate the payoff with bankruptcy costs. For example,
for a pseudo firm purchasing the SPX index, the Technical Appendix shows that we can
  23
    We do not need options to do these calculations, and therefore we use the full 1970 - 2014 sample for
SPX and individual options. For other options, we use the sample of underlying asset prices corresponding
to the sample period of option data, as the long time-series of underlying assets are not always available.


                                                    26
approximate the pseudo bond value by

     b (T, K) = K Z
                  b (T ) − (1 − κ )Pb SP X (K, T ) − κ K   PbtSP X (K, T ) − PbtSP X (K 0 , T )
     Bt            t             i   t                i                                           (8)
                                                                       K − K0
where K 0 is the closest strike price below the target strike price K.

     For every t, we use historical data to compute κi on an ex ante basis to match loss-given-
default reported by Moody’s. We take into account business cycle variations in loss-given-
default by computing different κi estimates depending on whether month t is during a boom
or recession. The full methodology is laid out in Technical Appendix C.

     Panels C and D of Table 2 show the results. First, Panel D shows that all of the ex
post realized loss-given-default of pseudo firms are now similar to the corporate loss-given-
default shown in the second column. Our ex ante methodology to compute bankruptcy costs
thus works well. Second, Panel C shows that pseudo spreads are larger with than without
bankruptcy costs (which is intuitive) and are somewhat larger than the credit spreads of real
corporate bonds.



6.       Conclusions

In this paper we have introduced hypothetical “pseudo firms” whose assets and liabilities are
fully observable and thus provide an ideal testing ground to analyze issues related to credit
risk, ranging from the size of credit spreads on defaultable bonds to the impact of credit
supply shocks on credit spreads. Our methodology utilizes traded options to quantify the
implications of the original Merton (1974) insight that the value of defaultable debt can be
computed as the value of risk-free zero-coupon debt minus the value of a put option on the
firm’s assets. By imagining that hypothetical pseudo firms issue debt and equity securities
to finance their purchases of underlying traded assets – such as the SPX portfolio, individual
firms’ stocks, commodities, foreign currencies, and fixed income securities, – we study the
empirical properties of pseudo bonds issued by such firms and the pseudo spreads on such
bonds.

   Our empirical results show that, like corporate bond spreads, pseudo spreads are large,
countercyclical, and that higher pseudo spread values predict lower future economic growth.
The data thus indicate a high degree of integration between corporate bond and options
markets, and the existence of similar risk premia that investors require to bear the risk of
tail events. We also find that over-prediction of default probabilities and market illiquidity
are unlikely to be the main explanations for observed large credit spreads. Instead, we find

                                               27
that idiosyncratic asset volatility positively impacts average spreads over and beyond their
theoretical impact on default probabilities and loss-given-default.

   Our option-based approach offers a novel model-free methodology to study credit risk
in (almost) controlled environments with a large number of potential applications.24 The
environment is controlled because we can choose the characteristics of pseudo firms, including
their capital structure, leverage, the type and riskiness of underlying assets, and so on. We
can therefore empirically study the credit risk of such pseudo firms without worrying about
endogenous capital structure, corporate frictions, and the like. Such corporate frictions can
still be investigated even with pseudo firms, however, as they can be introduced exactly as
they are introduced in any Merton-type model. For instance, in addition to bankruptcy costs
as in Section 5.2., it is possible to add taxes and study optimal capital structure. But the
investigation of such important additional applications necessitates another paper.




  24
    Some of these applications of pseudo firms are contained on the web site “Credit Risk Laboratory”
available at http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/pietro.veronesi/research/Credit_Risk_Lab/


                                                 28
                           Figure 1: Two SPX Pseudo Bonds




Notes: Panel A reports the no-arbitrage prices of two SPX pseudo bonds from June 2007 to
November 2009 as percent of principal. The pseudo bonds are issued by two pseudo firms,
one with low leverage (black line) and one with high leverage (dark grey line). The figure also
reports the values of assets of both firms, namely, the SPX index (light grey line). Panel B
reports the market leverage of the two pseudo firms Li,s = Bbi,t /At , in percentage terms. Panel
C reports the implied credit spread of the two pseudo bonds in Panel A, while Panel D reports
their ex ante default probabilities, computed from the historical empirical distribution of SPX
returns.




                                               29
               Figure 2: Credit Spreads of Two-Year Pseudo Bonds




Notes: Credit spreads are shown for corporate bonds, single-stock pseudo bonds, SPX pseudo
bonds, and implied by the lognormal Merton model (in Panel A). For corporate bonds, the
credit ratings are from Moody’s. For pseudo bonds, the credit ratings are imputed by comparing
their ex ante default probabilities to Moody’s default frequencies in booms and in recessions.
For each pseudo bond, we compute its default probability from the empirical distribution of
asset returns. For the Merton model, the default probability is obtained from its implied
lognormal distribution. For corporate spreads, book leverage is defined as (book value of debt)
/ (book value of debt plus market equity). For pseudo bonds, book value of debt is defined
as (face value of debt)/(face value of debt plus pseudo market equity), where market equity
equals the value of a call option. The sample is 1990 – 2015 for SPX pseudo bonds and real
corporate bonds, and 1996 – 2015 for single-stock pseudo bonds.
                                              30
Figure 3: Credit Spreads of Two-Year Pseudo and Corporate Bonds Over Time




Notes: Credit spreads are shown for two-year pseudo and corporate bonds. Pseudo bonds are
constructed from risk-free debt minus put options on individual stocks, or put options on SPX
index. Investment Grade (IG) and High Yield (HY) pseudo credit ratings of pseudo bonds are
assigned based on their ex ante default probabilities computed from the empirical distribution
of asset returns. Corporate bond data are from the Lehman Brothers Fixed Income Database,
the Mergent FISD/NAIC Database, TRACE and DataStream. IG and HY credit ratings of
corporate bonds are from Moody’s. IG and HY CDX indices are from Markit. Shaded vertical
bars denote NBER-dated recessions. The data frequency is monthly from January 1990 to July
2015 for corporate and SPX pseudo bonds, but the sample starts in January 1996 for single-
stock pseudo bonds, in November 2001 for CDX.HY index, and in April 2003 for CDX.IG
index.




                                             31
          Figure 4: Ex Ante Default Probabilities versus Ex Post Default Frequencies

                                        Panel A. Single−Stock Pseudo Bonds
          40
                   Ex ante def. prob.
                   Ex post def. prob.
          30       95% C.I.
Percent




          20


          10


           0
               0         5              10               15               20          25             30
                                        Ex ante default probability (percent)

                                           Panel B. SPX Pseudo Bonds
          40
                   Ex ante def. prob.
                   Ex post def. prob.
          30       95% C.I.
Percent




          20


          10


           0
               0         5              10               15               20          25             30
                                        Ex ante default probability (percent)

     Notes: Panel A plots the estimated ex post default frequencies of pseudo bonds based on single-
     stock (circles) together with their 95% confidence intervals (dotted lines) against the 45 degree
     line, which represent the ex ante default probability for each of the pseudo bonds. The sample
     is 1970 to 2014. Panel B plots the same quantities for SPX pseudo bonds.




                                                      32
                         Figure 5: GZ versus Pseudo Spreads




Notes: Panel A plots the time series of the GZ spread and the pseudo spread indices computed
from single stocks or the SPX index. The GZ spread is from Gilchrist and Zakajreks (2012,
updated series). Panel B plots the time series of GZ excess bond premium (EBP) and the
pseudo bond risk premia. The GZ EBP equals the GZ spread minus the in-sample predicted
spread. The pseudo risk premium equals the pseudo spread minus the “expected loss spread,”
an ex ante estimate of the actuarialy fair compensation for expected losses. The pseudo spread
index and pseudo risk premium index are are computed as the equally weighted average of
IG and HY pseudo bond spreads and pseudo risk premia for pseudo bonds with maturities
of 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years (six series). The pseudo bonds’ credit ratings are imputed
by comparing their ex ante default probabilities to Moody’s default frequencies in booms and
in recessions. For each pseudo bond, we compute its default probability from the empirical
distribution of asset returns. The sample is 1990 – 2015 for SPX pseudo bonds and real
corporate bonds, and 1996 – 2015 for single-stock
                                              33 pseudo bonds.
                   Figure 6: The Comovement of Pseudo Spreads




Notes: The four panels in this figure plot the standardized average credit spreads of pseudo
firms with different types of assets and credit rating categories (IG and HY). The type of assets
underlying the pseudo firms are the (i) the SPX index; (ii) single stocks; (iii) commodities; (iv)
foreign exchange (CME dataset); (v) foreign exchange (JPM dataset); and (vi) fixed-income,
through swaptions. The sample is January 1996 to August 2014, except for JP Morgan FX
which begins in January 1999, and fixed income, which begins in July 2002.




                                               34
                          Table 1: Pseudo and Corporate Bonds

Credit spreads and illiquidity measures are shown for pseudo bonds (Panels A and B), and cor-
porate bonds (Panel C). Pseudo bonds are constructed as risk-free debt minus put options on
individual stocks (Panel A) or on the SPX index (Panel B). Pseudo credit ratings are assigned
based on the pseudo bonds’ ex ante default probabilities, computed from the empirical distribu-
tion of asset returns. “B/A” is the bid-ask spread for each pseudo bond portfolio, computed as
                                                    Ask     Bid    M id
the kernel-weighted average of bid-ask spreads (Bi,t     − Bi,t )/Bi,t  . “Roll” is the Roll (1984)
illiquidity measure for pseudo
                         q     bond portfolios, computed as the kernel-weighted average of indi-
vidual bonds’ measures −Covt (∆pBid→Ask
                                      i,t,d   , ∆pAsk→Bid
                                                   i,t,d+1  ) from daily prices. Corporate bonds
are both callable and non-callable bonds, except for 30 and 91 days for which we use commercial
paper. Callable bonds’ spreads are adjusted for the option to call as in Gilchrist and Zakrajsek
(2012). The Roll illiquidity measure for corporateqbond portfolios is the value-weighted aver-
age of individual bonds’ measures, computed as 2 −Covt (∆pTi,t,d   ransaction
                                                                              , ∆pTi,t,d+1
                                                                                     ransaction
                                                                                                ) from
daily prices.

                Credit Spreads (bps)                               2-year Bonds

  Credit           Days to Maturity               Credit Spreads (bps)       Iliquidity Measures
  Rating      30    91 183 365 730                Boom     Recession         B/A (%) Roll (%)

                   Panel A. Single-Stock Pseudo Bonds (Jan 1996 – Jul 2015)

  IG              75 67 74 170                     168         184              1.01        0.34
  HY          392 340 436 577 632                  601         865              1.44        0.50

  Aaa/Aa         42 49 68                           66         119              0.86        0.29
  A/Baa          67 74 171                         169         184              1.01        0.34
  Ba     148 109 113 147 308                       303         352              1.14        0.38
  B      274 217 258 372 514                       489         697              1.31        0.46
  Caa-   447 425 570 800 862                       812         1234             1.48        0.57

                       Panel B. SPX Pseudo Bonds (Jan 1990 – Jul 2015)

  IG           52 45 53 59 90                       86         118              0.30        0.10
  HY          226 250 285 294 362                  319         675              0.34        0.16

  Aaa/Aa         38 32 42                           41          53              0.29        0.09
  A/Baa          82 81 119                         113         172              0.33        0.11
  Ba     187 91 140 162 209                        192         330              0.34        0.12
  B      178 195 246 266 325                       299         522              0.34        0.14
  Caa-   398 394 401 426 496                       442         881              0.33        0.18

                         Panel C. Corporate Bonds (Jan 1990 – Jul 2015)

  IG          61    60    103 107 115               98         237                          1.10
  HY                      334 389 452              421         674                          1.97

  Aaa/Aa      29    27    47    57     71           62         135                          0.85
  A/Baa       65    64    112   119   121          103         250                          1.18
  Ba                      226   252   293          253         566                          1.77
  B                       418   469   512          486         703                          2.15
  Caa-                    761   978   956          936         1181                         3.15
                                                 35
     Table 2: Types of Assets, Loss-Given-Default, and Bankruptcy Costs

Credit spreads and losses-given-defaults (LGD) are shown for corporate bonds and pseudo
bonds. Pseudo bonds are constructed from a portfolio of risk-free debt minus put options on
the SPX index (column “SPX”), individual stocks (column “Single Stocks”), individual stocks
for underlying firms with negligible leverage (column “Low Leverage”), commodity futures (col-
umn “Commodities”), foreign currency (column “Currencies”), and swaptions (column “Fixed
Income”). Pseudo credit ratings of pseudo bonds are assigned based on the pseudo bond ex ante
default probability, i.e. the probability the put option is in-the-money at maturity. In Panel B
the LGDs are computed from the empirical distributions of asset returns. Panel C and D report
credit spreads and ex post LGDs for pseudo bonds that contain bankruptcy costs calibrated to
match corporate LGDs. In this case, pseudo bonds are constructed from a portfolio of risk-free
debt, put options, and digital put options, the latter approximated from traded put options.
Corporate bonds have times to maturity between 1.5 and 2.5 years. LGDs for corporate bonds
are from Moody’s. Sample periods vary – i.e., Corporate and SPX: 1/1990 to 7/2015; single
stocks: 1/1996 to 7/2015; commodities: mid 1980s to 2/2015; Foreign currencies: 1/1999 to
12/2014; Swaptions: 7/2002 to 12/2014.

  Credit     Corporate      Single    SPX     Un-levered   Commodities    Currencies    Fixed
  Rating                    Stock              Equity                                  Income

                            Panel A: Credit Spreads across Types of Assets (bps)

  Aaa/Aa         71          68        42       199             32             51        33
  A/Baa         121          171       119      297             70             52        73
  Ba            293          308       209      468            147             51        87
  B             512          514       325      728            263             87       159
  Caa-          956          862       496      1069           435            175       278

                                     Panel B: Ex Post Loss-given-default(%)

  Aaa/Aa        61.0         49.6      10.2      49.6          10.9
  A/Baa         57.0         44.7      10.2      43.0          12.1
  Ba            59.0         32.0      14.9      31.4          15.5           3.6       1.3
  B             56.0         27.3      15.1      27.4          17.0           5.5       2.4
  Caa-          63.0         25.0      18.0      25.1          15.4           8.0       4.0

                           Panel C: Credit Spreads with Bankruptcy Costs (bps)

  Aaa/Aa         71                    66       228           121                       238
  A/Baa         121          486       216      698           207                       436
  Ba            293          845       400      1036          396             544       627
  B             512          1149      668      1456          942             641       1085
  Caa-          956          1727     1121      1984          1513            953       1789

                       Panel D: Ex Post Loss-given-default with Bankruptcy Costs (%)

  Aaa/Aa        61.0         69.2      64.4      67.6
  A/Baa         57.0         57.8      60.1      52.8          59.5
  Ba            59.0         58.7      60.8      56.3          59.0           58.8      58.8
  B             56.0         54.0      58.1      52.0          55.8           56.1      55.4
  Caa-          63.0         60.3      65.6      58.7          62.3           63.2      62.5

                                                 36
            Table 3: Idiosyncratic Asset Volatility and Credit Spreads

This table shows the impact of idiosyncratic asset volatility on pseudo spreads. For each time
t, we first sort pseudo bonds according to their pseudo credit rating, and then according to
the idiosyncratic volatility of pseudo-firm assets (individual stocks). Idiosyncratic volatility is
computed from the residuals of a market model regression. Panel A reports the average credit
spreads for each credit rating/volatility bin, while Panels B and C report the average leverage
K/A and the average loss given default (LGD) for each credit rating/volatility combination,
respectively. The LGD for each pseudo bond is computed on an ex ante basis from the empirical
distribution of asset returns. The sample is January 1996 to July 2015.


           A. Average Credit Spread             B. Average K/S            C. Loss Given Default

Credit      Idiosyncratic Volatility        Idiosyncratic Volatility      Idiosyncratic Volatility
Rating     Low Medium         High          Low Medium High               Low Medium High

Aaa/Aa     85        57          63         0.51      0.44     0.37       0.35     0.32      0.32
A/Baa      135       188        205         0.53      0.54     0.49       0.40     0.44      0.49
Ba         233       306        395         0.65      0.63     0.59       0.28     0.32      0.38
B          436       497        610         0.80      0.76     0.71       0.25     0.30      0.36
Caa-       798       836        946         0.97      0.93     0.87       0.25     0.29      0.36




                                                37
                   Table 4: Pseudo Spreads and Future Economic Growth

     This table reports the results of the following predictive regression:
                          p
                          X
          ∆h Yt+h = α +         βi ∆Yt−i + γ1 Pseudo Spreadt + γ2 GZ Spreadt + Controls t + εt+h
                          i=1

     where ∆h is the “h-period” lag operator, Pseudo Spreadt is the option-based pseudo spread
     index, GZ Spreadt is Gilchrist Zakrajsek (2012) spread, or its orthogonal component to the
     Pseudo Spreadt when the latter is in the same regression, and “Controls” include the term
     spread, the real Federal Funds rate, and the option-implied “fear gauge” VIX. The number
     of lags p is determined by the Akaike Information Criterion. The pseudo spread is computed
     separately for SPX pseudo bonds and single-stock pseudo bonds, and for each case reflects the
     equally weighted average of HY and IG spreads with 6-months, 1-year, and 2-year maturities
     (6 series). The prediction horizon is either h = 3 months or h = 12 months. The predicted
     economic variables are in the title of each panel. Frequency is monthly except for Panel D, where
     it is quarterly. All regression coefficients are multiplied by 100. Hodrick-adjusted t-statistics
     are in parenthesis.


                     Panel A: Single Stocks Pseudo Spreads (January 1996 to June 2015)

                                             A1: Payroll Growth
                               h = 3 months                                   h= 12 months
Pseudo Spread -0.18            -0.22 -0.19             -0.28    -0.78          -0.91 -1.11             -1.51
t-stat        (-3.05)         (-2.91) (-3.13)         (-3.47) (-4.32)         (-4.87) (-4.32)         (-5.28)
GZ Spread              -0.28 -0.19             -0.33 -0.24             -1.11 -0.57             -1.66 -1.05
t-stat                (-2.79) (-1.71)         (-3.33) (-2.26)         (-5.06) (-3.20)         (-5.80) (-5.27)
Controls         No      No     No      Yes     Yes     Yes      No      No      No     Yes     Yes     Yes
R2              0.80    0.82    0.83    0.81    0.83    0.84    0.64    0.63    0.66    0.71    0.70    0.77

                                   A2: Unemployment Rate Change
Pseudo Spread 13.26         15.36 14.41          21.29    51.38        52.94 75.48          97.03
t-stat        (2.70)        (2.73) (2.74)        (3.45)  (3.97)        (3.95) (3.97)        (4.58)
GZ Spread            17.81 11.58           24.78 20.11          51.14 8.85           98.06 61.30
t-stat               (2.64) (1.66)        (3.62) (2.81)         (3.62) (0.60)        (4.85) (3.62)
Controls        No     No     No     Yes    Yes   Yes       No    No     No    Yes    Yes    Yes
R2             0.50   0.51   0.53   0.51   0.57   0.58     0.46  0.37   0.46   0.60   0.59   0.67

                                     A3: Industrial Production Growth
Pseudo Spread -0.76            -0.89 -0.99             -1.37   -2.59               -2.61 -4.40               -5.48
t-stat        (-3.62)         (-3.68) (-3.70)         (-4.53) (-3.78)             (-3.95) (-3.98)           (-4.55)
GZ Spread              -0.97 -0.52             -1.29 -0.85             -2.10       -0.10           -4.25     -2.34
t-stat                (-3.44) (-1.72)         (-4.49) (-3.03)         (-3.58)     (-0.15)         (-4.65)   (-3.11)
Controls         No      No     No      Yes     Yes     Yes      No      No          No     Yes     Yes       Yes
R2              0.55    0.54    0.58    0.59    0.57    0.64    0.30    0.19        0.29    0.45    0.30      0.49

                                              A4: GDP Growth
Pseudo Spread -0.21            -0.22 -0.44              -0.54   -0.52           -0.48 -1.38             -1.63
t-stat        (-1.86)         (-2.08) (-2.13)          (-2.62) (-2.07)         (-2.01) (-3.26)         (-3.45)
GZ Spread              -0.16 -0.02              -0.39 -0.20             -0.28 0.17              -1.14 -0.54
t-stat                (-1.89) (-0.12)          (-2.68) (-1.31)         (-1.19) (0.46)          (-2.88) (-1.39)
Controls         No      No     No      Yes      Yes     Yes      No      No      No     Yes     Yes     Yes
R2              0.20    0.16    0.18    0.29     0.22    0.31    0.14    0.10    0.13    0.35    0.24    0.36
                                                     38
               Table 4: (cntd.) Pseudo Spreads and Future Economic Growth



                         Panel B: SPX Pseudo Spreads (January 1990 to June 2015)

                                             B1: Payroll Growth
                               h = 3 months                                   h= 12 months
Pseudo Spread -0.12            -0.14 -0.16             -0.25    -0.56          -0.67 -0.99             -1.48
t-stat        (-2.82)         (-2.66) (-2.49)         (-3.11) (-3.94)         (-4.13) (-3.11)         (-3.73)
GZ Spread              -0.16 -0.11             -0.17 -0.16             -0.77 -0.54             -1.02 -0.91
t-stat                (-2.24) (-1.49)         (-2.18) (-1.96)         (-4.10) (-3.09)         (-4.10) (-3.96)
Controls         No      No     No      Yes     Yes     Yes      No      No      No     Yes     Yes     Yes
R2              0.74    0.75    0.76    0.75    0.76    0.78    0.54    0.56    0.57    0.61    0.63    0.68

                                   B2: Unemployment Rate Change
Pseudo Spread 9.71          10.59 12.97          21.10    34.32        36.32 72.65          106.34
t-stat        (2.51)        (2.48) (2.26)        (2.96)  (3.14)        (3.11) (3.06)        (3.67)
GZ Spread            11.24 7.36            16.00 14.79          34.58 17.44          68.97 61.77
t-stat               (2.18) (1.45)        (2.71) (2.54)         (2.67) (1.36)        (3.77) (3.58)
Controls        No     No     No     Yes    Yes   Yes       No    No     No    Yes    Yes    Yes
R2             0.42   0.42   0.44   0.44   0.47   0.50     0.33  0.32   0.34   0.48   0.51   0.59

                                     B3: Industrial Production Growth
Pseudo Spread -0.52            -0.62 -0.84             -1.37   -1.62             -1.84 -4.33               -6.23
t-stat        (-3.28)         (-3.43) (-2.62)         (-3.55) (-3.09)           (-3.33) (-3.00)           (-3.49)
GZ Spread              -0.70 -0.51             -0.82 -0.79             -2.00     -1.34           -3.14     -2.97
t-stat                (-3.23) (-2.25)         (-3.27) (-3.20)         (-3.53)   (-2.41)         (-3.70)   (-3.63)
Controls         No      No     No      Yes     Yes     Yes      No      No        No     Yes     Yes       Yes
R2              0.39    0.42    0.43    0.42    0.43    0.48    0.18    0.19      0.21    0.31    0.27      0.41

                                              B4: GDP Growth
Pseudo Spread -0.10            -0.12 -0.39              -0.52   -0.38           -0.41 -1.66                -2.11
t-stat        (-1.23)         (-1.44) (-1.20)          (-1.48) (-1.60)         (-1.84) (-2.41)            (-2.75)
GZ Spread              -0.13 -0.10              -0.23 -0.21             -0.44 -0.30             -0.79      -0.69
t-stat                (-1.93) (-1.01)          (-1.94) (-1.87)         (-2.32) (-1.09)         (-2.26)    (-2.03)
Controls         No      No     No      Yes      Yes     Yes      No      No      No     Yes     Yes        Yes
R2              0.13    0.13    0.13    0.17     0.14    0.19    0.09    0.10    0.09    0.29    0.19       0.32




                                                  39
                    Table 5: Pseudo Bond Expected Losses and Risk Premia
This table reports the results of the following predictive regression:
                      p
                      X
      ∆h Yt+h = α +         βi ∆Yt−i + γ1 Expected Loss Spreadt + γ2 Risk Premiumt + Controls t + εt+h
                      i=1

where ∆h is the “h-period” lag operator, Expected Loss Spreadt is the index of actuarially fair, non-risk ad-
justed pseudo spread to compensate for the expected losses of pseudo bonds, and Pseudo Risk Premiumt is
the residual risk premium of individual pseudo bonds, given by Risk Premiumit = Pseudo Credit Spreadit −
Expected Loss Spreadit . “Controls” include the term spread, the real Federal Funds rate, and the option-
implied “fear gauge” VIX. The number of lags p is determined by the Akaike Information Criterion. The
Expected Loss Spreadit (Pseudo Risk Premiumit ) is computed separately for single-stock pseudo bonds
(Panel A) and SPX pseudo bonds (Panel B), and for each case, it equals the equally weighted average
of HY and IG pseudo bonds with 6-months, 1-year, and 2-year maturities (6 series). ∆R2 is the increment
in the (adjusted) R2 from including the Risk Premiumt in the regression. The prediction horizon is either
h = 3 month or h = 12 months. The predicted economic variables are payroll growth (PAY), unemployment
rate changes (UNEMP), industrial production growth (IPG), and real GDP growth (GDP). Frequency is
monthly except for GDP growth, where it is quarterly. All regression coefficients are multiplied by 100.
Hodrick-adjusted t-statistics are in parenthesis. The sample is January 1990 to June 2015 for SPX pseudo
spreads, and January 1996 to June 2015 for single stocks pseudo spreads.


                               Panel A: Single Stocks (January 1996 - June 2015)
                                         h = 3 months                            h = 12 months
                              PAY     UNEMP        IPG     GDP          PAY    UNEMP       IPG         GDP
 Expected Loss Spread         -0.23     19.31      -1.02   -0.47        -1.10    78.39    -3.97        -1.41
 t-stat                      (-3.08)    (2.99)    (-2.89) (-2.14)      (-4.40)   (4.06)  (-3.78)      (-3.85)
 Pseudo Risk Premium          -0.18     11.74      -0.98   -0.43        -1.11    73.95    -4.54        -1.37
 t-stat                      (-2.70)    (2.07)    (-3.63) (-2.03)      (-4.05)   (3.50)  (-3.92)      (-2.86)
 R2                            0.81      0.52       0.59    0.29         0.71     0.60     0.45         0.34
 ∆R2                           0.05      0.05       0.13    0.15         0.18     0.20     0.31         0.18

                                    Panel B: SPX (January   1990 - June 2015)
                                         h = 3 months                               h = 12 months
                              PAY      UNEMP       IPG       GDP          PAY      UNEMP      IPG      GDP
 Expected Loss Spread         -0.50      46.07    -1.69      -0.56        -1.46     134.82   -4.02     -1.45
 t-stat                      (-3.50)    (3.64)   (-2.63)    (-1.49)      (-3.16)    (3.94)  (-2.39)   (-2.49)
 Pseudo Risk Premium          -0.06       2.03    -0.62      -0.33        -0.82     51.86    -4.42     -1.73
 t-stat                      (-0.86)    (0.33)   (-1.89)    (-0.97)      (-2.55)    (2.10)  (-2.98)   (-2.10)
 R2                            0.77       0.51     0.43       0.17         0.61      0.51     0.31      0.28
 ∆R2                           0.00       0.00     0.02       0.03         0.04      0.04     0.13      0.12




                                                      40
                     Table 6: Pseudo Spreads and Future Economic Growth
This table reports the results of the following predictive regression:
                         p
                         X
         ∆h Yt+h = α +         βi ∆Yt−i + γ1 SPX Spreadt + γ2 Spread Differencet + Controls t + εt+h
                         i=1

where ∆h is the “h-period” lag operator, the “Spread Difference” is either the difference in pseudo spreads
between single-stock and SPX indices (Panel A) or the difference in the risk-premium component of these
pseudo spreads (Panel B). “Controls” include the term spread, the real Federal Funds rate, and the option-
implied “fear gauge” VIX. The number of lags p is determined by the Akaike Information Criterion. The
pseudo spread is computed separately for SPX pseudo bonds and single-stock pseudo bonds, and for each
case reflects the equally weighted average of HY and IG spreads with 6-months, 1-year, and 2-year maturities
(6 series). The risk premium component of a pseudo spread is the difference between the pseudo spread and
spread as compensation of expected losses, the latter computed as default probability times the loss-given
default. The risk premium index is then computed as the equally weighted average of HY and IG risk premia
with 6-months, 1-year, and 2-year maturities (6 series). The prediction horizon is either h = 3 months or
h = 12 months. The predicted economic variables are payroll growth (PAY), unemployment rate changes
(UNEMP), industrial production growth (IPG), and real GDP growth (GDP). ∆R2 is the increment in the
(adjusted) R2 from including the Spread Differencet in the regression. Frequency is monthly except for Panel
D, where it is quarterly. All regression coefficients are multiplied by 100. Hodrick-adjusted t-statistics are
in parenthesis. The sample is January 1996 to June 2015.


                                       Panel A: Pseudo Spread Difference
                                                h = 3 months                   h= 12 months
                                        PAY UNEMP IPG GDP                PAY UNEMP IPG GDP
 SPX Spread                             -0.21   18.11   -1.08 -0.53      -1.33 97.91   -5.98 -2.09
 t-stat                                (-2.64) (2.55) (-2.71) (-1.41) (-3.36) (3.30) (-3.18) (-2.71)
 Pseudo Spread Difference               -0.19   12.57   -0.95 -0.40      -0.99 64.27   -3.73 -0.99
 t-stat                                (-2.85) (2.42) (-3.69) (-2.37) (-4.74) (4.06) (-4.34) (-2.52)
 R2                                      0.81    0.52    0.59   0.29     0.72   0.62    0.48   0.40
 ∆R2                                     0.06    0.05    0.12   0.10     0.13   0.14    0.19   0.07

                             Panel B: Pseudo Risk Premium Difference
                                 PAY UNEMP IPG GDP                PAY UNEMP IPG GDP
 SPX Spread                      -0.21    18.07   -1.04 -0.51     -1.38 100.98 -5.99 -2.07
 t-stat                         (-2.58) (2.42) (-2.71) (-1.28) (-3.24) (3.17) (-3.08) (-2.40)
 Pseudo Risk Premium Difference -0.12      8.00   -0.64 -0.22     -0.69 46.92  -2.69 -0.59
 t-stat                         (-2.25) (1.78) (-3.10) (-1.57) (-3.67) (3.05) (-3.51) (-1.57)
 R2                               0.78     0.49    0.54  0.23      0.67  0.57   0.44    0.37
 ∆R2                              0.03     0.03    0.06  0.04      0.08  0.09   0.14    0.04




                                                       41
                                    REFERENCES

Anderson R.W., and S. Sundaresan, 1996, “Design and Valuation of Debt Contracts,” Review
  of Financial Studies, 9, 1, 37–78.
Bhamra, H. S., L.-A. Kuehn, and I. A. Strebulaev, 2010, “The Levered Equity Risk Premium
   and Credit Spreads: A Unified Framework,” Review of Financial Studies.
Bao, J., J. Pan, and J. Wang, 2011. “The illiquidity of Corporate Bonds.” Journal of
   Finance, 66, 911-946.
Black, F., J.C. Cox, 1976, “Valuing corporate securities: some effects of bond indenture
   provisions.” Journal of Finance, 31, 351-67.
Carr Peter, and Liuren Wu, 2011. “A Simple Robust Link Between American Puts and
   Credit Protection.” Review of Financial Studies, 24, 2, 473–505.
Chen, Hui, 2010, “Macroeconomic Conditions and the Puzzles of Credit Spreads and Capital
   Structure,” Journal of Finance, 65(6): 2171-2212
Chen, L., P. Collin-Dufresne, and R. S. Goldstein, 2009, “On the Relation Between the
   Credit Spread Puzzle and the Equity Premium Puzzle,” Review of Financial Studies, 22,
   3367-3409.
Coval, J.D., J.W. Jurek, and E. Stafford, 2009, “Economics Catastrophy Bonds,” American
   Economic Review, 99, 3, 628–666.
Cremers, M., J. Driessen, and P. Maenhout, 2008, “Explaining the level of credit spreads:
   Option-implied jump risk premia in a firm value model.” Review of Financial Studies,
   21, 22092242.
Constantinides, G. M., J. C. Jackwerth, and A. Z. Savov, 2013. “The Puzzle of Index Option
   Returns,” Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 3, 229 – 257.
Culp, C.L., A. van der Merwe, and B. J. Stärkle, 2016. “Single-Name Credit Default Swaps:
   A Review of the Empirical Academic Literature,” New York, N.Y: International Swaps
   and Derivatives Association.
David, A. , 2008. “Inflation Uncertainty, Asset Valuations, and the Credit Spread Puzzle.”
   Review of Financial Studies, 21 (6), 2487-2534.
Duffie, D., 1999, “Credit Swap Valuation,” Financial Analysts Journal, January/February.
Duffie, D., and D. Lando, 2001, “Term Structures of Credit Spreads with Incomplete Ac-
   counting Information,” Econometrica, 69, 633-664.
Feldhütter, Peter and Steven Schaefer, 2016, “The Credit Spread Puzzle - Myth or Reality?”
   Working paper, London Business School.
Frazzini, A. and L. H. Pedersen, 2012, “Embedded Leverage,” Working Paper, NBER.
Gamba A., M. Aranda, and A. Saretto, 2013, “The Agency Credit Spread,” Working Paper,
  SSRN, http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2373423
Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajsek, 2010, “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,”
   American Economic Review, 102(4): 1692 – 1720.

                                            42
Gomes, Joao F. and Lukas Schmid, 2016, “Equilibrium Asset Pricing with Leverage and
  Default,” Working paper.
Heaton, J.B., 2007, “Solvency Tests,” The Business Lawyer 62, 983–1006.
Herskovic, B., B. Kelly, H. Lustig, and S. van Nieuweburgh, 2016, “The Common Factor in
   Idiosyncratic Volatility: Quantitative Asset Pricing Implications” Journal of Financial
   Economics.
Huang, J.Z. and M. Huang, 2012, “How Much of the Corporate-Treasury Yield Spread Is
  Due to Credit Risk?” Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 2, 2, 153–202.
Jarrow, R.A., 2010, “Credit Risk Models,” Annual Review of Financial Economics. 1, 37-68
Krishnamurthy, A. and T. Muir, 2016, “How Credit Cycles across a Financial Crisis,” Work-
   ing paper.
Kuehn, Lars Alexander and Lukas Schmid, 2014, “Investment-Based Corporate Bond Pric-
  ing,” Journal of Finance (forthcoming)
Lando, D., 2004, Credit Risk Modeling: Theory and Applications, Princeton University
   Press.
Leland, H.E., 1994, “Corporate debt value, bond covenants, and optimal capital structure.”
   Journal of Finance, 49, 1213-52.
Leland, H.E., 1998, “Agency Costs, Risk Management, and Capital Structure.” Journal of
   Finance, 53, 4, 1213 – 1243.
Leland, H.E. and K.B. Toft, 1996, “Optimal Capital Structure, Endogenous Bankruptcy,
   and the Term Structure of Credit Spreads,” Journal of Finance, 51, 3, 987 – 1019.
Longstaff, F. A., S. Mithal, and E. Neis, 2005, Corporate Yield Spreads: Default Risk or
   Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default Swap Market, Journal of Finance, 60,
   2213-2253.
Merton, Robert C., 1974 “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest
  Rates.” Journal of Finance, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 449–470
Moody’s, 2014, Moody’s Corporate Defaults and Recovery Rates, 1920 – 2013.
Philippon, T., 2009, “The Bond Market q.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 1011-
   1056.
Roll, R., 1984, “A Simple Implicit Measure of the Effective Bid-Ask Spread in an Efficient
   Market.” Journal of Finance, 39, 1127-1139.
Santos, T. and P. Veronesi, 2016, “Habits and Leverage,” Working Paper.
Sundaresan, S., 2013. “A Review of Mertons Model of the Firms Capital Structure with its
   Wide Applications.” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 5, 21–41.
Villalonga, B. 2004. “Diversification Discount or Premium? New Evidence from the Business
    Information Tracking Series.” Journal of Finance, 59, 479-506.
Zhou, Chunsheng, 2001, “The Term Structure of Credit Spreads With Jump Risk,” Journal
   of Banking and Finance, 25, 2015-2040.

                                           43
