NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NOMINAL WAGE RIGIDITY IN VILLAGE LABOR MARKETS
Supreet Kaur
Working Paper 20770
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20770

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014, Revised November 2017

I am deeply grateful to Lawrence Katz, Michael Kremer, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Rohini
Pande for feedback and encouragement. For helpful discussions, I thank Melissa Adelman,
George Akerlof, Emily Breza, Lorenzo Casaburi, Katie Coffman, Tom Cunningham, Francois
Gerard, Edward Glaeser, Clement Imbert, Seema Jayachandran, Asim Khwaja, David Laibson,
W. Bentley MacLeod, Lauren Merrill, Emi Nakamura, Miikka Rokkanen, Frank Schilbach,
Heather Schofield, Jon Steinsson, Dmitry Taubinsky, Laura Trucco, Eric Verhoogen, and
numerous seminar and conference participants. I thank Prasanta Nayak for outstanding field
assistance and Lakshmi Iyer for sharing the World Bank data. This project received financial
support from the Project on Justice, Welfare, and Economics at Harvard University and the
Giorgio Ruffolo Doctoral Fellowship in Sustainability Science at Harvard University. All errors
are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Supreet Kaur. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Nominal Wage Rigidity in Village Labor Markets
Supreet Kaur
NBER Working Paper No. 20770
December 2014, Revised November 2017
JEL No. E24,J31,O10,O12
ABSTRACT
This paper tests for downward nominal wage rigidity by examining transitory shifts in labor
demand, generated by rainfall shocks, in 600 Indian districts from 1956-2009. Nominal wages
rise in response to positive shocks but do not fall during droughts. In addition, transitory positive
shocks generate ratcheting: after they have dissipated, nominal wages do not adjust back down.
This ratcheting effect generates a 9% reduction in employment levels. Inflation enables
downward real wage adjustments both during droughts and after positive shocks. Survey
evidence suggests that workers and employers believe that nominal wage cuts are unfair and lead
to effort reductions.

Supreet Kaur
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
supreet@berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

This paper empirically examines downward nominal wage rigidity and its employment
consequences in a developing country context. As is the case with any price, the wage
allocates labor—by far the biggest factor input, especially in developing countries—to
production. Adjustments in the wage are therefore what facilitate the labor market
response to shocks. Rigidities may prevent wages from adjusting fully to shocks, with
potentially important consequences for employment, earnings, and output. A large literature in economics has discussed these implications.1 For example, if wages do not fall
during negative shocks, this may increase layoffs—deepening the impact of recessions
and exacerbating business cycle volatility. In addition, the labor rationing generated
by rigidities could give rise to “disguised unemployment” or “forced entrepreneurship”,
creating a misallocation of labor across firms (Singh et al. 1986).
Some early work in development argued for the presence of nominal rigidities. For
example, Dreze and Mukherjee (1989) observe that in casual daily labor markets in
Indian villages, “The same standard wage often applies for prolonged periods — from
several months to several years... The standard wage (in money terms)...appears to be,
more often than not, rigid downwards during the slack season.” Historical time series
data from the Indian village of Tinur, for example, appears consistent with such observations (Figure 1). The prevailing wage follows a step-ladder progression: adjusting
upwards every few years and with no apparent downward nominal adjustments over a
12-year period, including in drought years. Looking across a set of 256 districts in India, the distribution of nominal wage changes exhibits a bunching of mass at zero, with
a discontinuous drop to the left of zero (Figure 2).2 These patterns, however, could
arise from measurement error such as rounding bias in reported wages. In addition,
to the extent that such evidence supports wage rigidity, it does not provide insight on
1

For overviews, see, e.g., Tobin (1972), Greenwald and Stiglitz (1987), Blanchard (1990), Clarida
et al. (1999), Akerlof (2002), and Galì (2009).
2
Under a continuous distribution of shocks, one may not expect a large discrete and asymmetric
jump at nominal zero changes (McLaughlin 1994, Kahn 1997). In contrast, the distribution of real
wage changes in Figure 2 appears continuous and symmetric around zero.

1

whether rigidities have any real consequences for employment.
These challenges apply more broadly to documenting wage rigidity in any context.
The approach in existing work—almost all of which uses data from OECD countries—is
based on examining distributions of wage changes, as in Figure 2. This has provided
compelling documentation in OECD countries (e.g., Akerlof et al. 1996, Kahn 1997,
Card and Hyslop 1997, Dickens et al. 2007, Barattieri et al. 2014, Ehrlich and Montes
2014).3 However, this approach has made it difficult to directly examine the potential
employment effects of rigidities.4 There is little direct evidence that wage rigidity
actually affects employment in the labor market in any setting.5
In this paper, I develop a different approach to test for wage rigidity: I isolate
shocks to the marginal revenue product of labor, and examine wage adjustment and
employment effects in response to these shocks.6 I apply this approach in the context
of markets for casual daily agricultural labor—a major source of employment in poor
countries. In this setting, local rainfall variation generates transitory labor demand
shocks. I investigate responses to these shocks in over 600 Indian districts from 1956
to 2009. My identification strategy relies on the assumption that rainfall shocks are
transitory: monsoon rainfall affects total factor productivity (TFP) in the current year,
but does not directly affect TFP in future years. I validate this assumption below.
Wage adjustment is consistent with downward rigidities. First, adjustment is asym3

However, more recently, studies have failed to find downward rigidity using this approach. This
has led to mixed evidence for downward rigidity in the aftermath of the Great Recession (Fallick et
al. 2015, Elsby et al. 2016, Verdugo 2016).
4
This approach typically limits analysis to workers employed by the same firm in consecutive years.
This also creates challenges for inference: if workers quit when they anticipate wage cuts, then wage
cuts will appear less frequent than they actually are. On the other hand, measurement error can make
wage cuts appear more frequent than they actually are.
5
A notable exception is Card (1990), who examines union workers whose nominal wages are explicitly indexed to expected inflation. As a result, real wages cannot adjust to inflation surprises, leading
firms to adjust employment. Card and Hyslop (1997) examine whether periods of higher inflation are
correlated with smaller impacts of negative shocks on unemployment in labor markets in the US, and
do not find evidence for a relationship. There remains a debate as to whether wage rigidity has any
relevance for employment dynamics (e.g., Pissarides 2009, Elsby 2009, Rogerson and Shimer 2011,
Schmitte-Grohe and Uribe 2013).
6
Holzer and Montgomery (1993) perform analysis in this spirit. They assume sales growth reflects
demand shifts, and examine correlations of wage and employment growth with sales growth in the
U.S. They find that wages changes are asymmetric and are small compared to employment changes.

2

metric. Relative to no shock, nominal wages rise in response to positive shocks, but
are no lower during negative shocks on average. Second, transitory positive shocks
generate ratcheting. When a positive shock in one year is followed by a non-positive
shock in the following year, nominal wages do not adjust back down—they are higher
than they would have been in the absence of the lagged transitory positive shock.
Third, particularly consistent with nominal rigidity, inflation moderates these wage
distortions.7 When inflation is higher, negative shocks are more likely to result in lower
real wages, and previous transitory positive shocks are less likely to have persistent
wage effects. When inflation is above 6%, I cannot reject that lagged positive shocks
have no impact on current real wages. In contrast, inflation has no differential effect on
upward real wage adjustment to current positive shocks—consistent with downward
nominal rigidities. These findings support the hypothesis that inflation “greases the
wheels” of the labor market.
When rigidities bind—keeping real wages above market clearing levels—this distorts employment. If a district experiences a transitory positive shock (and therefore
has a ratcheted wage in the following year), total agricultural employment is 9% lower
in the following year than if the lagged positive shock had not occurred.8 In contrast,
these shocks have no effect on non-agricultural hiring. Overall, these employment
dynamics are consistent with boom and bust cycles in village economies. They also
match observations from other contexts that labor markets exhibit relatively large
employment volatility and small wage variation.
The brunt of the employment decreases after lagged positive shocks is borne by
poorer individuals—the landless and small landholders—who are the primary suppliers of hired agricultural labor. When they are rationed out of the external labor
market, small landholders increase labor supply to their own farms. These findings
are consistent with the prediction that labor rationing will lead to “disguised unem7

In the presence of nominal rigidities, inflation will enable real wages to adjust downward without
requiring any nominal wage cuts. Because local rainfall shocks do not affect—and are therefore uncorrelated with—inflation, this enables a causal test of whether inflation affects real wage adjustment.
8
Total agricultural employment is total worker-days spent in farm work—whether on one’s own
land or as hired labor on someone else’s land. This effect is driven by a decreased in hired employment.

3

ployment” and separation failures, with smaller farms using labor more intensively in
production than larger farms (Singh, Squire, and Strauss 1986; Benjamin 1992).9
Could the above findings be explained by factors other than nominal wage rigidity? There are two categories of potential concerns. The first is a violation of the
assumption that shocks are transitory. The second is that rainfall affects labor supply
or demand through other channels, such as migration or capital accumulation. While
such explanations could account for a portion of my findings, I argue that the full pattern of results—wages, employment, and inflation—is most consistent with downward
nominal wage rigidity. In addition, in supplementary analyses, I fail to find evidence
in support of such alternate explanations.
The results point to the relevance of nominal rigidities in a setting with few of
the institutional constraints that have received prominence in the empirical literature
on wage rigidity. In villages, minimum wage legislation is largely ignored and formal
unions are rare (Rosenzweig 1980, 1988). Wage contracts are typically bilaterally
arranged between employers and workers and are of short duration (usually one day),
making it potentially easier for contracts to reflect changes in market conditions (Dreze
and Mukherjee 1989).
A growing body of evidence argues that nominal wage cuts are perceived as unfair, causing decreases in worker productivity.10 Following Kahneman, Knetsch, and
Thaler (1986), I presented 396 agricultural laborers and employers in 34 villages across
6 districts with scenarios about wage setting behavior, and asked them to rate the
behaviors as fair or unfair on a 4-point scale. The results suggest that nominal wage
cuts violate fairness norms. For example, the majority of respondents thought it was
9

In the presence of rationing, a household’s labor supply decision will not be separable from its
decision of how much labor to use on its farm. This is a prominent hypothesis for why smaller
farms tend to use more labor per acre and have higher yields per acre than larger farms—a widely
documented phenomenon in poor countries (e.g. Bardhan 1973, Udry 1996). These results lend some
support to this hypothesis. Behrman (1999) reviews the empirical literature on separation failures.
10
Individual responses to a range of scenarios suggest the relevance of nominal variables (Shafir,
Diamond, and Tversky 1997). Employers express perceptions that nominal wage cuts damage worker
morale, with potential consequences for labor productivity (Blinder and Choi 1990; Bewley 1999).
See Fehr, Goette, and Zehnder (2009) for a broader discussion of the relevance of fairness preferences
in labor markets.

4

unfair to cut nominal wages after a surge in unemployment (62%) or during a severe
drought (64%). In contrast, relatively few people thought that a real wage cut is unfair
if it is achieved through inflation (9%). Respondents also expressed a strong belief that
workers decrease effort when fairness norms are violated.11
This paper is closely linked to the literature on labor market distortions in poor
countries. Early theoretical work in development focused heavily on labor market imperfections.12 However, there has been no direct empirical documentation of downward
wage rigidity in this setting to date. There is a broader empirical literature on the functioning of labor markets in developing countries. Some studies find results consistent
with competitive markets exhibiting real wage and employment adjustments to shocks
(Rosenzweig 1980, Benjamin 1992, Jayachandran 2006, Mobarak and Rosenzweig 2014,
Imbert and Papp 2015, Muralidharan et al. 2016). Other studies find evidence consistent with imperfections such as separation failures (Bardhan 1973, Udry 1996, Foster
et al. 1997, Barrett et al. 2008, Foster and Rosenzweig 2011, LaFave and Thomas
2016).13 These two strands of evidence should not be viewed as contradictory. The
findings in this paper indicate that in this setting, real wages do adjust often in response
to market forces and play an allocative role. However, in cases when nominal rigidities
bind, thereby distorting real wages, this affects employment—with the potential to
contribute to labor market imperfections.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a model of nominal
wage rigidity. Section 3 lays out the empirical strategy and Section 4 presents the
results. Section 5 evaluates whether explanations other than nominal rigidity are
consistent the results. Section 6 discusses mechanisms and presents survey evidence
for the role of fairness norms in villages. Section 7 concludes. The Online Appendix
11

Of course, survey responses may not reflect actions under real stakes. To the extent that these
responses reflect fairness norms, they do not provide insight on the micro-foundations for these norms.
12
For example, Lewis (1954), Eckaus (1955), Rosenstein-Rodan (1956), Leibenstein (1957), Kao et
al. (1964), Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), Singh et al. (1986). Many of the early theories for labor
rationing have not withstood empirical scrutiny. Rosenzweig (1988) provides an excellent review of
the evidence for some of these theories, such as nutrition efficiency wages.
13
Other recent papers explore other related topics, such as labor supply elasticity (Goldberg 2016),
credit and labor allocation (Fink, Jack, and Masiye 2014), and migration (Morten 2016; Bryan,
Chowdhury, and Mobarak 2014; McKenzie, Theoharides, and Yang 2014).

5

contains all appendix materials, including appendix figures and tables.

2

Model

I model a small open economy with decentralized wage setting and exogenous product
prices. Rigidities arise because workers view nominal wage cuts as unfair, and retaliate
to such cuts by decreasing effort.14 I use this framework to develop testable implications of fairness preferences on labor market outcomes. For simplicity, what follows
is a static model of the labor market, in which employers and workers make decisions
about the current period, taking the previous period’s wages as given. At the end of
the section, I discuss implications of a multi-period dynamic setting.

2.1

Set-up

The labor force is comprised of a unit mass of potential workers. All workers are


equally productive. They are indexed by parameter φi ∼ U 0, φ , which equals worker
i’s cost of supplying 1 unit of effective labor. The worker’s payoff from accepting a
nominal wage offer of w equals the utility from consuming her real wage minus the
 
disutility of working: u wp − φi eR (λ, w, w̄t−1 ), where p is the price level and R (·)
captures reference dependence in utility around the previous period’s average market
wage, w̄t−1 .15 Specifically, I assume R (λ, w, w̄t−1 ) = 1+ 1−λ
λ 1 {w < w̄t−1 }. This means
that when w < w̄t−1 , the disutility of work, φi e, is scaled up by

1−λ
λ ,

where λ ∈ (0, 1].

The case of λ = 1 corresponds to the benchmark of no reference dependence. Note
that time subscripts are omitted from w, p, and e for simplicity of notation, since all
results in the model will pertain to period t (the current period), taking as given w̄t−1 .
A market-wide fairness norm governs effort behavior. The worker usually exerts
a standard amount of effort: e = 1. However, when she feels treated unfairly by the
14

In Section 6, I provide support for this modeling assumption using survey evidence.
In Indian villages, at any point in time, there is a gender-specific prevailing wage; any agricultural
worker employed in the village is typically paid this wage. Thus, the average market wage in the
previous period would also correspond to the individual’s own wage in the previous period.
15

6

firm, she reduces effort to exactly offset the disutility from the fairness violation:


1 w ≥ w̄t−1
.
(1)
e=

λ w < w̄
t−1
 
Consequently, worker i’s payoff from accepting wage offer w always reduces to u wp −
φi . In the model, I take this fairness norm as exogenous.16 More generally, it can be
conceptualized as the reduced form for a strategy in a repeated game. I normalize
the payoff from not working as 0. When all firms offer w, aggregate labor supply is:
 
LS = φ1 u wp .
There are J firms (indexed by j), where J is large so that each firm’s wage contributes negligibly to the average market wage. Firm j’s profits from hiring Lj workers
at nominal wage wj equals:
πj = pθf (eLj ) − wj Lj ,

(2)

where f (·) is a continuous, increasing, twice-differentiable concave function, and output depends on effective labor, eLj . I assume θ is a non-negative stochastic productivity parameter whose realization is common to all firms. In the empirical strategy, θ
corresponds to the current year’s rainfall realization.
All firms simultaneously post a wage. Firms satisfy labor demand in descending
order of posted wages. If multiple firms post the same wage, those firms proceed in
random order. For simplicity, I assume each firm hires the available workers with the
lowest φ-values that are willing to work for it.17
16

Other fairness norm-based efficiency wage models of wage rigidity—e.g. Akerlof and Yellen (1990),
Eliaz and Spiegler (2013), and Benjamin (2015)—also assume exogenous rules for effort decreases.
17
Specifying an allocation mechanism by which workers are matched to firms is needed to formalize
the impact of off-equilibrium deviations on firm profits in the model proofs. The mechanism described
here ensures that the firms offering the highest wage receive priority in hiring. In addition, it maximizes
gains from trade in the narrow sense that for a given wage offer, those workers that would benefit the
most from employment (the lowest φ workers) are the ones that get the job.

7

2.2

Benchmark Case: No Rigidity

In the benchmark case (i.e. when λ = 1), e = 1 for all wage levels. Firm j’s profits
are therefore: πj = pθf (Lj ) − wj Lj . I focus on the symmetric pure strategy Nash
Equilibrium, in which all firms offer the same wage:18 wj = w∗ (θ, p) ∀j, where w∗ (θ, p)
will be used to denote the equilibrium wage level in the benchmark case. The firm’s
first order condition pins down the optimal choice of labor:
pθf 0 (L∗ ) = w∗ .

(3)

The market clearing condition is:
1
JL = u
φ
∗



w∗
p


.

(4)

Lemma 1: Market clearing in benchmark case.
If workers do not exhibit fairness preferences, the unique pure strategy symmetric Nash Equilibrium will satisfy conditions (3) and (4). The labor
market will clear for all realizations of θ.
Proof: See Appendix B.1. 
Note that (3) and (4) correspond exactly to the conditions in a competitive equilibrium.
Corollary: Null Hypotheses.
(1) The equilibrium wage will be monotonically increasing in θ: If θ0 < θ00 ,
then w∗ (θ0 , p) < w∗ (θ00 , p).
(2) The equilibrium wage, w∗ (θ, p), is not affected by the previous period’s
wage, w̄t−1 .
(3) The price level has no impact on the real wage. Consequently, for any

 ∗ 00
∗ 0
θ0 < θ00 , w (θp ,p) − w (θp ,p) is not affected by changes in p.
Null hypotheses (1) and (2) follow directly from Lemma 1. For (3), it is straightforward to verify from (3) and (4):

∂w∗ (θ,p)
∂p

=

w∗
p

and

∂L∗ (θ,p)
∂p

= 0. If there is a price

18
Since all employers in a village typically pay the same prevailing wage, in this setting it is reasonable to focus on pure strategy symmetric equilibria.

8

increase, firms raise nominal wages to keep real wages constant and employment therefore does not change. Consequently, the difference in the equilibrium real wage under
two different θ-realizations will also be independent of p.

2.3

Downward Rigidity at the Previous Period’s Wage

I now turn to examine the implications of fairness preferences. Expression (2) indicates
that for any (wj , Lj ) combination, profits are always weakly lower in the fairness case
than the benchmark case.
In the symmetric pure strategy Nash equilibrium: wj = w (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) ∀j, where
w (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) denotes the equilibrium wage level corresponding to total factor productivity (TFP) θ, price p, and the previous period’s wage w̄t−1 in the fairness case. All
firms demand the same amount of labor, L (θ, p, w̄t−1 ). For a given w, this is pinned
down by the firm’s first order condition, which is discontinuous around w̄t−1 :



pθf 0 L
w ≥ w̄t−1
w=
.

pθλf 0 λL w < w̄
t−1

(5)

When w ≥ w̄t−1 , this corresponds exactly to the first order condition in the benchmark
case. However, when w < w̄t−1 , retaliation by the firm’s workers makes them less


productive. I assume f 0 L > λf 0 λL for λ < 1. This implies that at wages below
w̄t−1 , firms demand less labor than in the benchmark case. Note that this condition
holds for many common production functions, such as Cobb-Douglas: f (eL) = (eL)α .
Implicitly define θR as:
w∗ (θR , p) = w̄t−1 .

(6)

In other words, θR is the unique value of θ at which w̄t−1 would be the market clearing
equilibrium wage. Proposition 1 establishes asymmetric wage adjustment around θR .
Proposition 1: Asymmetric adjustment to shocks
In the unique pure strategy symmetric Nash equilibrium:
(i) θ < θR : For a range of productivity realizations below θR , there will

9

be no downward wage adjustment. Wages will remain fixed at the previous
period’s wage and there will be excess supply of labor. Specifically, there


exists a θeR < θR such that for all θ ∈ θeR , θR , w (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) = w̄t−1 >
w∗ (θ, p). In addition, lim θeR = 0.
λ→0

(ii) θ ≥ θR : For any productivity realization above θR , there will be upward
wage adjustment. The equilibrium wage will correspond to the benchmark
case and the labor market will clear: w (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) = w∗ (θ, p).
Proof: See Appendix B.2. 
For values of θ above θR , firms will increase wages smoothly as θ rises. However, for
sufficiently small decreases in θ below θR , it will be more profitable to maintain wages
at w̄t−1 than to cut wages and have effort decreases due to worker retaliation. However,
if θ falls below θeR , w̄t−1 is no longer the unique equilibrium, and wages may fall below
w̄t−1 . Note that θeR will be lower for smaller values of λ: as λ approaches 0, firms will
never find it profitable to lower wages below w̄t−1 .


This contradicts Null hypothesis 1. Proposition 1 predicts that for any two θ0 , θ00 ∈
i
θeR , θR , the equilibrium wage will be the same: w (θ0 , p, w̄t−1 ) = w (θ00 , p, w̄t−1 ).

2.4

Impact of Increases in the Previous Period’s Wage

In the benchmark case, previous wages have no impact on period t wages. However,
this will no longer be true when there is reference dependence around the previous
low < w̄ high .
period’s wage. Compare the case of two different lagged wage levels: w̄t−1
t−1


high
high
high
Following equation (6) above, define θR implicitly as w∗ θR , p = w̄t−1 .

Proposition 2: Ratcheting: Effects of a higher lagged wage
high
(i) For any θ < θR
and λ sufficiently small, the period t wage will be
high
low .
higher and employment will be lower if w̄t−1 = w̄t−1
than if w̄t−1 = w̄t−1
high
(ii) For any θ ≥ θR
, the period t wage and employment levels will be the
high
low .
same under w̄t−1
and w̄t−1

Proof: See Appendix B.3. 
10

A higher lagged wage has the potential to exacerbate distortions in the current period
through two channels. First, there is a larger range of θ-values at which labor market
distortions occur. Second, for any given θ where the rigidity binds, the higher lagged
wage will constitute a larger departure from the market clearing level. In contrast,
high
because the rigidity does not bind for θ ≥ θR
, the lagged wage—as long as it is weakly
high
less than w̄t−1
—is irrelevant. Note that Proposition 2 contradicts Null hypothesis 2.

2.5

Impact of Inflation

In the benchmark case, prices are neutral. This is no longer true when workers have
fairness preferences over a nominal wage.
Proposition 3: Inflation will mitigate distortions from rigidity
(i) For any fixed θ < θR where the wage is distorted above the market
clearing level so that w (·) = w̄t−1 , an increase in price levels will lower


w(·)
∂
the real wage: ∂p
< 0. With sufficient inflation, w̄t−1 will equal the
p
market clearing wage.
(ii) For any θ ≥ θR , an increase in price levels will have no effect on the
real wage; nominal wages will rise to keep the real wage constant.
Proof: See Appendix B.4. 
For any w̄t−1 , a price increase means that the value of θ at which w̄t−1 is the market
clearing nominal wage will now be lower; i.e., inflation lowers θR . Because the rigidity
will bind to the left of this lower θ value, distortions will affect a smaller portion of
the θ-distribution. Intuitively, inflation enables firms to achieve real wage reductions
while keeping the nominal wage fixed at w̄t−1 , thereby avoiding effort retaliation.
Proposition 3 contradicts Null hypothesis 3. Inflation lowers the real wage whenever the wage is distorted at the previous period’s wage. This means that inflation
undoes the asymmetric adjusment prediction under Proposition 1. Specifically, suppose
θ0 < θ00 but w (θ0 , p, w̄t−1 ) = w (θ00 , p, w̄t−1 ). Then, as shown in the proof in Appendix
B.4, there is a sufficiently high price level, p0 , where the market clears under both θ0
11

and θ00 . Consequently, after a change in prices to p0 , w (θ0 , p0 , w̄t−1 ) < w (θ00 , p00 , w̄t−1 ).
Similarly, inflation will also mitigate the distortion from high lagged wages in Proposition 2. Regardless of the value of θ, with a sufficient increase in prices, w̄t−1 will
be less than the market clearing nominal wage in period t, so that the fairness norm
becomes irrelevant and the rigidity does not bind.

2.6

Discussion

The model assumes that firms make decisions only taking into account current period
payoffs. In a multi-period setting, if there is a high θ-realization, firms would trade off
the benefits of raising wages to satisfy labor demand now, versus the expected decrease
in future profits from the ratcheting effect. In the model, the former consideration
would dominate the latter, producing almost full upward adjustment to positive shocks.
This is because each firm gains the full benefit of posting a higher wage this period, but
only bears a infinitesimal fraction of the cost since its wage contributes negligibly to the
average market wage. In reality, a firm may internalize more of the future costs—e.g.,
if it has long-term relationships with individual workers or if firms can collude to not
raise wages. However, the literature suggests that in the empirical context of this study,
this is unlikely.19 To the extent that this does occur, the core qualitative predictions
that distinguish rigidity from the benchmark case above would still remain, but the
expected magnitude of the effects would be smaller. This would make it less likely
that I would be able to reject the null model in favor of downward nominal rigidity.
In addition, the model assumes the reference point is the previous period’s nominal
wage. Other formulations, such as the expected wage (Koszegi and Rabin 2006), would
alter some of the specific predictions.20 Alternately, consistent with Loewenstein and
Prelec (1991), workers may demand upward sloping wage profiles. This could lead the
19

For example, Dreze and Mukherjee (1989) observe, “No explicit collusion exists between either
employers or labourers. Individual employers have no monopsonistic power: the pool of employers is
large, and re-sorting of partners occurs constantly.”
20
For example, prior positive shocks would not necessarily create ratcheting because the reference
point would depend on the expected value of θ. Inflation would not affect real wage adjustment if the
reference point is formulated with respect to the real wage.

12

reference wage to be of the form w̄t−1 (1 + ϕ), reflecting a norm for a ϕ percentage wage
increase in each period. My formulation of the reference point is simple and matches
the survey evidence provided in Section 6 and in Kahneman et al. (1986). While the
empirical results below do appear to provide support for some types of reference points
as being more likely than others, I take no strong stance on the functional form of the
reference point, or on the micro-foundation for rigidity more generally.

3

Empirical Strategy

3.1

Context: Rural Labor Markets in India

Agricultural production in India, as in most developing countries, is largely undertaken
on smallholder farms. The median household farm size is about 0.9 acres.21 The
composition of farm employment is often a mix of household and hired labor. Markets
for hired labor are active: most households buy and/or sell labor.22 Labor is typically
traded in decentralized markets for casual daily workers. 98% of agricultural wage
employment is through casual wage contracts (with regular/salaried workers making
up the bulk of the remaining 2%). In addition, 67% of landless rural workers report
casual employment as their primary source of earnings.
Within a village, there is typically a gender-specific prevailing wage for casual daily
labor for any given task. This has been documented in earlier development work on
India. For example, Dreze and Mukherjee (1989) state, “[I]n normal times a single wage
rate applies to all adult males in the village for a ’normal’ day’s work, irrespective of the
identity of the partners involved. If the task is of a special nature...some bargaining may
take place.” Similarly, Bliss and Stern (1982) note, “At any particular time everyone
in the village knew what the going rate was. And in nearly every case that wage or
something of equivalent value would be paid to every agricultural laborer.”
Using more recent data, Figure 3 plots the distribution of casual daily wages re21
Unless stated otherwise, the statistics in this sub-section are computed from India’s National
Sample Survey Employment/Unemployment rounds (1982-2009).
22
See, for example, Rosenzweig (1980), Benjamin (1992), and Bardhan (1997).

13

ported by agricultural laborers. In the ICRISAT data (Panel A), workers were asked
their average wage over the past year or season. Over 80% of workers within a village
report the same exact wage. In the 0more detailed data collected by Breza, Kaur, and
Shamdasani (BKS) (2017) in Orissa (Panel B), respondents reported their activity and
wage for each day in the past ten days.23 The reported daily wage is the same in about
80% of worker-day observations within a village. This supports the presumption that
there is a salient prevailing wage at any given point in time. In addition, the prevailing
agricultural wage (i.e. mode) stays the same over the one month study period in all
villages in the BKS sample.
There are few formal institutional constraints in these markets. Contracts are usually negotiated bilaterally between landowners and laborers in a decentralized manner;
unions or other formal labor institutions are rare. Wage contracts are typically of
short duration (on the order of 1-3 days).24 As a result, they can more easily reflect
recent changes in market conditions and time worked is more flexible than in other
contexts. Minimum wage policies are in practice ignored and there is little government
intervention in the private wage labor market (Rosenzweig 1980; 1988).
Agricultural production is heavily rainfall dependent and exhibits considerable seasonality. The major rainfall episode is the yearly monsoon, which accounts for over
80% of annual rainfall. The monsoon arrives between May-July in most parts of the
country and marks the beginning of the agricultural year. For rice (the major crop) as
well as some other crops, planting occurs once the rains begin. Subsequent months involve various activities such as transplanting, fertilizer application, and weeding. Rice
harvesting typically occurs between November and January. February-April is the lean
season in rain-fed areas; during this time, growing crops usually requires irrigation and
the monsoon is a less important determinant of labor demand.
23

This data was collected from laborers who were not randomly selected to receive employment
offers in their worksites. Consequently, the survey respondents were engaged in casual daily work in
their villages during the study period.
24
Of course, this does not rule out longer-term informal implicit contracts.

14

3.2

Empirical Tests

A distinct labor market is defined as an Indian district (an administrative geographic
unit). Let θdt denote the rainfall realization in district d in year t. The empirical
implementation will focus on discrete shocks. As discussed in Section 3.4, in each year,
a labor market can experience a negative shock (low rainfall), no shock (the usual level

of rainfall), or a positive shock (high rainfall): θdt ∈ θN eg , θZero , θP os . I assume
these shocks are i.i.d.: uncorrelated with any other determinants of the wage and
serially uncorrelated across years. In addition, as in the model, I assume the shocks
are transitory: rainfall in a given year affects TFP in only that year.25
In the absence of rigidities, the following simple model captures the effects of transitory shocks on equilibrium wages:
ln wdt = α0 + α1 P osdt + α2 N egdt + ln pt + dt ,

(7)

where P osdt and N egdt are dummies for a positive and negative shock, respectively.
α1 and α2 give the difference in the wage level under these shocks relative to the
omitted category of Zerodt . Null hypothesis 1 establishes that α1 > 0 and α2 < 0. In
accordance with Null hypothesis 2, lagged values do not appear in equation (7) because
they are irrelevant. Consistent with Null hypothesis 3, prices enter only additively:
a price increase raises the nominal wage to keep the real wage constant. This means
that, for example, the difference in wages between N egdt = 1 and Zerodt = 1 is fixed
at α2 ; this difference is not affected by inflation. The empirical strategy builds on this
basic specification, which is amenable to the fact that much of the analysis relies on
data from repeated cross-sections over non-consecutive years.26
These null predictions will not hold in the presence of nominal rigidity. Proposition
25

This is a standard assumption in prior work (e.g., Paxson 1992; Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1993;
Townsend 1994; Jayachandran 2006). Below, I use the results to directly document lack of serial
correlation in shocks, and to rule out persistent productivity impacts of shocks.
26
Note that this equilibrium wage model can also be expressed in a first differences framework.
It is straightforward to verify that writing equation (7) for ln wd,t−1 and subtracting from (7) gives:
ln wdt −ln wd,t−1 = α1 (P osdt − P osd,t−1 )+α2 (N egdt − N egd,t−1 )+It +ξdt , where It ≡ ln pt −ln pt−1
is the inflation level. The α1 and α2 coefficients have the same expected value in both specifications.
However, equation (7) has the advantage that it does not require data from consecutive years.

15

1 predicts that in equation (7), α2 = 0 if inflation is sufficiently low. Proposition 2
can be tested by adding lagged values. Specifically, the expected value of w̄t−1 will be
higher if there was a positive shock in year t − 1. Proposition 2 (i) therefore implies
that if θd,t−1 = θP os , then in year t, wage distortions can occur for any θdt < θP os (i.e.,
for θN eg and θZero ). Model (8) below expands equation (7) by adding dummies for a
lagged positive shock, P osd,t−1 , for the cases where θdt = θN eg and θdt = θZero . Thus,
in order to enable separate tests of Propositions 1 and 2, the following specification
breaks up the case of negative shocks into two subcases:
ln widt = β0 + β1 P osdt + β2 N onP osd,t−1 N egdt + β3 P osd,t−1 N egdt + β4 P osd,t−1 Zerodt
P
e
+ K
k=2 φk P osd,t−k + δd + ρt + εidt ,
(8)
where where N onP osd,t−1 is an indicator for a non-positive shock last year (i.e.
N onP osd,t−1 ≡ Zerod,t−1 + N egd,t−1 ), ρt are year fixed effects (which absorb pt ), and
δd are district fixed effects that capture differences in real wage levels across districts.
In principle, positive shocks in even earlier years, such as t−2, could distort current
period wages; the power to detect these effects will be lower than from a positive shock
in period t−1 because there is a longer period of time over which inflation can erode the
ratcheting effect (see below). However, such earlier positive shocks could still weaken
the sharpness of the tests of Propositions 1 and 2. To sharpen the predictions, the
PK e
k=2 P osd,t−k covariate vector controls for a longer history of lagged positive shocks
from periods t − 2 to t − K. Specifically, Peosd,t−k is a binary indicator that equals 1
if there was a positive shock t − k periods ago and no positive shock since then (i.e.
from periods t − k + 1 to period t), and equals 0 otherwise.27 With these controls,
the omitted shock category in model (8) is no shock this year, and non-positive shocks
Q
Specifically, these controls are defined as: Peosd,t−k ≡ P osd,t−k tm=t−k+1 (1 − P osd,m ). Under
rigidities, prior high rainfall shock will only matter if it is not followed by high rainfall in a more recent
year; otherwise the wage would adjust upward later anyway, making the older shock irrelevant. For
this reason, I use these Peosd,t−k controls, rather than just dummies for P osd,t−k . This also increases
power to detect effects on P osdt and P osd,t−1 in the specification. In practice, prior positive shocks
often dissipate within a couple years. Note that it is not necessary to add similar controls for a longer
history of lagged negative shocks; indeed, the inclusion of such controls makes essentially no difference
to the results.
27

16

in the past K years. This means that there have been no upward perturbations in
the past wage from high rainfall in earlier years. Consequently, the expected wage
associated with the omitted category approximates the market clearing wage under
no shock: w∗ (θZero , p).28 In other words, with this specification, θZero is a proxy for
θR —setting up a direct test of the model’s predictions. This approach allows me to
maximize power for tests by focusing on shocks in periods t − 1 and t, while creating
a “clean” reference value for tests. In the analysis, I show the results with and without
these controls.
Both Null hypothesis 1 and Proposition 1 predict β1 > 0: wages should be higher
when there is a positive shock than under no shock (the omitted category). Thus,
outcomes under high rainfall states will not distinguish rigidities from full adjustment.
β2 provides a test of asymmetric adjustment. Null hypothesis 1 predicts β2 < 0, while
Proposition 1 predicts that β2 = 0 (when inflation is sufficiently low). Note that the
Null hypothesis 1 does not necessarily impose the restriction that β1 = −β2 ; this will
depend on whether the TFP shock under θN eg and θP os is of equal magnitude, relative
to θZero . To test for asymmetric adjustment, I therefore test Proposition 1 with the
weaker assumption that θN eg < θZero < θP os . If my weaker test fails, then this implies
the more stringent restriction of β1 = −β2 will also fail.
The β3 and β4 coefficients provide tests of Proposition 2. Null hypothesis 2 predicts
that β4 = 0: this year’s TFP is the same as the omitted category and so wages should
be the same. However, under downward rigidities, the wage increase from last year’s
high rainfall would persist into the current year—keeping wages above w∗ (θZero , p).
Proposition 2 therefore predicts that β4 > 0: nominal wages will be higher due to the
ratcheting effect. In addition, as was the case for β2 , under the null, β3 < 0. However,
Proposition 2 predicts that β3 > 0: wages could be higher than the omitted category
of no shock, even though there is a negative shock in year t.29
28

Note that the validity of the empirical strategy does not rely on the wage level under the omitted
category truly being the market clearing wage. Rather, what is important is that the omitted category
captures the counterfactual for the wage under usual rainfall without any ratcheting effects (i.e. no
upward distortions) from prior shocks.
29
Note that model (8) does not include a separate test for the case of P osd,t−1 P osdt . This is because

17

Finally, note that under the null of full adjustment, model (8) should reduce exactly
to model (7): β1 = α1 > 0; β2 = β3 = α2 < 0; and β4 = 0. Thus, equation (8) will
only have additional explanatory power if there are downward rigidities.
Proposition 3 predicts that, in the presence of rigidities, inflation will move wages
closer to market clearing levels. I test this by interacting each of the shock categories
with inflation:
ln widt = γ0 + γ1 P osdt + γ2 N onP osd,t−1 N egdt + γ3 P osd,t−1 N egdt + γ4 P osd,t−1 Zerodt
+ ψ1 P osdt × It + ψ2 N onP osd,t−1 N egdt × It + ψ3 P osd,t−1 N egdt × It
PK
e
+ ψ4 P osd,t−1 Zerodt × It +
k=2 φk P osd,t−k + δd + ρt + εidt ,
(9)
where It is price inflation from t − 1 to t. In this model, γ1 , γ2 , γ3 , and γ4 capture
the difference between the omitted category and each respective shock category when
inflation is zero. They therefore provide a sharper test of Propositions 1-2, which
predict γ1 > 0, γ2 = 0, γ3 > 0, and γ4 > 0. The coefficients on the interaction terms
capture how each of these differences changes with inflation.
First, note that because the omitted category approximates w∗ (θZero , p), if price
levels rise, the nominal wage in the omitted category will rise accordingly to maintain
a constant real wage. The same will be true when P osdt = 1. Consequently, Null
hypothesis 3 and Proposition 3(ii) both predict that ψ1 = 0: the difference in nominal
wages between P osdt and the omitted category will not change with inflation.
In contrast, inflation will not be neutral in the other shock cases, in which wages
are distorted above market clearing levels. In these cases, employers can keep nominal wages fixed, enabling real wage reductions through inflation. Consequently, with
inflation, nominal wages will end up being lower under N onP osd,t−1 N egdt than the
omitted category: ψ2 < 0. Similarly, inflation will also mitigate the ratcheting effect,
so that lagged transitiory positive shocks do not cause nominal wages to be higher than
under both the null and under rigidities (Proposition 2 (ii)), lagged high rainfall levels will not matter
if the rainfall this year is also high. This sub-case is therefore subsumed under P osdt . In general,
specification (8) expands model (7) to only include those sub-cases of shocks that can distinguish
predictions under rigidity from the null. This keeps the main estimating equation parismonious.
It also helps with statistical power. In the appendix below, I also show results for the full set of
interactions between lagged and current rainfall levels, which constitute 3 × 3 = 9 cells.

18

the omitted category in year t: ψ3 < 0 and ψ4 < 0. In contrast, under Null hypothesis
3, ψ2 = ψ3 = ψ4 = 0. This again means that under the null, specification (9) should
reduce to specification (7).
In addition to providing a direct test of Proposition 3, specification (9) is helpful for
two reasons. Model (8) pools across high and low inflation periods; it will therefore only
have power to distinguish rigidities if average inflation across years is sufficiently low.
Second and relatedly, in model (8), if β2 = 0 but inflation is high (i.e. ρt is positive and
large), then this could mean that nominal wages are rising in absolute terms despite
a negative shock. Under the reference point assumed in Section 2—where workers
dislike wage cuts, but do not demand consistent wage increases-–we would expect this
to happen if inflation is high, but not if it is low. For both these reasons, the level
effects on the shock covariates in model (9) are important because they isolate wage
adjustment in periods of low inflation.
Finally, this empirical strategy allows a test for whether rigidities have real effects on employment. I replace the dependent variable in model (8) with eidt —the
employment level of worker i in district d in year t:
eidt = σ0 + σ1 P osdt + σ2 N onP osd,t−1 N egdt + σ3 P osd,t−1 N egdt + σ4 P osd,t−1 Zerodt
P
e
+ K
k=2 φk P osd,t−k + δd + ρt + εidt .
(10)
Under both the Null hypotheses and Proposition 1, employment should rise with positive shocks and fall under negative shocks: σ1 > 0 and σ2 < 0.
Testing for employment distortions requires a counterfactual benchmark of what
employment would be if wages could adjust downward. Proposition 2 enables such
a test using lagged transitory positive shocks. Specifically, in the omitted category,
there is no shock in the current year. This therefore serves as a counterfactual for
what employment would be if wages could adjust down after the lagged high rainfall
in the P osd,t−1 Zerodt case. If the wage distortion from the ratcheting effect lowers
employment, then σ4 < 0. In contrast, under the null, σ4 = 0. Similarly, Proposition 2 predicts that σ3 < σ2 : P osd,t−1 N egdt will lead to lower employment than

19

N onP osd,t−1 N egdt , because of the additional wage distortion from ratcheting in the
former case. In contrast, under the null, σ3 = σ2 .30
It would also be interesting to test whether inflation mitigates employment distortions. However, because employment data is only available for a small number of
years—providing little variation in inflation—it is not possible to examine differential
employment effects by inflation (see below).

3.3

Data

Wage and employment data is constructed using two primary datasets. The first source
is the rural sample of the Employment/Unemployment rounds of the Indian National
Sample Survey (NSS), a nationally representative survey of over 600 Indian districts.31
Households in each district are sampled on a rolling basis over the agricultural year
(July to June). The survey elicits daily employment and wage information for each
household member over the 7 days preceding the interview. The surveys were conducting during the 1982, 1983, 1987, 1993, 1999, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2007, and 2009
agricultural years.32 The second source is the World Bank Agriculture and Climate
dataset, which provides yearly data on 240 Indian districts in 13 states from 1956-1987.
The unit of observation is a district-year. Rainfall data is taken from Terrestrial Precipitation: 1900-2008 Gridded Monthly Time Series (version 2.01), constructed by the
Center for Climatic Research, University of Delaware. Appendix C provides further
details on data construction, and Appendix Table 1 provides summary statistics.

3.4

Definition of Shocks

I focus on rainfall in the first month when the monsoon typically arrives in a district
(which ranges from May to July). Focusing on rain in the month of expected arrival
30

The model also predicts labor rationing under N onP osd,t−1 N egdt , but in this case, there is no
clear counterfactual for what employment levels would be if wages were flexible.
31
A district is an administrative unit in India (like counties in the US). On average, there are 17
districts per state and approximately 2 million residents per district.
32
Since the monsoon is the rainfall shock used in the analysis, the results will focus on wages and
employment between the month of monsoon arrival and the end of harvesting in January.

20

reflects the fact that both the level of rain and the timeliness of its arrival are important
determinants of productivity. To construct shocks, I compute the rainfall distribution
for each district separately for each dataset: for the years 1956-1987 for the World
Bank data and the years 1982-2009 for the NSS data. A shock is a deviation in rainfall
from a district’s usual rainfall level. Specifically, as in Jayachandran (2006), a positive
shock is rainfall above the eightieth percentile for the district and a negative shock is
rainfall below the twentieth percentile. These discrete cut-offs capture the non-linear
relationship between rainfall and productivity and increase power. This illustrated in
Appendix Figure 1: rainfall in the upper (lower) tail of the distribution is associated
with increased (decreased) yields, while the middle of the rainfall distribution has a
relatively flat relationship with yields.
Rainfall is serially uncorrelated across years (Appendix Table 2). To allow for the
possibility of correlated shocks across districts in a given year, standard errors are
clustered by region-year in all regressions, using the region definitions from the NSS.33

4
4.1

Results
Test for Wage Adjustment

Table 1 provides a preliminary test for wage adjustment (as in model (7)), showing
results from the World Bank and NSS datasets side by side. The dependent variable
is the log nominal daily wage for agricultural work.34 In both datasets, relative to no
shock, nominal wages adjust up when there are positive shocks, but I cannot reject
that they are not lower on average when there is a negative shock (Cols. 1 and 4).35
In Cols. 2 and 5, there is some evidence that a positive shock in one year leads to a
persistent increase in wages in the following year. Under rigidities, a lagged positive
33
Appendix Table 2 provides some evidence for negative serial correlation in rainfall. Clustering
standard errors by region makes minor difference in the results, and slightly improves precision in
some cases. To be conservative, I cluster by region-year.
34
The World Bank data provides the average daily cash wage in each district-year. In the NSS data,
I compute the daily agricultural wage as total (cash plus in-kind) value of paid earnings for casual
agricultural work divided by days worked over the past 7 days. See Appendix C for more details.
35
Below, I show that employment does indeed fall sharply when there are negative shocks.

21

shock has the potential to distort wages upward particularly if the current year’s shock
is none or negative. If the current shock is positive, wages would need to adjust up
anyway, rendering the prior positive shock irrelevant. Cols. 3 and 6 limit analysis to
non-positive shocks in the current year—as expected, this increases the magnitude of
the coefficients and lagged positive shocks significantly raise current wages (relative to
having no shock last year) in both datasets. In contrast, consistent with rigidity in the
downward direction, lagged negative shocks have no persistent wage effects.
Table 2 shows the full test corresponding to specification (8). Cols. 1-2 examine
effects in the World Bank data. In Col. 2, relative to the counterfactual of no shock
this year and no shock last year, wages are 4.3% higher if there is positive shock this
year (row 1, significant at the 1% level). In contrast, consistent with Proposition 1,
wages are not significantly lower if there is a negative shock this year: while β2 has a
negative sign, it is small in magnitude and I cannot reject that it is zero (row 2), and
β3 is actually positive (row 3).36 In addition, consistent with Proposition 2, lagged
positive shocks have persistent wage effects (rows 3 and 4). For example, when there
is a positive shock last year and no shock this year, wages are 3.7% higher on average
than if last year’s positive shock had not occurred (significant at the 1% level). The
pattern of findings is similar in the NSS data (Cols. 3-4). Col. 5 limits analysis to
individuals whose primary source of earnings is casual daily labor, with similar results.
Col. 6 adds controls for individual covariates and season of the year. Women earn
substantially less than men, but landholdings and education have no predictive power
for wages.37
I provide a series of robustness checks in the Apendix Tables. The finding of wage
rigidity holds separately for each gender (Appendix Table 5), is robust to limiting analysis to the cash component of the wage (Appendix Table 6), and appears stronger for
36
In addition, I reject that β1 = −β2 in both the World Bank data (p-value=0.043) and NSS
data (p-value=0.011). However, as discussed in Section 3.2, this null hypothesis requires stronger
assumptions about the production function.
37
Appendix Table 3 shows the raw wage change patterns for each shock category using the World
Bank data. The results on wage change premiums are consistent with the findings in Table 2. Appendix Table 4 runs a more detailed version of the main specification in Table 2, with each of the 9
shock sequences estimated separately.

22

flat wages relative to piece rate contracts (though the test is under-powered, Appendix
Table 7). In addition, Appendix Tables 8-9 show robustness of these and subsequent
results to alternative percentile cut-offs for defining positive and negative shocks.

4.2

Impact of Inflation on Wage Adjustment

To test Proposition 3, I use the World Bank data since it covers 32 years, providing
substantial variation in inflation. (The NSS rounds are comprised of 8 years of data,
with limited variation in inflation). Inflation is computed from the state-wise Consumer
Price Index for Agricultural Labourers in India, published by the Government of India.
For each district, I construct inflation as the average of inflation in all states excluding
the district’s own state. This captures the component of inflation that is nationally
determined (by factors outside the district’s own state) and therefore unaffected by
local idiosyncratic shocks. Appendix Table 10 verifies that the district rainfall shocks
have no correlation with prices in other states (Cols. 3-4) or inflation in other states
(Col. 5)—the coefficients are small in magnitude and insignificant. The correlation
between own state inflation and national inflation is 0.70.
Table 3, Cols. 1-2 present estimates of model (9), with interactions of each shock
category with the continuous inflation rate in other states. Contemporaneous positive
shocks increase wages (row 1). Consistent with Proposition 3(ii), there are no differential effects by inflation (row 2). When there are contemporaneous droughts, estimated
wages are the same on average as the omitted category when inflation is zero (row 3).
However, when there is positive inflation, nominal (and real) wages are lower under
negative shocks than when there is no shock (row 4). Similarly, after lagged positive
shocks, wages are ratcheted upwards when inflation is low (rows 5 and 7); as inflation
rises, such shocks are less likely to have persistent effects on current wages (rows 6
and 8). Overall, the negative coefficients on the interaction terms in rows 4, 6, and 8
violate Null hypothesis 3 and are consistent with Proposition 3(i).
In Table 3, Cols. 3-4, the interaction term is a binary indicator for inflation above
6%—about the mean inflation rate in the sample. The pattern of results is similar.

23

Inflation has no differential effects when there are positive shocks, but does enable
downward real wage adjustment in the three categories of shocks where rigidity creates
distortions. As indicated in the F-test p-values at the bottom of the table, when
inflation is above 6%: real wages adjust downward when there are negative shocks
(significant at the 5% level) and I cannot reject that lagged positive shocks have no
effect on current wages.
A potential concern is that there could be co-trends in inflation and the impact of
rainfall shocks. For example, if inflation and the adoption of irrigation (which makes
crops less reliant on rainfall) both trend upward over time, this could create a spurious
correlation. In Appendix Table 11, I conduct two placebo tests to rule out this concern:
interactions of the rainfall shocks with a linear time trend (Col. 2) and with a dummy
for whether the year is after 1970 (the sample mid-point and the beginning of India’s
green revolution, Col. 3) are small and insignificant, indicating that the inflation
results are not driven by co-trends.

4.3

Employment Effects

I test for employment effects on all individuals who comprise the potential agricultural
labor force: rural workers for whom casual employment or self-employment (i.e. work
on their own farm) is a primary or subsidiary activity. 100% of the individuals in the
data who report any positive agricultural work fall within this group. Appendix Table
14 verifies that rainfall does not affect the composition of the sample—e.g., through
the likelihood of reporting oneself as being in the agricultural labor force (Col. 1).
Employment in agriculture is the number of worker-days in the last 7 days (the
interview reference period) in which the individual did any agricultural work: own
farm work plus hired work on someone else’s farm.38 Table 4, Panel A indicates that,
on average, a positive shock in the previous year lowers agricultural employment in
38

Only 31% of the individuals in the potential agricultural labor force report doing any agricultural
work (on their own land or for someone else) in the past week. Among these individuals, 66% of
worker-days were comprised of work on one’s own land, and the remaining were for work on someone
else’s land. Note that wages can only be measured for this latter group.

24

the current year. The estimated decrease in agricultural activity is 0.153 days/week or
8.8% for the average worker (Col. 2) and 0.193 days/week or 11% for landless laborers
(Col. 3); these coefficients are significant at the 1% level.
Panel B shows the main specification, equation (10). Contemporaneous positive
shocks (row 1) raise average employment by 0.145 days/week or 8.3%. Contemporaneous droughts (row 3) decrease employment by 0.094 days/week or 5.4%. Consistent
with the prediction under rigidity, when a drought is preceded by a positive shock
(row 5), employment drops by about 0.254 days/week or 14.6%—more than twice the
magnitude of the decrease in row 3. This difference is statistically significant at the
10% level in Col. 1 and at the 5% level in Col. 2 (see bottom of table). Similarly,
when a year in which there is no shock is preceded by a lagged positive shock (row 7),
this lowers employment by 6-7%.
In village labor markets, those who own land have the right to use their own labor
on their farms before hiring others. As a result, those with little or no land—who are
the net suppliers to the casual daily labor market—are the most likely to be rationed
when rigidities bind. Consistent with this, employment decreases are concentrated
among those with less land (Col. 3). Finally, there is little evidence that the shocks
affect hiring in the non-agricultural sector (Col. 4).

4.4

Separation Failures: Compositional Effects on Employment

A long theoretical literature has pointed out that labor rationing may affect the allocation of labor across firms (Singh, Squire, and Strauss 1986; Benjamin 1992). Specifically, a rationed household’s decision of how much labor to supply and its decision of
how much labor to use in production are no longer separable. Households with smaller
landholdings—which are more likely to face a binding rationing constraint since they
are more reliant on selling labor in the external market—will supply labor more intensively to their own farms. This will lead to a misallocation of labor, with more labor
per acre used in small farms compared to large farms.
In Table 5, I test whether rationing affects the composition of labor supply for

25

agricultural households. I examine effects separately for three groups, defined in terms
of acres per adult in the household:39 the landless, who have no or marginal land (<0.01
acres); below median landholding; and above median landholding. I limit analysis to
observations in which there was a non-positive shock in the current year, since this is
when lagged positive shocks will be most likely to generate rationing.
The dependent variable Col 1. is total worker-days in agriculture—the same measure as in Table 4. Consistent with the Table 4 results, agricultural employment among
the landless drops substantially. On average, there is no effect on households with below median landholdings; however, this masks substantial changes in labor allocation
for these small landholders. Col. 2 examines effects on hired labor on others’ farms.
In the year after a positive shock, while the landless experience the largest decrease in
wage employment (1.198 days/week), small landholders also experience an estimated
decrease of 0.444 days/week or 22% (significant at the 5% level). Col. 3 indicates
that, at the same time, small landholders increase the amount of time spent working
on their own farms by 0.449 days/week or 18%, significant at the 5% level—this is the
key prediction of the separation failures framework. This magnitude corresponds to
having approximately one extra acre of land (the sample median) in a typical year. In
contrast, large landowners’ labor supply is largely unaffected by lagged positive shocks;
this makes sense since these households do not sell much labor externally.

5

Alternate Explanations

Could the results be explained by reasons other than downward nominal wage rigidity?
First, positive rainfall shocks may have persistent effects on productivity—for example by improving future soil moisture. However, then future employment should also
be higher and inflation should not affect persistence, which contradicts the results.
39
Acres per adult proxies for how much “excess” labor the household would traditionally supply off
its own farm. This is consistent with traditional tests for separation failures, which examine whether,
for a given number of acres, households with more adults tend to use more labor on their own farms
(e.g., Benjamin 1992, Shapiro 1990, Udry 1996, LaFave and Thomas 2016). Note that I conduct this
analysis at the household-year level to remain consistent with the previous literature.

26

Second, shocks may affect worker quality. During negative shocks, employers may
hire the subset of workers who are better quality—leading to a higher average wage
per worker. However, this should not depend on inflation. It also cannot explain
why wages do not adjust back down after lagged positive shocks have dissipated. In
addition, I find little evidence that the various shocks change the composition of who
receives wage employment, in terms of gender, education, age, or wealth (Appendix
Table 18).
Third, if positive shocks reduce future labor supply—e.g. through out-migration
or inter-temporal substitution of labor—this could explain why wages rise and employment falls in the following year. However, to explain the lack of downward wage
adjustment, this would need to (i) occur both in the year after a positive shock and
during a contemporaneous drought and (ii) occur when inflation is low but not when it
is high. It is unclear why labor supply shifters would operate in this way. In addition,
there is no evidence of increased migration after lagged positive shocks or during contemporaneous negative shocks in the NSS data (Appendix Table 14) or in the ICRISAT
data (Appendix Table 16).
Fourth, if positive shocks enable credit-constrained small farmers to invest in capital, this could decrease future labor demand. To fit the results in Table 6, capital would
need to be complementary with own household labor (to explain the increase in own
farm labor supply) and substitutable with hired labor (to explain the large decrease in
hired labor). In this case, wages for hired manual labor should be lower after a lagged
positive shock, not higher. In addition, it is unclear why these effects would occur
only when inflation is low. This explanation also doesn’t account for why downward
wage adjustment is hindered during negative shocks, again only when inflation is low.
Finally, there is little direct evidence that lagged positive shocks lead to an increase in
bullocks, tractors, or fertilizer—among the most common and important capital inputs
in this setting (Appendix Table 19).
Fifth, measurement error (e.g. due to rounding) is unlikely to drive the results. It
is unclear why respondents would be differentially more likely to round wages during

27

negative shocks and the year after positive shocks. In addition, if the wage results
simply reflect reporting errors, we should not observe real employment effects.
Overall, the above arguments are of course suggestive. It is perfectly plausible
that rainfall could affect labor supply or demand through a variety of channels. A
complete investigation of their role is outside the scope of this paper. The model
in this paper delivers a rich set of positive predictions under wage rigidity. The full
pattern of results—for wages, employment, and inflation, along with asymmetry in
effects for each of these tests—is consistent with these predictions.
Finally, efficiency wage models that do not involve nominal rigidities—such as moral
hazard, screening, labor turnover, or nutrition—also generate equilibrium unemployment. However, they do not predict that wages will be rigid in response to shocks.
For example, none of these models can account for why wages would rise under a positive shock but then not adjust back down once the shock has dissipated, or why this
should be influenced by inflation. Similar arguments apply to search friction models
that do not incorporate some nominal rigidity. Other models of unemployment—such
as implicit insurance, informal unions, or the fairness efficiency wage model presented
in Section 2—could be consistent with these results if contracting pertains (at least
in part) to the nominal wage. In this paper, I do not take a strong stance on the
micro-foundation for rigidity, but rather argue that a model would need to incorporate
some degree of nominal rigidity to explain the above findings.

6

Mechanisms: Survey Evidence on Fairness Norms

The presence of rigidities in markets for casual daily labor is perhaps especially surprising given the lack of institutional constraints in these markets. This suggests that
non-institutional mechanisms discussed in the literature—such fairness norms against
wage cuts—may play a role in maintaining rigid wages. To obtain suggestive evidence
on the relevance of fairness considerations, I surveyed in 196 agricultural laborers and
200 employers in 34 villages across 6 districts in the Indian states of Orissa and Madhya

28

Pradesh.40 Following Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1986), I presented scenarios
about wage setting behavior and asked respondents to rate them as “Very fair”, “Fair”,
“Unfair”, or “Very unfair”. Table 6 presents the scenarios and results.41
Panel A establishes baseline norms relating to wage cuts in 2 sets of situations.
For example, question 1 presents a scenario in which a farmer who used to pay Rs.
120/day lowers the wage after a surge in unemployment after a factory (which used to
pay Rs. 100/day) shuts down. The majority of respondents believed it was unfair if
the farmer then re-hires a previous employee at Rs. 100 (62%) or if he hires one of the
newly unemployed factory workers at Rs. 100 (55%).42
Panel B investigates whether norms are anchored on the nominal wage rather than
the real wage. Question 3 presents scenarios that involve a 5% real wage cut due to
a drought, but vary the level of the nominal wage change. 64% of respondents view a
5% nominal wage cut as unfair. However, if there is 5% inflation and no nominal wage
change, 38% view it as unfair. If there is 10% inflation and a 5% nominal wage increase,
the percentage viewing this as unfair drops to 9%.43 Note that similar exercises in the
US and Canada have produced similar patterns, with respondents exhibiting some
(albeit a lesser) degree of “money illusion” (Kahneman et al. 1986; Shafir et al. 1997).
Similarly, 29% of respondents view a real wage cut as unfair if it is achieved by reducing
an in-kind payment of lunch. This is sharply lower than the reactions to a nominal
wage cut of smaller magnitude in Scenario 3A.44
Panel C indicates that several wage setting behaviors associated with market clearing are at odds with expressed fairness norms. For example, 61% of respondents felt
40

Orissa is one of India’s poorest states, and is dominated by rain-fed paddy. Madhya Pradesh is
more affluent, and a large portion of the survey areas is covered by soybeans, a cash crop.
41
Each respondent was asked half the questions to prevent the survey from becoming tedious, and
in the case of paired scenarios (1A/1B, 3A/3C, and 9A/9B), was asked only 1 version of the scenario.
42
In this setting, it is common for some local factories to hire casual daily laborers from surrounding
villages, drawing from the same labor pool as agricultural employers.
43
In the local vernacular, the term “price of food and clothing” is used to describe inflation. Workers
and employers say that this is frequently cited by workers when they are negotiating wages.
44
Based on field interviews, the value of the food, when it is provided, usually exceeds Rs. 10. The
responses to Scenario 3A vs. 4 are consistent with evidence that there is lower earnings rigidity (and
fewer layoffs during recessions) of workers who receive a base salary plus a bonus, presumably because
bonuses can be more easily cut during downturns (e.g. Kahn 1997).

29

it would be unfair if, during a period of high unemployment, a farmer asks workers for
their reservation wage and then offers a job to the worker with the lowest reservation
wage (Question 5). 63% of respondents think it is unfair for an employer to raise the
wage during a period of high labor demand to attract enough workers, and then lower
the wage to its previous level in later weeks when demand is lower (Question 7).
Finally, Panel D investigates whether respondents think worker effort depends on
fairness perceptions. Question 9 presents a scenario in which a farmer offers a job
to a worker in financial distress. If the job is offered at the prevailing wage (which
would uphold fairness norms and possibly also show benevolence given the laborer’s
distress), 55% percent of respondents say the worker would exert more effort than
usual and only 1% state he would exert less effort than usual. In sharp contrast, if the
wage is below the prevailing rate, only 6% of respondents state the worker would exert
extra effort, while 40% state the worker would exert less effort than usual. Responses
to this question were not substantially different between workers and employers.
Of course, survey responses may not reflect the actual actions people take when the
stakes are real. The pattern of results in Table 6 simply lends some plausibility to the
idea that fairness norms may be a way in which rigid wages are maintained in village
labor markets. It is unclear, however, whether such fairness preferences are inherent
features of utility or whether they arise endogenously—for example, as a coordinating
device among laborers in the presence of incomplete contracting.
Appendix Table 20 tabulates responses to supplementary questions about respondents’ own experiences and behavior. For example, 100% of workers and employers
state that in their memory, there has not been a single year during which the prevailing
nominal agricultural wage for a given season was lower than that in the previous year
(Questions 1 and 6).45 74% of laborers report having been involuntarily unemployed
in the past (Question 2), and 95% of employers claim that they have never hired a
45
During informal interviews, respondents stated that wages do vary within a year based on the
season/tasks—for example, the transplanting, weeding, harvesting, and lean seasons may each have a
distinct wage. They stated that the wage for each season takes as a starting (“reference”) point the
wage during that season in the previous year.

30

worker at a wage below the prevailing wage during the lean season (Question 8).

7

Conclusion

This paper tests for downward nominal wage rigidity in markets for casual daily agricultural labor. First, there is asymmetric wage adjustment: nominal wages rise in
response to positive shocks but do not fall during negative shocks. Second, after
transitory positive shocks have dissipated, nominal wages do not return to previous
levels—they remain high in future years. Third, inflation moderates these effects:
when inflation is higher, real wages are more likely to fall during droughts and after
transitory positive shocks. Fourth, wage distortions generate employment distortions,
creating boom and bust cycles: employment is 9% lower in the year after a transitory
positive shock than if the positive shock had not occurred. Fifth, consistent with the
misallocation of labor across farms, households with small landholdings increase labor
supply to their own farms when they are rationed out of the external labor market.
In addition to its broad implications for unemployment and business cycle dynamics, wage rigidity has particular relevance for developing country labor markets. One
focus of the development literature has been that shocks cause shifts in the production
frontier, leading to volatility in income and consumption. In the presence of wage
rigidity, volatility has an additional implication: production may often not be at the
frontier because labor markets do not adjust fully in each period. As implied by the
employment results, this means rigidities may lower the levels and further increase
the volatility of output and income. In addition, the evidence indicates that landless
and marginal farmers—who are the poorest and most vulnerable workers in this setting—bear the brunt of the labor market effects. The findings in Section 4.4 suggest
that this has not only distributional consequences—it can impact labor (mis)allocation,
and consequently is another channel by which rigidities affect aggregate output.
Finding rigidities in casual daily labor markets is perhaps surprising, given the
lack of formal institutional constraints in this setting. The survey evidence suggests

31

that agricultural workers and employers view nominal wage cuts as unfair and believe
that they cause effort reductions. Fairness preferences against wage cuts have been expressed in a range of contexts, including in richer countries (e.g., Kahneman, Knetsch,
and Thaler 1986). While the strength of the norms expressed in Table 6 appears somewhat higher than that expressed in OECD countries, the survey findings suggest the
potential for some commonality in the reasons for rigidity across settings.
However, it is unclear whether such fairness preferences are inherent features of
utility or whether they arise endogenously. For example, fairness norms may simply
be a coordinating device among workers in a setting where formal contracting or unions
are difficult. Further exploration of the microfoundations for fairness norms is necessary
to fully assess the efficiency and welfare implications of wage rigidity. This in turn,
would inform our understanding of why wage rigidity may appear more prevalent in
some settings than in others.

References
1. Akerlof, George. 2002. “Nobel Lecture: Behavioral Macroeconomics and Macroeconomic Behavior.” American Economic Review.
2. Akerlof, George, William Dickens, George Perry. 1996. “The Macroeconomics of
Low Inflation.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1: 1-76.
3. Akerlof, George, and Janet Yellen. 1990. “The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and
Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 255-83.
4. Altonji, Joseph and Paul Devereux. 2000. “The Extent and Consequences of Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity.” Research in Labor Economics. 19: 383-431.
5. Bardhan, Pranab. 1973. “Size, Productivity, and Returns to Scale: An Analysis of
Farm-level Data in Indian Agriculture.” Journal of Political Economy. 81(6).
6. Barattieri, Alessandro, Susanto Basu, and Peter Gottschalk. 2014. “Some Evidence
on the Importance of Sticky Wages.” AEJ: Macroeconomics.
7. Behrman, Jere. 1999. "Labor Markets in Developing Countries," in ed. O. Ashen32

felter and D. Card. (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 3: 2859-2939.
8. Benjamin, Dwayne. 1992. “Household Composition, Labor Markets, and Labor
Demand: Testing for Separation in Agricultural Household Models.” Econometrica.
9. Benjamin, Daniel. 2015. “A Theory of Fairness in Labour Markets.” The Japanese
Economic Review. 66(2): 182-225.
10. Bewley, Truman F. 1999. Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession.
11. Blanchard, Olivier. 1990. “Why Does Money Affect Output? A Survey”, in Ben
Friedman and Frank Hahn, editors, Handbook of Monetary Economics. Vol 2.
12. Blinder, Alan and Don Choi. 1990. “A Shred of Evidence on Theories of Wage
Stickiness.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 1003-1015.
13. Bliss, Christopher and Nicholas Stern. 1982. Palanpur: The Economy of an Indian
Village. OUP Catalogue.
14. Breza, Emily, Supreet Kaur, and Yogita Shamdasani. 2017. “The Morale Effects of
Pay Inequality.” NBER Working Paper No. 22491.
15. Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury, and A. Mushfiq Mobarak. 2014. “UnderInvestment in a Profitable Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh,”
Econometrica. 82(5): 1671-1748.
16. Card, David. 1990. “Unexpected Inflation, Real Wages, and Employment Determination in Union Contracts.” American Economic Review.
17. Card, David and Dean Hyslop. 1997. “Does Inflation ‘Grease the Wheels of the
Labor Market’ ?”, Romer and Romer, Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy.
18. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galì, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “The Science of Monetary
Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature. 37.
19. Dickens, William et al. 2007. “How Wages Change: Micro Evidence from the
International Wage Flexibility Project.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 21(2).
20. Dreze, Jean and Anindita Mukherjee. 1989. “Labour Contracts in Rural India:
Theories and Evidence.” The Balance Between Industry and Agriculture in Economic Development. Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 233-265.
21. Ehrlich, Gabriel and Joshua Montes. 2015. “Wage Rigidity and Employment Out-

33

comes: Evidence from Administrative Data.” Mimeo, University of Michigan.
22. Eliaz, Kfir and Ran Spiegler. 2013. “Reference Dependence and Labor-Market
Fluctuations.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual. Vol. 28.
23. Elsby, Michael. 2009. “Evaluating the Economic Significance of Downward Nominal
Wage Rigidity.” Journal of Monetary Economics. 56.2: 154-169.
24. Elsby, Michael, Donggyun Shin, and Gary Solon. 2016. “Wage Adjustment in the
Great Recession and Other Downturns: Evidence from the United States and Great
Britain.” Journal of Labor Economics. 34.S1: S249-S291.
25. Fallick, Bruce, Michael Lettau, and William Wascher. 2016. “Downward Nominal
Wage Rigidity in the United States During and After the Great Recession.” Mimeo,
Federal Reserve Board.
26. Fehr, Ernst, Lorenz Goette, and Christian Zehnder. 2009. “A Behavioral Account
of the Labor Market: The Role of Fairness Concerns.” Annual Review of Economics.
27. Fink, Gunther, B. Kelsey Jack, and Felix Masiye. 2014. “Seasonal Credit Constraints and Agricultural Labor Supply.” NBER Working Paper 20218.
28. Galì, Jordi. 2009. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press.
29. Goldberg, Jessica. 2016. “Kwacha Gonna Do? Experimental Evidence about Labor
Supply in Rural Malawi.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
30. Greenwald, Bruce and Joseph Stiglitz. 1987. “Keynesian, New Keynesian and New
Classical Economics.” Oxford Economic Papers. 39(1): 119-133.
31. Hall, Robert and Paul Milgrom. 2008. “The Limited Influence of Unemployment
on the Wage Bargain.” American Economic Review. 98(4): 1653-1674.
32. Holzer, Harry and Edward Montgomery. 1993. "Asymmetries and Rigidities in
Wage Adjustments by Firms." Review of Economics and Statistics. 75(3).
33. Imbert, Clement and John Papp. 2015. “Labor Market Effects of Social Programs:
Evidence from India’s Employment Guarantee.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 7(2): 233-263.
34. Jayachandran, Seema. 2006. “Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity

34

Shocks in Developing Countries.” Journal of Political Economy. 114(3).
35. Kahn, Shulamit. 1997. “Evidence of Nomninal Wage Stickiness from Microdata.”
American Economic Review. 87(5).
36. Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1986. “Fairness as a Constraint on Profit Seeking: Entitlements in the Market.” American Economic Review.
37. Koszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin. 2006. “A Model of Reference-Dependent
Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 121(4): 1133-1166.
38. LaFave, Dan and Duncan Thomas. 2016. “Farms, Families and Markets: New
Evidence on Completeness of Markets in Agricultural Settings.” Econometrica.
84(5):1917-60.
39. Lewis, W. Arthur. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of
Labour.” The Manchester School. 22(2): 139–191.
40. Leibenstein, Harvey. 1957. Economic Backwardness and Economic Growth.
41. Loewenstein, George and Drazen Prelec. 1991. “Negative Time Preference.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. 81(2): 347-352.
42. Martins, Pedro, Gary Solon, and Jonathan Thomas. 2012. “Measuring What Employers Do about Entry Wages over the Business Cycle: A New Approach." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 4.4: 36-55.
43. McKenzie, David, Caroline Theoharides, and Dean Yang. 2014. “Distortions in
the International Migrant Labor Market.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics. 6(2): 49-75.
44. McLaughlin, Kenneth. 1994. “Rigid Wages?” Journal of Monetary Economics.
45. Mobarak, Mushfiq and Mark Rosenzweig. 2014. “Risk, Insurance and Wages in
General Equilibrium.” NBER Working Paper No. 19811.
46. Morten, Melanie. 2016. “Temporary Migration and Endogenous Risk Sharing in
Village India.” NBER Working Paper No. 22159.
47. Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2016. “General
Equilibrium Effects of (Improving) Public Employment Programs: Experimental
Evidence from India.” Mimeo, UC San Diego.

35

48. Paxson, Christina. 1992. “Using Weather Variability to Estimate the Response of
Savings to Transitory Income in Thailand.” American Economic Review. 82(1).
49. Pissarides, Christopher. 2009. “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage
Stickiness the Answer?” Econometrica. 77(5): 1339–1369.
50. Pitt Mark and Mark Rosenzweig. 1986. “Agricultural Prices, Food Consumption
and the Health and Productivity of Farmers”, in Agricultural Household Models:
Extensions, Applications, and Policy, pp. 153-182.
51. Rogerson, Richard and Robert Shimer. 2011. “Search in Macroeconomic Models of
the Labor Market”, in Card and Ashenfelter (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics.
52. Rosenstein-Rodan, P. N. 1956. “Disguised Unemployment and Under-employment
in Agriculture.” Working Papers Series C, Center for International Studies, MIT.
53. Rosenzweig, Mark. 1980. “Neoclassical Theory and the Optimizing Peasant: An
Econometric Analysis of Market Family Labour Supply in Developing Countries.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. (94): 31–56.
54. Rosenzweig, Mark. 1988. “Labour Markets in Low-income Countries”, in H. Chenery and T. N. Srinivasan (eds), Handbook of Development Economics.
55. Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martín Uribe. 2013. “Downward Nominal Wage
Rigidity and the Case for Temporary Inflation in the Eurozone.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 27(3): 193–212.
56. Shafir, Eldar, Peter Diamond, and Amos Tversky. 1997. “Money Illusion.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 112(2): 341-374.
57. Shapiro, Charles and Joseph Stiglitz. 1984. “Equilibrium Unemployment as a
Worker Discipline Device.” American Economic Review. 74(3): 433-444.
58. Singh, I., L. Squire and J. Strauss, eds. 1986. Agricultural Household Models:
Extensions, Applications, and Policy. The World Bank, Washington, DC.
59. Tobin, James. 1972. “Inflation and Unemployment.” American Economic Review.
60. Townsend, Robert. 1994. “Risk and Insurance in Village India.” Econometrica.
61. Udry, Chris. 1996. “Efficiency and Market Structure: Testing for Profit Maximization in African Agriculture.” Mimeo. Northwestern University.

36

62. Verdugo, Gregory. 2016. “Real Wage Cyclicality in the Eurozone Before and During
the Great Recession: Evidence from Micro Data.” European Economic Review. 82:
46-69.

37

H H

2.5
2
1.5

D

H
D H

1

D = Drought year
H = High (good) rainfall year

1971

1970

1969

1968

1967

1966

1965

1964

1963

1962

1961

1960

1959

0.5
1958

Nominal Daily Wage (Rupees)

3

Year
Figure 1 – Evolution of the Prevailing Nominal Daily Wage in an Indian Village
Notes:
1. This motivational figure plots the prevailing daily nominal wage for ploughing in the Indian
village of Tinur, Tamil Nadu during the month of April from 1958-1971. These wages were
reported in Agricultural Wages in India, published by the Government of India.
2. The letters “D” and “H” signify years in which there was a drought (rain below the 20th
percentile of the district’s historical rainfall distribution) or very good rainfall (rain above the 80th
percentile of the district’s historical rainfall distribution), respectively.

Fraction of Observations
.05
.1
.15
.2
0

0

.05

Fraction of Observations
.1
.15
.2

.25

Real Wage Changes

.25

Nominal Wage Changes

-.5

0
Percentage Change in Nominal Wage

.5

-.5

0
Percentage Change in Real Wage

.5

Figure 2 – Distributions of Wage Changes
Notes:
1. The figures plot year-to-year percentage changes in agricultural wages in the World Bank Climate and
Agriculture dataset. The unit of observation is a district-year, with data on 256 districts from 1956-1987.
2. Nominal wage changes are shown for the full sample (7,680 observations).
3. Real wages are computed as the nominal wage divided by the state CPI for agricultural workers, for the years in
which state CPI data is available (6,850 observations).
4. Wage changes are top coded at 50% and bottom coded at –50%.

38

B. Orissa Village Sample

0

0

.2

.2

Fraction
.4

Fraction
.4

.6

.6

.8

.8

A. ICRISAT Village Sample

-40

-20
0
20
Deviation of own wage from village mode

40

-100

-50
0
50
Deviation of own wage from village mode

100

Figure 3 – Dispersion of Agricultural Wages
Notes:
1. Each panel displays the distribution of: (wage reported by worker) – (gender-specific mode of wages in village).
2. Panel A uses observations from the 2001-2004 ICRISAT Village Level Studies. Respondents were asked to report
their average daily wage in the past year or season. Sample is restricted to “Daily wage earners” who report their
work type as agricultural labor. Observations are at the worker-year level. N=6 villages, 259 households.
3. Panel B uses data collected by Breza, Kaur, and Shamdasani (2017). Respondents were asked to list their work
activity and wage level for each of the past 10 days. Observations are at the worker-day level. N=25 villages, 185
male workers.

Table 1
Effect of Rainfall Shocks on Wages
Dependent Variable: Log Nominal Daily Agricultural Wage
Source:
World Bank Data (1956-1987)

Positive shock this year
Negative shock this year
Positive shock last year
Negative shock last year

Source:
National Sample Survey Data (1982-2009)

All
observations

All
observations

Non-positive
shock this year

All
observations

All
observations

Non-positive
shock this year

(1)
0.021
(0.009)**
-0.004
(0.010)

(2)

(3)

(4)
0.059
(0.018)***
0.007
(0.023)

(5)

(6)

0.017
(0.009)**
0.007
(0.009)

0.026
(0.010)***
-0.001
(0.011)

0.030
(0.021)
0.005
(0.022)

0.050
(0.023)**
0.019
(0.023)

Observations: district-years
7,680
7,680
5,948
---Observations: individual-years
---59,243
59,243
50,158
Notes:
1. The dependent variable is the log of the nominal daily wage for casual agricultural work.
2. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below) the 80th (20th) percentile
of the district’s usual distribution. No shock is rainfall between the 20th-80th percentile of the district’s usual distribution.
3. Cols (3) and (6) restrict analysis to observations where there was a negative shock or no shock this year.
4. All regressions include district and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

39

Table 2
Test for Wage Adjustment
Dependent Variable: Log Nominal Daily Agricultural Wage
Source:
World Bank (1956-1987)
Full sample Full sample
(1)
(2)

Source:
National Sample Survey (1982-2009)
Full sample
Full sample
Laborers
Full sample
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Last year's shock

This year's shock

None, Negative, or Positive

Positive

0.026
(0.009)***

0.043
(0.009)***

0.063
(0.018)***

0.072
(0.019)***

0.071
(0.019)***

0.066
(0.016)***

None or Negative

Negative

-0.011
(0.010)

-0.014
(0.010)

0.001
(0.024)

0.001
(0.023)

0.000
(0.024)

-0.000
(0.022)

Positive

Negative

0.035
(0.020)*

0.052
(0.021)**

0.046
(0.042)

0.058
(0.041)

0.064
(0.039)*

0.054
(0.039)

Positive

None

0.020
(0.010)**

0.037
(0.011)***

0.058
(0.024)**

0.064
(0.024)***

0.060
(0.025)**

0.064
(0.022)***

Female worker

-0.213
(0.028)***
0.0000
(0.0003)
0.0025
(0.0037)
Yes
-52,278
3.39

Household land size (acres)
Education

Prior shock history controls?
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Observations: district-years
7,680
7,680
---Observations: individual-years
--59,243
59,243
51,697
Dependent variable mean
1.21
1.21
3.39
3.39
3.39
Notes:
1. The dependent variable is the log of the nominal daily wage for casual agricultural work.
2. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below) the 80th (20th) percentile of the district’s
usual distribution. No shock ("None") is rainfall between the 20th-80th percentile of the district’s usual distribution.
3. The shock sequences are presented as the shock in the previous year and the shock in the current year. Each of the 4 shock covariates are
indicators that equal 1 if the sequence of shocks was realized and zero otherwise. The omitted category in each regression is {None or
Negative} last year and {None} this year.
4. All regressions include district and year fixed effects. Cols. (2) and (4)-(6) add controls for positive shocks 2 years ago and 3 years ago. Col.
(6) includes fixed effects for quarter of the year. Col. (5) limits analysis to individuals whose primary source of earnings is casual daily labor.
5. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

40

Table 3
Impact of Inflation on Wage Adjustment
Dependent Variable: Log Nominal Daily Agricultural Wage
Inflation measure:
Inflation rate
(1)
(2)
1

Last year's shock
Any

This year's shock
Positive

2

Interaction with inflation measure

3

None or Negative

4

Interaction with inflation measure

5

Positive

6

Interaction with inflation measure

7

Positive

8

Interaction with inflation measure

Negative

Negative

None

Inflation measure:
Indicator: Inflation > 6%
(3)
(4)

0.027
(0.009)***
0.002
(0.095)

0.043
(0.010)***
0.009
(0.094)

0.032
(0.010)***
-0.016
(0.019)

0.047
(0.011)***
-0.013
(0.019)

0.005
(0.012)
-0.230
(0.107)**

0.000
(0.012)
-0.184
(0.104)*

0.006
(0.014)
-0.038
(0.021)*

0.001
(0.013)
-0.031
(0.020)

0.067
(0.025)***
-0.481
(0.203)**

0.084
(0.025)***
-0.479
(0.205)**

0.069
(0.028)**
-0.083
(0.037)**

0.085
(0.029)***
-0.082
(0.037)**

0.041
(0.014)***
-0.257
(0.096)***

0.057
(0.014)***
-0.248
(0.097)**

0.042
(0.015)***
-0.047
(0.019)**

0.057
(0.015)***
-0.045
(0.020)**

Shock history controls
No
Yes
No
Yes
Observations: district-years
7680
7680
7680
7680
R2
0.947
0.948
0.947
0.947
F-test p-value: Coefficient 3 + Coefficient 4 = 0
--0.043**
0.049**
F-test p-value: Coefficient 5 + Coefficient 6 = 0
--0.566
0.891
F-test p-value: Coefficient 7 + Coefficient 8 = 0
--0.690
0.316
Notes:
1. The dependent variable is the log of the nominal wage for casual daily agricultural work. Observations are from the
World Bank data.
2. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below) the 80th (20th)
percentile of the district’s usual distribution. No shock ("None") is rainfall between the 20th-80th percentile of the
district’s usual distribution.
3. The shock sequences are presented as the shock in the previous year and the shock in the current year. Each
of the 4 shock covariates (rows 1, 3, 5, 7) is an indicator that equals 1 if the sequence of shocks was realized and
zero otherwise. The omitted category in each regression is {None or Negative} last year and {None} this year.
4. The remaining covariates (rows 2, 4, 6, 8) are interactions of the shock sequence indicators with a measure of
inflation. Inflation is the percentage change in the state CPI for Agricultural Labourers, averaged across all
states excluding the district's own state; for 1956 and 1957, the national CPI is used because state CPI data is
unavailable. The inflation measure in Cols. (1)-(2) is the continous inflation rate, and in Cols. (3)-(4) is a binary
indicator for inflation above 6%.
5. All regressions include district and year fixed effects. Cols. (2) and (4) add controls for positive shocks 2
years ago and 3 years ago. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

41

Table 4
Test for Employment Effects
Dependent variable
Total worker-days in agriculture
(1)
Positive shock last year

(2)

Panel A: Simple specification
-0.117
-0.153
(0.051)**
(0.051)***

Positive shock last year x
Acres per adult in HH

2

Panel B: Full specification
This year's shock
Positive
0.145
0.100
(0.063)**
(0.068)
Interaction with acres per adult in HH

3

None or Negative

4

Interaction with acres per adult in HH

5

Positive

6

Interaction with acres per adult in HH

7

Positive

8

Interaction with acres per adult in HH

1

Last year's shock
Any

Negative

Negative

None

Non-agri
employment

(3)

(4)

-0.193
(0.059)***
0.067
(0.054)

-0.014
(0.027)
0.016
(0.20)

0.074
(0.080)
0.053
(0.068)

-0.033
(0.027)
0.030
(0.026)

-0.094
(0.055)*

-0.096
(0.055)*

-0.188
(0.071)***
0.136
(0.069)**

0.011
(0.024)
-0.020
(0.021)

-0.254
(0.084)***

-0.289
(0.086)***

-0.416
(0.090)***
0.212
(0.060)***

0.009
(0.053)
0.013
(0.055)

-0.099
(0.066)

-0.130
(0.065)**

-0.146
(0.074)**
0.027
(0.063)

-0.013
(0.035)
0.011
(0.032)

0.709
(0.118)***
-0.201
(0.034)***

-0.386
(0.043)***
0.085
(0.043)***

Acres per adult in HH
(Acres per adult in HH)2

Previous shock history controls?
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
F-test p-value: Coefficient 3 = Coefficient 5
0.087*
0.045**
0.027**
-Observations: individual-years
632,327
632,327
632,327
632,327
Dependent variable mean
1.74
1.74
1.74
0.28
Notes:
1. The dependent variable in Cols. (1)-(3) is the number of days in the last 7 days in which the worker did
any agricultural work (own farm work plus hired out work). In Col. (4) it is the number of days in the last 7
days in which the worker was hired for any non-agricultural work. Observations are from the NSS data.
2. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below) the
80th (20th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution. No shock ("None") is rainfall between the 20th80th percentile of the district’s usual distribution.
3. In Panel A, the shock covariate is a dummy for a positive shock in the previous year.
4. In Panel B, each of the 4 shock covariates (rows 1, 3, 5, 7) is an indicator that equals 1 if the sequence of
shocks (presented as the shock in the previous year and the shock in the current year) was realized and
equals 0 otherwise. The omitted category in these regressions is {None or Negative} last year and {None}
this year. Each covariate is interacted with number of acres per adult in the household (rows 2, 4, 6, 8).
5. All regressions include district and year fixed effects. Cols. (2) and (4) add controls for positive shocks 2
years ago and 3 years ago. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

42

Table 5
Compositional Changes in Labor Allocation
Dependent Variable
1

Positive shock last year

2

Positive shock last year x
Below median landholding
Positive shock last year x
Above median landholding

3

Below median landholding
Above median landholding

Total worker-days
in agriculture
(1)
-1.729
(0.503)***
1.734
(0.625)***
1.289
(0.585)**

Worker-days as
wage laborer
(2)
-1.198
(0.438)***
0.754
(0.520)
1.351
(0.545)**

Worker-days on
own farm
(3)
-0.531
(0.299)*
0.980
(0.306)***
-0.058
(0.410)

-1.017
(0.308)***
-0.618
(0.373)*

-2.107
(0.263)***
-4.171
(0.358)***

1.092
(0.176)***
3.549
(0.234)***

F-test p-value: Coefficient 1 + Coefficient 2 = 0
0.989
0.046**
0.047**
Observations: household-years
166,003
166,003
166,003
Dependent variable mean: Landless & marginal
5.152
5.016
0.136
Dependent variable mean: Below median land
4.179
2.770
1.410
Dependent variable mean: Above median land
5.022
0.882
4.140
Notes:
1. The table decomposes agricultural employment in the past 7 days. The dependent variable in Col. (2) is the
number of worker-days household members worked as hired casual wage laborers for others; in Col. (3) it is the
number of worker-days household members worked on their own land; and Col. (1) is the total number of workerdays in agriculture (own farm work plus hired out work). Observations are from the NSS data.
2. A positive shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above the 80th percentile of the
district’s usual distribution. The sample is comprised of observations in which there is no positive shock this year.
3. The regressions interact the lagged positive shock covariate with binary indicators for landholding categories.
The omitted category is landless and marginal landowners--those with less than 0.01 acres per adult in the
household. The median landholding is approximately 0.4 acres per adult in the household.
5. All regressions include district and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

43

Table 6: Fairness Norms in Rural Labor Markets
Proportion of respondents saying the scenario is "unfair" or "very unfair"

1

2

3

4

5

Panel A: Acceptability of Wage Reductions
A farmer hires a laborer to weed his land for 1 day at a wage of Rs. 120. There is a local
factory that pays Rs. 100 per day. One month later, the factory shuts down and many people
in the area become unemployed.
A) … After this, the farmer decides to do a second weeding and hires the same laborer as
before at a wage of Rs. 100.
B) … After this, the farmer decides to do a second weeding and hires one of the newly
unemployed laborers at a wage of Rs. 100.
A farmer usually pays laborers Rs. 120 per day. His son becomes sick and the medical bills
are very expensive. He lowers the wage to Rs. 110 per day.
Panel B: Money Illusion
Last year, the prevailing wage in a village was Rs. 100 per day. This year, the rains were very
bad and so crop yields will be lower than usual.
A) … There has been no change in the cost of food and clothing. Farmers decrease this year’s
wage rate from Rs. 100 to Rs. 95 per day.
B) …. The price of food and clothing has increased so that what used to cost Rs. 100 before
now costs Rs. 105. Farmers keep this year’s wage rate at Rs. 100.
C) … The price of food and clothing has increased since last year, so that what used to cost
Rs. 100 before now costs Rs. 110. Farmers increase this year’s wage rate from Rs. 100 to Rs.
105.
A farmer usually pays laborers Rs. 100 per day plus food. There is not much work in the area
and many laborers are looking for work. He stops providing food but continues to pay Rs.
100.
Panel C: Market Clearing Mechanisms
A farmer needs to hire a laborer to plough his land. There is not much work in the area at that
time, and 5 laborers want the job. The farmer asks each of them to state the lowest wage at
which they are willing to work, and then hires the laborer who stated the lowest wage.

All

Laborers

Employers

0.62

0.68

0.57

0.55

0.59

0.52

0.79

0.71

0.87

0.64

0.71

0.58

0.38

0.53

0.23

0.09

0.09

0.08

0.29

0.33

0.24

0.61

0.78

0.44

6

A farmer needs to hire a laborer to plough his land. The prevailing rate in the area is Rs. 120
per day. The farmer knows there is a laborer who needs money to meet a family expense and
is having difficulty finding work. The farmer offers the job to that laborer at Rs. 110 per day.

0.53

0.47

0.59

7

It is harvest time and all farmers in a village pay laborers Rs. 120 per day. One large farmer
decides to harvest some of his land immediately and needs to hire 10 laborers. To find enough
laborers, he pays them Rs. 150 per day for one week. In the following weeks, he decides to
harvest the rest of his land, and re-hires 5 of the laborers at Rs. 120 per day.

0.63

0.70

0.57

8

There are 20 landowners in a village. The prevailing wage during ploughing time is Rs. 120.
10 landowners want to attract extra laborers, and they increase the wage they pay to Rs. 130.
The other 10 landowners don’t need much labor and maintain the wage at Rs. 120.

0.45

0.52

0.39

Panel D: Fairness Norms and Effort
A farmer needs a laborer to weed his land. The prevailing wage is Rs. 120. There isn’t much work in the area and many
want the job. A laborer named Balu has family expenses for which he desperately needs money. The farmer knows Balu’s
situation, and offers him the job at: A) Rs. 120 B) Rs. 100. Given his need for money, Balu accepts the job. How
carefully will he weed?
More carefully than usual
With the normal amount of care
Less carefully than usual
A) Rs. 120
0.55
0.44
0.01
B) Rs. 100
0.06
0.54
0.40
Notes:
1. The sample is comprised of 196 casual laborers and 200 landowning farmers (employers) from 34 villages across 6 districts
in the states of Orissa and Madhya Pradesh. Respondents were working males aged 20-80.
2. Each respondent only received half the scenarios presented in the table. In the case of paired scenarios (questions 1A/1B,
3A/3C, and 9A/9B), each respondent was asked only 1 scenario in each pair. They were asked to rate each scenario as “Very
fair”, “Fair”, “Unfair”, or “Very Unfair”. The table reports the proportion selecting “Unfair” or “Very Unfair".
9

44

ONLINE APPENDICES

APPENDIX A: APPENDIX TABLES AND FIGURES

Estimated Impact
(Coefficient)

0.1
0.05
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-0.05
-0.1

Rainfall Decile

Appendix Figure 1 – Impact of Rainfall on Log Crop Yield
Notes:
1. The figure plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a regression of log crop yields on dummies for
each decile of the rainfall distribution.
2. Log crop yields is the log of a weighted average of yields of the 20 crops for which data is available in the World
Bank dataset. The yield for each crop has first been normalized by the mean yield of that crop in the district.
Weights are the mean percentage of land area planted with a given crop in a district.
3. Each decile dummy equals 1 if rainfall in the first month of the monsoon in the current year fell within the given
decile of the district’s usual rainfall distribution for that month and equals 0 otherwise. The confidence interval for
the 5th decile, which is the omitted category, is computed by averaging the confidence intervals for the 4th and 6th
deciles.
4. Each regression contains district and year fixed effects, and controls for lagged positive and lagged negative
shocks in the past 5 years. Analysis is limited to districts with non-positive shocks in the previous year to improve
precision.
5. Standard errors are corrected to allow for clustering by region-year.

1

.5
Proportion of households with any migrants
.1
.2
.3
.4
0

-2

-1

0
1
Standardized Rainfall Deviation

2

3

Appendix Figure 2 – Relationship between Rainfall and Migration
Notes:
1. Observations are village-years from the ICRISAT VLS 2001-2004 data.
2. The y-axis measures the proportion of households that reported any out migration in a given village-year.
3. The x-axis is standardized deviation of June rainfall (the month of monsoon arrival for all these villages).

0

.2

Fraction

.4

.6

Proportion of Wages Paid in Cash

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
(cash payment) / (cash payment + in-kind payment)

Appendix Figure 3 – Proportion of Wages Paid in Cash
Notes:
1. Histogram plots the proportion of the casual agricultural wage payment that was paid in cash.
2. Observations are from the National Sample Survey data.

2

1

Appendix Table 1
Summary Statistics
Variable

Observations
District- Individualyears
years

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Rainfall shocks
% Positive Shock (1956-1987)
% No Shock (1956-1987)
% Negative Shock (1956-1987)

0.226
0.626
0.149

0.418
0.484
0.356

7,680
7,680
7,680

----

Univ of Delaware
Univ of Delaware
Univ of Delaware

% Positive Shock (1982-2009)
% No Shock (1982-2009)
% Negative Shock (1982-2009)

0.149
0.627
0.224

0.356
0.484
0.417

3,548
3,548
3,548

----

Univ of Delaware
Univ of Delaware
Univ of Delaware

1.208
3.390
1.743

0.817
0.470
2.783

7,680
---

-59,243
632,327

World Bank
Natl Sample Survey
Natl Sample Survey

Wage and employment variables
Log nominal agricultural wage (1956-1987)
Log nominal agricultural wage (1982-2009)
Agricultural employment in past week

Source

Other measures
Inflation
0.066
0.095
7,680
-CPI for Agri Labourers
Acres possessed by household
2.750
6.336
-632,327
Natl Sample Survey
Acres per adult in household
0.633
0.821
-632,327
Natl Sample Survey
Notes:
1. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below) the 80th (20th) percentile of
the district’s usual distribution. No shock is rainfall between the 20th-80th percentile of the district’s usual distribution.
2. The nominal agricultural wage is the daily wage for casual agricultural work in each dataset.
3. Agricultural employment is the number of worker-days in the past week the individual was employed in agricultural work
(either own farm or on someone else's farm).
4. Inflation equals the percentage change in the state-level CPI for Agricultural Labourers from last year to this year. In the years
where state CPI is not available, national CPI is used to compute inflation (the years 1956 and 1957).

3

Appendix Table 2
Test for Serial Correlation in Rainfall
Dependent variable: Rainfall deviation in the current year
Sample

Rainfall deviation in the previous year

World Bank data districts
(1956 - 1987)
(1)
(2)
-0.031
-0.058
(0.034)
(0.032)*
No
Yes
7,680
7,680

NSS data districts
(1982 - 2009)
(3)
(4)
-0.014
0.054
(0.073)
(0.097)
No
Yes
3,548
3,548

District and year fixed effects?
Observations: district-years
Notes:
1. This table tests for serial correlation in rainfall. The unit of observation is a district-year.
2. Rainfall deviation is the rainfall level in inches in the first month of the monsoon minus the
district's median (50th percentile) rainfall level in that month in the sample distribution. The sample
distribution for the World Bank data is computed for the years 1956-1987. The sample distribution
for the NSS data is computed for the years 1982-2009.
3. Each column shows results of an OLS regression of the district's rainfall deviation in the current
year on the district's rainfall deviation in the previous year. The regressions are run for the districtyears of data included each respective dataset: 1956-1987 in the World Bank data and the 9 years
covered in the NSS data.
4. Standard errors in each regression are corrected to allow for clustering by geographic region, as
defined in the NSS data.

Appendix Table 3
Summary Statistics: Wage Change Premiums
Mean Relative
Wage Change
(1)

Standard error
(2)

Last year's shock

This year's shock

Any

Positive

0.0388

0.0400

None or Negative

Negative

-0.0127

0.0412

Positive

Negative

0.0138

0.0716

Positive

None

0.0332

0.0440

Notes: This table summarizes wage change patterns for each shock category relative to the reference
category in the paper. I compute the wage change as the difference between the log of the current
year's wage and the log of the previous year's wage. The above presents the simple mean difference
between each shock category and the reference category for this wage change variable. The estimates
come from regressing the wage change on the left hand side on dummies for each shock category.

4

Appendix Table 4
Test for Wage Adjustment: 9-cell Specification
Dependent Variable: Log Nominal Daily Agricultural Wage
Source:
World Bank (1956-1987)
(1)
(2)
(3)
% Obs

(4)
% Obs

Source:
NSS (1982-2009)
(5)
(6)

Last year's shock

This year's shock

1

None

None

40%

Omitted

Omitted

39%

Omitted

Omitted

2

Negative

None

8%

0.001
(0.011)

-0.002
(0.011)

12%

0.021
(0.022)

0.020
(0.022)

3

None

Positive

14%

0.021
(0.010)**

0.044
(0.011)***

9%

0.086
(0.019)***

0.086
(0.021)***

4

Negative

Positive

3%

0.062
(0.020)***

0.087
(0.020)***

3%

0.093
(0.041)**

0.088
(0.042)**

5

Positive

Positive

5%

0.015
(0.016)

0.036
(0.016)**

3%

-0.040
(0.034)

-0.041
(0.035)

6

None

Negative

8%

-0.009
(0.012)

-0.011
(0.012)

11%

0.028
(0.023)

0.024
(0.023)

7

Negative

Negative

3%

-0.017
(0.017)

-0.019
(0.017)

3%

-0.060
(0.051)

-0.059
(0.053)

8

Positive

Negative

4%

0.035
(0.020)*

0.059
(0.021)***

8%

0.058
(0.040)

0.061
(0.039)

9

Positive

None

14%

0.020
(0.010)**

0.044
(0.011)***

13%

0.065
(0.023)***

0.064
(0.024)***

Prior shock history controls?
-No
Yes
-No
Yes
Observations: district-years
7,680
7,680
7,680
3,548
--Observations: individual-years
----59,243
59,243
Notes:
1. The dependent variable is the log of the nominal wage for casual daily agricultural work.
2. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below) the 80th (20th) percentile
of the district’s usual distribution. No shock ("None") is rainfall between the 20th-80th percentile of the district’s usual
distribution.
3. The shock sequences are presented as the shock in the previous year and the shock in the current year. Each of the 8 shock
covariates is an indicator that equals 1 if the sequence of shocks was realized and equals zero otherwise. The omitted category
in each regression is {None} last year and {None} this year. Cols. (1) and (4) indicate the percentage of observations in which
each shock sequence was realized.
4. All regressions include district and year fixed effects. Cols. (3) and (6) add controls for positive shocks 2 years ago and 3
years ago. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

5

Appendix Table 5
Effects by Gender
Dependent Variable: Log Nominal Daily Agricultural Wage
Males
(1)

Females
(2)

Last year's shock

This year's shock

Any

Positive

0.0860***
(0.023)

0.0515***
(0.017)

None or Negative

Negative

-0.000143
(0.024)

-0.0132
(0.022)

Positive

Negative

0.0844*
(0.047)

0.0179
(0.036)

Positive

None

0.0872***
(0.032)

0.0426**
(0.021)

Observations: individual-years
30,201
29,007
R2
0.599
0.570
Notes:
1. This table replicates the main specification separately for male and female laborers.
2. Observations are from the NSS data. Note that the gender variable is missing for 35
observations, which are therefore excluded in this table.
3. All regressions include district and year fixed effects, as well as controls for positive
shocks 2 years ago and 3 years ago.
4. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

6

Appendix Table 6
Effects for Cash vs. In-Kind Wage Payments
Dependent variable:

Dependent variable:

Cash wage payment
Log wage
Wage level
(1)
(2)

In-kind wage payment
Log wage
Wage level
Proportion
(3)
(4)
(5)

Last year's shock

This year's shock

Any

Positive

0.0718***
(0.020)

3.144***
(0.819)

-0.0761
(0.078)

-0.586
(0.379)

-0.0185
(0.014)

None or Negative

Negative

-0.0324
(0.025)

-0.609
(0.924)

0.0699
(0.077)

0.612*
(0.351)

0.000516
(0.010)

Positive

Negative

0.0745
(0.050)

3.853**
(1.812)

-0.149
(0.100)

-1.669**
(0.760)

-0.0711***
(0.026)

Positive

None

0.0459**
(0.021)

2.821**
(1.422)

-0.109
(0.088)

-0.548
(0.764)

-0.0283**
(0.013)

Observations: individual-years
48,892
55,825
19,529
55,825
55,825
R2
0.530
0.520
0.618
0.453
0.531
Dependent variable mean
3.297
25.88
2.482
6.167
0.202
Notes:
1. This table replicates the main specification separately for the cash and (monetary value of) the in-kind components
of the daily wage payment.
2. The dependent variable in Cols. (1) and (3) is the log of the payment amount. In Cols. (2) and (4) it is the payment
level (included for robustness due to the presence of zero cash or in-kind payment levels for some observations). In
Col. (5) it is the proportion of the in-kind wage payment: in-kind / total payment.
3. Shocks are defined exactly as in the main specification in the paper. The omitted shock category in each regression
is {None or Negative} last year and {None} this year.
4. All regressions include district and year fixed effects, as well as controls for positive shocks 2 years ago and 3 years
ago.
5. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.
6. Observations are from NSS data. In round 55 of the survey, information on the cash versus in-kind components of
the payment were not separately recorded for some observations; these are omitted from the analysis.

7

Appendix Table 7
Wage Adjustment for Flat Rate vs. Piece Rate Contracts
Dependent Variable: Log Nominal Daily Cash Payment
Rounds with
contract type
(1)

Rounds with
contract type
(2)

All rounds
(3)

0.0923**
(0.041)

0.102**
(0.045)

0.120***
(0.038)

1

Last year's shock
Any

This year's shock
Positive

2

Interaction with piece rate dummy

-0.0153
(0.072)

-0.0159
(0.072)

-0.00809
(0.068)

3

None or Negative

0.0306
(0.040)

0.0273
(0.041)

0.0172
(0.041)

4

Interaction with piece rate dummy

-0.0772
(0.092)

-0.0754
(0.092)

-0.0923
(0.086)

5

Positive

0.0335
(0.063)

0.0690
(0.062)

0.0375
(0.057)

6

Interaction with piece rate dummy

-0.00259
(0.061)

-0.00494
(0.061)

-0.0000641
(0.057)

7

Positive

0.111*
(0.065)

0.131**
(0.066)

0.139**
(0.054)

8

Interaction with piece rate dummy

-0.117
(0.106)

-0.119
(0.105)

-0.114
(0.098)

9

Piece rate dummy

0.00634
(0.030)

0.00666
(0.030)

0.00693
(0.028)

Negative

Negative

None

Shock history controls
No
Yes
Yes
Observations: district-years
15864
15864
48512
Notes:
1. The dependent variable is the log nominal cash payment for a day of casual agricultural work.
2. Shocks are defined as in the main specifications in the paper.
3. The remaining covariates (rows 2, 4, 6, 8) are interactions of each respective shock sequence indicator
with a dummy that equals 1 if the worker was paid a piece rate and equals 0 for a flat wage.
4. In the NSS, contract terms (whether the payment was a flat wage, piece rate, etc.) are only provided in
rounds 55, 61, and 66. Cols. (1)-(2) are restricted to observations in which contract terms are defined. To
increase power by improving the estimation of the fixed effects, Col. (3) includes observations from all
rounds, and adds a full set of interactions of all covariates with a dummy for rounds in which contract
terms are not defined; consequently, the displayed coefficients provide the effects for only the rounds of
interest (55, 61, 66).
5. All regressions include district and year fixed effects. Cols. (2)-(3) add controls for positive shocks 2
years ago and 3 years ago. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

8

Appendix Table 8
Robustness to Definition of Rainfall Shocks: NSS Data Results
80/20
(1)

Percentile Cut-off for Positive/Negative Shocks
80/25
80/30
75/25
70/30
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Last year's shock

This year's shock

Any

Panel A - Dependent Variable: Log Nominal Daily Wage
Positive
0.072
0.075
0.075
0.067
(0.019)*** (0.020)*** (0.019)*** (0.019)***

None or Negative

Negative

0.001
(0.023)

0.013
(0.021)

0.013
(0.020)

0.021
(0.023)

0.025
(0.024)

Positive

Negative

0.058
(0.041)

0.087
(0.038)**

0.090
(0.036)**

0.063
(0.037)*

0.047
(0.033)

Positive

None

0.064
(0.024)***

0.042
(0.024)*

0.037
(0.022)

0.054
(0.022)**

0.018
(0.023)

Any

Panel B - Dependent Variable: Agricultural Employment
Positive
0.100
0.093
0.082
(0.068)
(0.070)
(0.071)

0.080
(0.066)

-0.020
(0.071)

None or Negative

Negative

-0.096
(0.055)*

-0.089
(0.053)*

-0.112
(0.056)**

-0.081
(0.054)

-0.111
(0.063)*

Positive

Negative

-0.289
(0.086)***

-0.283
(0.077)***

-0.308
(0.077)***

-0.233
(0.073)***

-0.288
(0.079)***

Positive

None

-0.130
(0.065)**

-0.114
(0.073)

-0.094
(0.075)

-0.047
(0.077)

-0.094
(0.074)

0.056
(0.021)***

Notes:
1. This tables examines robustness of the results to alternate cut-offs for positive and negative shocks in the NSS data. The
dependent variable in Panel A is the log of the nominal wage for casual daily agricultural work, and in Panel B is total
number of days worked in agriculture (on one's own farm or as a hired laborer on someone else's farm).
2. In each column, positive and negative shocks are defined under different cut-offs, as labeled at the top of each column.
E.g., in Col (1), a positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below) the 80th
(20th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution. This corresponds to the definiton of shocks in the main specification in
the paper. Similarly, in Col. (2), a positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above
(below) the 80th (25th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution, and so on.
3. All regressions include district and year fixed effects and controls for positive shocks 2 years ago and 3 years ago.
4. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

9

Appendix Table 9
Robustness to Definition of Rainfall Shocks: World Bank Data Results
Percentile Cut-off for Positive/Negative Shocks
80/20
80/25
80/30
75/25
70/30
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Last year's shock
Any

This year's shock
Positive

0.0474***
(0.013)

0.0418***
(0.010)

0.0410***
(0.010)

0.0445***
(0.010)

0.0444***
(0.011)

-0.013
(0.018)

-0.00735
(0.018)

-0.00699
(0.018)

-0.00832
(0.017)

-0.0121
(0.016)

0.000586
(0.013)

-0.0123
(0.012)

-0.0139
(0.012)

-0.0137
(0.013)

-0.0188
(0.013)

-0.0312
(0.020)

-0.0190
(0.018)

-0.0142
(0.017)

-0.0195
(0.018)

-0.0154
(0.017)

0.0849***
(0.029)

0.0738***
(0.026)

0.0720***
(0.024)

0.0743***
(0.024)

0.0711***
(0.021)

Interaction with 1{Inflation> 6%}

-0.0816**
(0.037)

-0.0714**
(0.032)

-0.0572*
(0.030)

-0.0678**
(0.031)

-0.0594**
(0.028)

Positive

0.0573***
(0.015)

0.0519***
(0.016)

0.0504***
(0.017)

0.0510***
(0.016)

0.0451***
(0.015)

-0.0445**
(0.020)
0.0486
0.891
0.316

-0.0397*
(0.020)
0.0152
0.902
0.356

-0.0432**
(0.021)
0.0184
0.434
0.584

-0.0422**
(0.020)
0.00874
0.759
0.506

-0.0489**
(0.020)
0.00383
0.555
0.780

Interaction with 1{Inflation> 6%}
None or Negative

Negative

Interaction with 1{Inflation> 6%}
Positive

Negative

None

Interaction with 1{Inflation> 6%}
F-test p-value: Coeff 3 + Coeff 4 = 0
F-test p-value: Coeff 5 + Coeff 6 = 0
F-test p-value: Coeff 7 + Coeff 8 = 0

Notes:
1. This tables examines robustness of the results to alternate cut-offs for positive and negative shocks in the World Bank
data. It replicates the regression in Col. (4) of Table 3 under different shock definitions.
2. In each column, positive and negative shocks are defined under different cut-offs, as labeled at the top of each column.
E.g., in Col (1), a positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below) the
80th (20th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution. This corresponds to the definiton of shocks in the main
specification in the paper. Similarly, in Col. (2), a positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the
monsoon above (below) the 80th (25th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution, and so on.
3. All regressions include district and year fixed effects and controls for positive shocks 2 years ago and 3 years ago.
4. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

10

Appendix Table 10
Correlation of Shocks with Prices and Inflation
Dependent variable
Other
Own
Other states'
harvest
states' harvest
price
CPI
price
(2)
(3)
(4)

Other
states'
inflation
(5)

Last year's shock

Own
CPI
(1)
This year's shock

None, Drought, or Positive

Positive

0.67
(1.24)

-0.42
(2.29)

-0.24
(0.17)

0.13
(0.35)

0.0001
(0.0006)

None or Drought

Drought

-1.17
(1.84)

0.79
(2.43)

0.13
(0.24)

-0.20
(0.33)

0.0009
(0.0012)

Positive

Drought

-5.54
(3.45)

-2.27
(4.75)

0.42
(0.46)

0.79
(0.56)

0.0028
(0.0014)*

Positive

None

-1.77
(2.17)

-1.08
(2.83)

-0.02
(0.30)

0.21
(0.40)

0.0017
(0.0012)

6,851
275

7,680
111

7,440
260

7,680
117

7,680
0.066

Observations: district-years
Dependent variable mean

Notes:
1. Own CPI is the district's state-level CPI for Agricultural Labourers. Own harvest price is the
harvest price for paddy (i.e. rice) (given in the World Bank dataset). Inflation is the percentage
change in the CPI for Agricultural Labourers since the previous year. The dependent variables in
Cols. (3)-(6) are computed by averaging values for all states except the district's own state.
2. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above
(below) the 80th (20th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution. No shock ("None") is
rainfall between the 20th-80th percentile of the district’s usual distribution.
3. The shock sequences are presented as the shock in the previous year and the shock in the
current year. Each of the 4 shock covariates is an indicator that equals 1 if the sequence of
shocks was realized and equals zero otherwise. The omitted category in each regression is {None
or Negative} last year and {None} this year.
4. All regressions include district and year fixed effects.
5. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

11

Appendix Table 11
Inflation Results: Robustness and Placebo Checks
Dependent variable: Log nominal daily agricultural wage
Interaction Term in Regressions
Other states' Linear year
Post-1970
inflation
trend
dummy
(1)
(2)
(3)
1

Last year's shock
None, Drought, or Positive

2

Interaction

3

None or Drought

4

Interaction

5

Positive

6

Interaction

7

Positive

8

Interaction

This year's shock
Positive

0.030
(0.009)***
0.005
(0.012)

0.026
(0.009)***
-0.000
(0.000)

0.031
(0.013)**
-0.009
(0.017)

Drought

0.005
(0.012)
-0.220
(0.109)**

-0.012
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.001)

-0.004
(0.014)
-0.016
(0.022)

Drought

0.077
(0.025)***
-0.522
(0.199)***

0.035
(0.020)*
-0.001
(0.003)

0.033
(0.030)
0.003
(0.040)

None

0.045
(0.014)***
-0.271
(0.096)***

0.020
(0.010)**
0.000
(0.001)

0.021
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.019)

Observations: district-years
7,200
7,680
7,680
R2
0.946
0.947
0.947
Dependent variable mean
1.27
1.21
1.21
Notes:
1. The dependent variable is the log of the nominal wage for casual daily agricultural work.
Observations are from the World Bank data.
2. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below)
the 80th (20th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution. No shock ("None") is rainfall between
the 20th-80th percentile of the district’s usual distribution. The shock sequences are presented as the
shock in the previous year and the shock in the current year. Each of the 4 shock covariates (rows 1,
3, 5, 7) is an indicator that equals 1 if the sequence of shocks was realized and zero otherwise. The
omitted category in each regression is {None or Negative} last year and {None} this year.
3. The remaining covariates (rows 2, 4, 6, 8) are interactions with the shock sequence indicators. In
Col. (1) the interaction term is inflation, which equals the percentage change in the state CPI for
Agricultural Labourers, averaged across all states excluding the district's own state; this is not
available for 1956 and 1957. In Col. (2) the interaction term is the calendar year of the observation.
In Col. (3), it is a binary indicator for whether the year is after 1970.
4. Regressions include district and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

12

Appendix Table 12
Inflation Results: Alternate Inflation Definitions
Dependent variable: Log nominal daily agricultural wage
Interaction Term in Regressions

1

Last year's shock
None, Drought, or Positive

2

Interaction

3

None or Drought

4

Interaction

5

Positive

6

Interaction

7

Positive

8

Interaction

Sample

Avg of current
and next year's
inflation
(2)

Avg of current
and previous
year's inflation
(3)

Current year's
inflation
(4)

0.0529***
(0.011)

0.0594***
(0.012)

0.0440***
(0.010)

-0.0128
(0.019)

-0.0305
(0.022)

-0.0442*
(0.023)

-0.0108
(0.019)

-0.000959
(0.013)

-0.00247
(0.015)

-0.0184
(0.016)

-0.000959
(0.013)

-0.0348
(0.023)

-0.0226
(0.028)

0.00759
(0.025)

-0.0348
(0.023)

0.0847***
(0.029)

0.0590
(0.039)

0.0987***
(0.031)

0.0847***
(0.029)

-0.0758**
(0.038)

-0.0187
(0.062)

-0.121***
(0.045)

-0.0758**
(0.038)

0.0553***
(0.016)

0.0534***
(0.016)

0.0464***
(0.015)

0.0553***
(0.016)

-0.0334
(0.021)

-0.0457*
(0.025)

-0.0219
(0.022)

-0.0334
(0.021)

All

All

All

Exclude
1968 & 1975
7,200

Current year's
inflation
(1)
This year's shock
Positive
0.0474***
(0.011)

Drought

Drought

None

Observations: district-years
7,680
7,680
7,680
Notes:
1. Observations are from the World Bank data.
2. In Cols. (1) and (4), the interaction term is a dummy for inflation>6% in the current calendar year -- Col (1)
corresponds to the main specification in the paper. Cols. (2) and (3) average the value of this variable for the current year
with the next calendar year (Col. 2) and with the previous calendar year (Col. 3). The robustness checks are similar if the
continuous version of variables is used instead.
3. Col (4) drops observations from years 1968 and 1975.
4. Regressions include district and year fixed effects, and controls for positive shocks 2 years ago and 3 years ago.
Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

13

Appendix Table 13
Robustness: Wage Rigidity in Low Inflation Years
Dependent Variable: Log Nominal Daily Agricultural Wage
Sample
Inflation < 4%
(1)

Inflation < 2%
(2)

Inflation < 1%
(3)

Last year's shock

This year's shock

Any

Positive

0.0438***
(0.012)

0.0361***
(0.013)

0.0363**
(0.014)

None or Negative

Negative

-0.00388
(0.014)

0.00727
(0.016)

0.00323
(0.016)

Positive

Negative

0.0628**
(0.025)

0.0530*
(0.027)

0.0527**
(0.025)

Positive

None

0.0433**
(0.018)

0.0358**
(0.017)

0.0230
(0.019)

Observations: district-years
2,792
2,312
1,926
Notes:
1. The dependent variable is the log of the nominal wage for casual daily agricultural work.
2. Each of the three columns limits observations to those in which the state inflation rate was less
than 4%, 2%, or 1%, respectively, in that calendar year.
3. All regressions include district and year fixed effects and lagged positive shock controls.
4. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

14

Appendix Table 14
Effects of Rainfall on Composition & Size of Agricultural Labor Force
Dependent variable

Panel A: Simple specification
Positive shock last year
Panel B: Full specification
Last year's shock
This year's shock
Any
Positive
None or Negative

Negative

Positive

Negative

Positive

None

Individual
reports being
in agricultural
labor force

Individual
migrated into
village

Household
member
migrated out
of village

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.0034
(0.0039)

0.0018
(0.0021)

-0.0037
(0.0026)

0.0027
(0.0047)
0.0025
(0.0035)
-0.0008
(0.0070)
-0.0048
(0.0045)

-0.0047
(0.0017)***
0.0027
(0.0029)
-0.0006
(0.0045)
0.0020
(0.0019)

-0.0026
(0.0042)
-0.0053
(0.0132)
-0.0061
(0.0128)
-0.0047
(0.0031)

Observations: individual-years
1,530,688
414,232
Observations: household-years
36,251
Dependent variable mean
0.389
0.230
0.035
Notes:
1. In Col. (1), the dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 if the respondent indicated
agriculture as his/her primary or subsidiary occupation, and equals 0 otherwise. The sample is
comprised of all rural residents from all rounds of the NSS.
2. In Col. (2), the dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 if the individual is a migrant
into the village and 0 otherwise. The sample is comprised of all rural residents in rounds for
which questions on individual-level in-migration status were asked (rounds 38, 43, 55).
3. In Col. (3), the dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 if the household reports
having a member who has migrated out in the past year and 0 otherwise. The sample is
comprised of all rural households in round 64, which has data on out-migration status by year,
surveyed in the final quarter of the agricultural year (so that the 1 year recall links cleanly to
agricultural year).
4. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above
(below) the 80th (20th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution. No shock ("None") is
rainfall between the 20th-80th percentile of the district’s usual distribution.
5. In Panel A, the shock covariate is a dummy for a positive shock in the previous year.
6. In Panel B, each of the 4 shock covariates is an indicator that equals 1 if the sequence of
shocks (presented as the shock in the previous year and the shock in the current year) was
realized and equals zero otherwise. The omitted category in these regressions is {None or
Negative} last year and {None} this year.
7. Results are from OLS regressions. Regressions (1) and (2) contain district and year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

15

Appendix Table 15
Relationship between Rainfall and Migration (ICRISAT)
Any
migration

Any
migration

Number of
migrants

Number of
migrants

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0343**
(0.011)

-0.0410***
(0.010)

Panel B: Continuous rainfall deviation - Asymmetric effects
Standardized June rain x Positive deviation
-0.0413***
-0.0437***
-0.0627***
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.016)

-0.0650**
(0.018)

Dependent variable

Standardized June rain

Panel A: Continuous rainfall deviation
-0.0260***
-0.0286***
(0.006)
(0.006)

Standardized June rain x Negative deviation

Positive shock (above 80th percentile)

Negative shock (below 20th percentile)

-0.00446
(0.016)

-0.00719
(0.018)

Panel C: Binary shocks
-0.0761***
-0.0841***
(0.020)
(0.021)
0.0135
(0.017)

0.0161
(0.020)

0.00562
(0.025)

-0.00701
(0.030)

-0.0961**
(0.043)

-0.114**
(0.042)

0.0197
(0.027)

0.0322
(0.030)

Village fixed effects?
Yes
No
Yes
No
Household fixed effects?
No
Yes
No
Yes
Observations: household-years
1781
1781
1781
1781
Dependent variable mean
0.177
0.177
0.322
0.322
Notes:
1. Observations are household-years from the ICRISAT VLS 2001-2004 data.
2. The dependent variable in Cols. (1)-(2) is a dummy for whether there was any out migration from the
household. In Cols. (3)-(4), the dependent variable is the continuous number of individuals who migrated out
of the household at some point during the year.
3. Standardized June rain is the standardized deviation from the mean of June rainfall, where the mean and
standard deviation are taken from the rainfall timeseries for that district in the University of Delaware data
(same rainfall data as in the main paper).
2. In Panel C, positive and negative shocks are defined exactly as in the main analysis for the NSS data in the
paper.
A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below) the 80th
(20th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution. No shock ("None") is rainfall between the 20th-80th
percentile of the district’s usual distribution. Note that June corresponds to the first month of the monsoon for
the ICRISAT villages.
7. Results are from OLS regressions. Regressions (1) and (3) contain village fixed effects, and Cols. (2) and
(4) contain household fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by village-year.

16

Appendix Table 16
Effects of Rainfall Shocks on Migration (ICRISAT)

Any
migration

Full sample
Number
Any
of
migration migrants

(1)
Positive shock last year

(2)

(3)

Panel A: Simple specification
-0.0208
-0.0255
-0.0518
(0.033)
(0.040)
(0.049)

Landless
& Small
farms
Number
of
migrants

Any
migration

(4)

(5)

-0.0794
(0.053)

-0.0180
(0.029)

Panel B: Full specification
Last year's shock
Any

This year's shock
Positive

None or Negative

-0.0654**
(0.024)

-0.0731**
(0.025)

-0.0976**
(0.047)

-0.121**
(0.043)

-0.0618**
(0.026)

Negative

0.0212
(0.020)

0.0237
(0.023)

0.0186
(0.030)

0.0273
(0.034)

0.0230
(0.026)

Positive

Negative

--

--

--

--

--

Positive

None

0.0354
(0.032)

0.0362
(0.035)

-0.00507
(0.049)

-0.0233
(0.058)

0.0284
(0.030)

Village fixed effects?
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Household fixed effects?
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Observations: household-years
1781
1781
1781
1781
1174
Dependent variable mean
0.177
0.177
0.322
0.322
0.175
Notes:
1. Observations are household-years from the ICRISAT VLS 2001-2004 data.
2. The dependent variable in Cols. (1), (2), and (5) is a dummy for whether there was any out migration from
the household. In Cols. (3)-(4), the dependent variable is the continuous number of individuals who migrated
out of the household at some point during the year.
3. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above (below) the 80th
(20th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution. No shock ("None") is rainfall between the 20th-80th
percentile of the district’s usual distribution.
4. In Panel A, the shock covariate is a dummy for a positive shock in the previous year.
5. In Panel B, each of the 4 shock covariates is an indicator that equals 1 if the sequence of shocks (presented as
the shock in the previous year and the shock in the current year) was realized and equals zero otherwise.
6. Results are from OLS regressions. Cols. (1), (3), and (5) contain village fixed effects, and Cols. (2) and (4)
contain household fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by village-year.

17

Appendix Table 17
Effects of Rain Shocks on Employment over Time
Dependent variable: Total worker-days in agriculture
Interaction term (Time measure)
Year (linear)
Post 1995 dummy
(1)
Panel A: Simple specification
-0.236**
(0.117)

Positive shock last year
Positive shock last year x
Time measure

(2)
-0.143**
(0.071)

0.00591
(0.006)

0.0475
(0.101)

Panel B: Full specification
This year's shock
Positive
0.207
(0.159)

0.105
(0.078)

1

Last year's shock
Any

2

Interaction with time measure

-0.00318
(0.008)

0.0819
(0.133)

3

None or Negative

-0.0708
(0.111)

-0.0887
(0.067)

4

Interaction with time measure

-0.00112
(0.006)

-0.0165
(0.117)

5

Positive

-0.170
(0.167)

-0.317***
(0.103)

6

Interaction with time measure

-0.00372
(0.009)

0.0914
(0.155)

7

Positive

-0.242*
(0.143)

-0.124
(0.084)

8

Interaction with time measure

0.00731
(0.008)

0.0492
(0.124)

Negative

Negative

None

F-test p-value: Coefficient 3 = Coefficient 5
0.087*
0.045**
Observations: individual-years
632,327
632,327
Dependent variable mean
1.74
1.74
Notes:
1. Observations are from the NSS data.
2. In Panel A, the shock covariate is a dummy for a positive shock in the previous year.
3. In Panel B, each of the 4 shock covariates (rows 1, 3, 5, 7) is an indicator that equals 1 if the
sequence of shocks was realized and equals zero otherwise.
4. In Panel B, rows 2, 4, 6, and 8 show the coefficients from an interaction of each shock with a
time measure. In Col (1), the time measure is a continuous linear variable for the year. This
variable has been rescaled so that first year in sample (1982) has a value of 1; i.e. the variable is
defined as: (year - 1981). In Col (2), the time measure is a dummy for whether the year is after
1995 (the midpoint of the NSS sample).
5. All regressions include district and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by region-year.

18

Appendix Table 18
Correlation of Shocks with Characteristics of Wage Workers
1{Female
worker}

Dependent Variable
Education
Age
category

Landholding

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Last year's shock

This year's shock

None, Negative, or Positive

Positive

-0.000609
(0.017)

0.0987
(0.069)

0.196
(0.334)

-0.128
(0.080)

None or Negative

Negative

-0.000678
(0.014)

0.0481
(0.045)

-0.257
(0.381)

-0.278
(0.222)

Positive

Negative

-0.0171
(0.022)

0.0936
(0.075)

0.0496
(0.570)

0.0701
(0.121)

Positive

None

-0.00177
(0.017)

-0.0538
(0.057)

-0.719*
(0.420)

0.153
(0.104)

Prior shock history controls?
Observations: individual-years
59208
42016
59243
59243
Dependent variable mean
1.48
1.59
33.87
0.81
Notes:
1. The sample is restricted to observations in which a worker did agricultural work for a paid wage (NSS data).
2. Shocks are defined as in the main tables.
3. All regressions include district and year fixed effects, and controls for positive shocks 2 years ago and 3 years ago.
4. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

19

Appendix Table 19
Impact of Shocks on Capital Inputs
Dependent variable
Bullocks
Tractors
Fertilizer
(1)
(2)
(3)
Positive shock last year

Panel A: Simple specification
-0.001
(0.010)

0.009
(0.024)

-0.004
(0.022)

Last year's shock

Panel B: Full specification
This year's shock

None, Drought, or Positive

Positive

0.006
(0.011)

-0.012
(0.026)

-0.023
(0.024)

None or Drought

Drought

-0.012
(0.013)

-0.011
(0.039)

-0.044
(0.036)

Positive

Drought

-0.012
(0.021)

-0.037
(0.053)

-0.037
(0.045)

Positive

None

0.009
(0.011)

0.007
(0.030)

0.005
(0.028)

Observations: district-years
7,680
7,680
7,680
Dependent variable mean
0.000
0.000
0.000
1. The dependent variables are number of bullocks, number of tractors, and amount of nitrogen
fertilizer (the most common fertilizer input) used in rural production. The source is the World
Bank dataset. All dependent variables are standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard
deviation of 1.
2. A positive (negative) shock is defined as rainfall in the first month of the monsoon above
(below) the 80th (20th) percentile of the district’s usual distribution. No shock ("None") is
rainfall between the 20th-80th percentile of the district’s usual distribution.
3. In Panel A, the shock covariate is a dummy for a positive shock in the previous year.
4. In Panel B, each of the 4 shock covariates (rows 1, 3, 5, 7) is an indicator that equals 1 if the
sequence of shocks (presented as the shock in the previous year and the shock in the current
year) was realized and equals zero otherwise. The omitted category in these regressions is
{None or Negative} last year and {None} this year. Each covariate is interacted with the
number of acres per adult in the household (rows 2, 4, 6, 8).
5. All regressions include district and year fixed effects.
6. Standard errors are clustered by region-year.

20

Appendix Table 20
Survey Responses to Employment Scenarios
Proportion of Responses
Yes
Maybe
No
1

Panel A: Laborers (N=196)
Do you remember any year when the agricultural wage in this village was less
than the wage [for that season] in the year before?

0.00

--

1.00

2a

Have there been times when you would have liked to work at the prevailing
wage but did not obtain work?

0.74

--

0.26

2b

How often have you faced this problem of involuntary unemployment?
Every year (0.60); Some years (0.12); Rarely (0.02); Never (0.26)

--

--

--

3

If a laborer was willing to accept work at a rate lower than the prevailing wage,
would he be more likely to obtain work from farmers in the village?

0.61

0.20

0.19

4

When you have difficulty finding work at the prevailing wage, do you offer to
work at a lower wage?

0.31

0.22

0.47

5

Suppose the prevailing wage is Rs. 100 per day. You have been unemployed for
a long time and are in urgent need of money. If a farmer offers you Rs. 95 for
one day of work, would you accept the job?

0.58

0.24

0.18

--

1.00

0.25

0.37

6
7

Panel B: Landowning farmers (Employers) (N=200)
Do you remember any year when the agricultural wage in this village was less 0.00
than the wage [for that season] the year before?
Suppose the prevailing non-peak wage rate is Rs. 100. There is a laborer in your
village who has been unemployed for a long time and is in urgent need of
money. If a farmer offers him Rs. 95 for one day of work, would the laborer
accept the job?

8

0.39

In non-peak periods, have you ever hired a laborer for agricultural work at a 0.05
-0.95
wage below the prevailing wage?
Notes:
1. The sample is comprised of 196 casual laborers and 200 landowning farmers (i.e. employers) from 34 villages across
6 districts in the Indian states of Orissa and Madhya Pradesh. Respondents were working males aged 20-80.
2. Interviews were conducted July-August 2011.
3. The tabulation of responses for Question 2b is reported below the statement of the question.

21

For Online Publication
Appendix B: Model Proofs
B.1: Proof of Lemma 1 (Market Clearing in Benchmark Case)
First, I show that the market clearing condition must hold in the benchmark case.
(i)

Suppose there is excess labor supply: JL∗ <

1
u
φ



w∗
p



. Then firm j can

cut its wage to some w∗ −  and still hire L∗ workers. To see this, define δ
 ∗
as the slack in the market: δ ≡ JL∗ − φ1 u wp . At wage wj = w∗ − , by
the allocation mechanism for workers, the supply of workers available to j
equals the mass of workers that would be willing to work for j minus the
mass of workers employed by the other (higher-wage) firms:
n  ∗ 
o
1
w −
∗, 0
LAvail
=
max
u
−
(J
−
1)L
j
p
φ
Firm j can cut wages by  and still hire L∗ workers as long as  satisfies
the following condition:
 ∗ 
L∗ ≤ φ1 u w p− − (J − 1)L∗
h  ∗
i
 ∗ 
=⇒ J1 φ1 u wp − δ ≤ φ1 u w p− −
 ∗
 ∗ 
=⇒ φ1 u wp − δ ≤ φ1 u w p− .

J−1
J

h

1
u
φ



w∗
p



−δ

i

Such a wage cut will strictly decrease j’s wage bill while holding revenue
constant, thereby strictly increasing profits. Thus, there cannot be excess
labor supply.
(ii)

Suppose there is excess labor demand: JL∗ >

1
u
φ



w∗
p



. This implies

that each firm is hiring strictly less labor than demanded by its first order
condition. If firm j raises its wage infinitesimally above w∗ to w∗ + , it will
be able to fully satisfy its labor demand by the allocation mechanism. In
what follows, denote LFj OC (wj ) as j’s labor demand under wage wj (this is
determined by j’s first order condition, (3)). This upward wage deviation

1

will be profitable if profits from w∗ +  are higher than profits from w∗ , i.e.
if the following inequality holds:
θpf

LFj OC

∗



∗

(w + ) −(w +

) LFj OC

∗

(w + ) > θpf



1
u
Jφ



w∗
p



1
−w
u
Jφ
∗

Note that:


lim θpf LFj OC (w∗ + ) − (w∗ + ) LFj OC (w∗ + )
→0


= θpf LFj OC (w∗ ) − w∗ LFj OC (w∗ )
 ∗ 
 ∗

1
1
u wp
u wp .
> θpf Jφ
− w∗ Jφ
The equality on the second line follows from the continuity of the first order
condition and continuity of f (•). The inequality on the third line is due to
the fact that at w∗ , LFj OC (w∗ ) maximizes profits. This implies that there
exists some ¯ > 0 such that for all  < ¯, profits from deviating to w∗ + 
will be higher than maintaining wages at w∗ .
Next, I show that no firm will deviate from the w∗ pinned down by conditions (3) and
(4).
(i)

Suppose firm j raises its wage to some wj = w∗ + . It follows from the
first order condition, (3), that the firm will demand labor LFj OC < L∗ .
However, it could have hired LFj OC workers under wage w∗ , with a lower
wage bill and higher profits. This deviation cannot be profitable.

(ii)

Suppose firm j lowers its wage to some wj = w∗ − . The supply of workers
available to j equals the mass of workers that would be willing to work for
j minus the mass of workers employed by the other (higher-wage) firms:
n  ∗ 
o
1
w −
∗, 0
u
LAvail
=
max
−
(J
−
1)L
j
n φ  ∗p 
 ∗
o
w
= max φ1 u w p− − J−1
u
,
0
.
p
Jφ
Note that at w∗ − , LAvail
< L∗ < LFj OC by the above and the first
j
order condition. This deviation will not be profitable iff πj (w∗ , L∗ ) −


πj w∗ − , LAvail
≥ 0.
j

2



w∗
p


.

(a)



∗ − , LAvail
If LAvail
=
0,
then
π
w
= 0 and profits are
j
j
j
trivially weakly higher from maintaining w∗ .

(b)

If LAvail
> 0, then profits from maintaining w∗ will be higher
j
for J sufficiently large. First, rewrite


πj (w∗ , L∗ ) − πj w∗ − , LAvail
j
 ∗
h

i

∗
Avail
u wp
= pθ f (L ) − f Lj
− Jφ
 ∗

= F (J) − Jφ
u wp ,
where I define F (J) as the difference in revenue from L∗ and
LAvail
. Note that:
j
1
∂
F (J) = 2 u
∂J
J φ



w∗
p




i
h 
0
∗
−
f
(L
)
>0
pθ f 0 LAvail
j

e
by the concavity of f (•). Next, define Jas:
 ∗

w
F (1) =
.
u
e
p
Jφ
Cutting wages to w∗ −  will not be a profitable deviation for
 ∗

any J such that F (J) − Jφ
u wp > 0. The following shows
e For any positive number X:
this will hold for any J ≥ J.
e
F (Je + X) > F (J)

(since

∂
∂J F (J)

> 0)

∂
F (J) > 0)
> F (1)
(since ∂J
 ∗
e
= e u wp
(by def inition of J)
Jφ
 ∗

>
u wp .
e
(J+X
)φ

Thus for J sufficiently large, profits from maintaining w∗ will be higher
than from deviating to w∗ − . This is consistent with the assumption
stated in the model that J is arbitrarily large. 

B.2: Proof of Proposition 1 (Asymmetric Adjustment to Shocks)
I prove each of the two parts of Proposition 1 in turn.
(i)

Define θeR , =

pf 0



w̄t−1


1
u
(J−1)φ

λw̄t−1
p

 .

3



For θ ∈ θeR , θR , no firm will deviate

from wage offer w̄t−1 :
(a)

Suppose firm j deviates by raising the wage to wj > w̄t−1 . It
follows from the first order condition, (5), that the firm will
demand labor LFj OC < L. However, it could have hired LFj OC
workers under wage w̄t−1 , with a lower wage bill and higher
profits. This deviation cannot be profitable.

(b)

Suppose firm j deviates by lowering the wage to wj ∈ (λw̄t−1 , w̄t−1 ).
By the firm’s first order condition (5), j 0 s labor demand will increase, but the supply of labor available to j will decrease to
some LAvail
: 0 < LAvail
< L (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) . Then:
j
j




Avail − w LAvail
=
pθf
λL
πj wj , LAvail
j j
j
j




Avail
< pθf λLAvail
−
w̄
λL
(since wj > w̄t−1 λ)
t−1
j
j

< pθf L (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) − w̄t−1 L (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) (by F OC at w̄t−1 )

= πj w̄t−1 , L (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) .
This deviation is not profitable.

(c)

Suppose firm j deviates by lowering the wage to wj ≤ λw̄t−1 .
0 , the definition of θ 0 above implies:
Since θ > θR
R


λw̄t−1
1
u
L (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) >
.
p
(J − 1)φ

As a result, the supply of labor available to j is:
n  
o
w
LAvail
= max φ1 u pj − (J − 1)L̄ , 0
j

o
n 
(since wj ≤ w̄t−1 λ)
≤ max φ1 u λw̄pt−1 − (J − 1)L̄ , 0
= 0

(by the expression f or L above).

The profits from cutting to wj ≤ λw̄t−1 are therefore 0. This
deviation is not profitable.


The first order condition (5) implies that for θ ∈ θeR , θR , L (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) <
L (θR , p, w̄t−1 ). This is because the wage remains fixed at w̄t−1 , while θ <
θR , and f (·) is concave. Since by the definition of θR , JL (θR , p, w̄t−1 ) =
4

1
u
φ



w̄t−1
p







, this implies that for θ ∈ θeR , θR , JL (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) < φ1 u w̄t−1
.
p

Thus, there will be excess labor supply in the market.
Finally, note that lim θeR = lim
λ→0

(ii)

λ→0 pf 0



w̄t−1
 λw̄

t−1
1
u
p
(J−1)φ

= 0.

The definition of θR and Lemma 1 imply: w (θR , p, w̄t−1 ) = w∗ (θR , p) =
w̄t−1 . Since

∂w∗ (θ,p)
∂θ

> 0 for all θ, w∗ (θR , p) ≥ w̄t−1 for θ ≥ θR . The

below arguments show that for θ ≥ θR , no firm will want to deviate from
w (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) = w∗ (θ, p):
(a)

Suppose firm j raises its wage to some wj = w (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) +  >
w̄t−1 . Since wj > w̄t−1 , j’s first order condition (5) coincides
with the benchmark case. This deviation cannot be profitable
by the same logic as part (i) of the proof of Proposition 1 above.

(b)

Suppose firm j lowers its wage to some wj = w (θ, p, w̄t−1 )− ≥
w̄t−1 . (Note that this implies θ > θR ). The firm’s choice of
labor demand at wj is given by first order condition (5). This
deviation cannot be profitable by the same logic as part (ii) of
the proof of Proposition 1 above.

(c)

Suppose firm j lowers its wage to some wj = w (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) −


 < w̄t−1 . Define LFj OC,λ implicitly as: pθλf 0 λLFj OC,λ =


wj . In addition, define LFj OC,B implicitly as: pθf 0 LFj OC,B =
wj . Note that LFj OC,λ < LFj OC,B because of the assumption


in the model that f 0 L > λf 0 λL f or λ < 1. At wj , j’s
optimal labor demand will correspond to LFj OC,λ . There are 2
possibilities:
1) If LFj OC,λ > LAvail
, then the amount of labor hired by
j
the firm will correspond to LAvail
(the available labor supply).
j
Then:

5





Avail − w LAvail
πj wj , LAvail
=
pθf
λL
j j
j
j


≤ pθf LAvail
− wj LAvail
(since λ < 1)
j
j
< pθf (L∗ ) − w∗ L∗

= pθf L − wL

= πj w, L

(by P roposition 1 proof )

2) If LFj OC,λ ≤ LAvail
, then the amount of labor hired by the
j
firm will correspond to LFj OC,λ . Then:




πj wj , LFj OC,λ
= pθf λLFj OC,λ − wj LFj OC,λ


< pθf LFj OC,λ − wj LFj OC,λ
(since λ < 1)


< pθf LFj OC,B − wj LFj OC,B (by F OC condn (3))
< pθf (L∗ ) − w∗ L∗

= pθf L − wL

= πj w, L

(by P roposition 1 proof )

Thus, such a downward deviation cannot be profitable.
Since w (θR , p, w̄t−1 ) = w∗ (θR , p) for θ ≥ θR , this implies L (θR , p, w̄t−1 ) =
L∗ (θR , p) because labor demand under the first order conditions (3) and (5)
coincides for w ≥ wR . As a result, condition (4) implies JL (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) =


w(θ,p,w̄t−1 )
1
for θ ≥ θR . 
u
p
φ

B.3: Proof of Proposition 2 (Ratcheting: Distortions from a Higher
Previous Wage)
high
w̄t−1

high
Following the proof of Proposition 1, define θeR
=
pf 0

1
u
(J−1)φ

high
λw̄t−1

!! .

Following

p

low implicitly as w ∗
equation (6), define θR




high
high
high high
By Proposition 1, w θ, p, w̄t−1
= w̄t−1
for all θ ∈ θeR
, θR
. Since, from


low , p = w̄ low .
θR
t−1

high

∂ θeR
high
Proposition 1, ∂λ
> 0 and lim θeR
= 0, for λ sufficiently small, it follows that
λ→0


high
high
high
w θ, p, w̄t−1
= w̄t−1
for θ ≤ θR
.

6

low , θ high ):
First note that for θ ∈ (θR
R


low , p, w̄ low
low , p
a and P roposition 1
w θR
= w ∗ θR
by def inition of θR
t−1


high
.
< w ∗ θR
,p
by Lemma 1
high
= w̄t−1

b
by def inition of θR


low , w θ, p, w̄ low ≤ w̄ low < w̄ high , where the first inequality
In addition, for θ ≤ θR
t−1
t−1
t−1

low < w̄ high for
follows from Proposition 1. Together, the above imply that w θ, p, w̄t−1
t−1
high
θ < θR
.



high
high
high
Since for λ sufficiently small, w θ, p, w̄t−1
= w̄t−1
for θ < θR
, this im




low < w̄ high = w θ, p, w̄ high for θ < θ high . Then, L θ, p, w̄ high <
plies: w θ, p, w̄t−1
t−1
t−1
t−1
R

high
low
L θ, p, w̄t−1 for θ < θR by the firm’s first order condition (5). 

B.4: Proof of Proposition 3 (Effect of Inflation on Wage Adjustment)
I state the text of Proposition 3(i) formally:
For any fixed θ = θ0 and p = p0 such that w (θ0 , p0 , w̄t−1 ) = w̄t−1 >
w∗ (θ0 , p0 ),
∂
∂p



w (θ, p, w̄t−1 )
p


< 0.
θ=θ0 ,p=p0

In addition, ∃ pe > p0 such that ∀p ≥ pe: w (θ0 , p, w̄t−1 ) = w∗ (θ0 , p).
The first part of Proposition 3(i) states that when there is a wage distortion, real
wages will fall as price levels rise. First, note that a change in the price level will shift
the θ-interval over which rigidity binds. To make explicit the fact that this interval


e
depends on p, write this interval as θ(p),
θR (p) . Since the rigidity binds at θ0 and


p0 , this implies that θ0 < θR (p0 ) by Proposition 1. Suppose θ0 ∈ θeR (p0 ), θR (p0 ) . For


δ sufficiently small, for any  ≤ δ, it will be the case that θ0 ∈ θeR (p0 + ), θR (p0 + )
by the fact that θeR (p) and θR (p) are continuous in p. Thus, w (θ0 , p0 + , w̄t−1 ) = w̄t−1 .
As a result, we have:


∂ w (θ, p, w̄t−1 )
∂p
p

= lim
θ=θ0 ,p=p0

w(θ0 ,p0 +,w̄t−1 )
p0 +

−


→0

7

w(θ0 ,p0 ,w̄t−1 )
p0

= lim

→0

w̄t−1
p0 +

−


w̄t−1
p0

< 0.

If θ0 ≤ θeR (p0 ), then similar logic applies: an  increase in the price level, firms will hold
the wage fixed at w̄t−1 (thereby experiencing an increase in profits). Thus, the real
wage will fall with an  increase in the price level.
The second part of the Proposition 3(i) states that a sufficiently large increase in
the price will enable the market to achieve the market-clearing real wage. To see this,
note that as the price level rises above p0 , holding the wage fixed at w̄t−1 , labor supply
will fall, while the first order condition (5) implies that labor demand will rise. There
will be a pe > p0 at which aggregate labor demand will be exactly equal to aggregate
supply. This pe is pinned down by the following condition:



1
w̄t−1
0 0
peθ f
= w̄t−1 .
u
pe
J φ̄
Note that at pe and θ0 , w̄t−1 is the market clearing wage. This implies that: w (θ0 , pe, w̄t−1 ) =
w∗ (θ0 , pe) = w̄t−1 . In addition, for any p00 ≥ pe:
w (θ0 , pe, w̄t−1 ) = w̄t−1

by def inition of pe.

= w∗ (θ0 , pe)
≤ w∗ (θ0 , p00 )

since

∂w∗
∂p

.
>0

= w (θ0 , p00 , w̄t−1 ) by P roposition 1 since w∗ (θ0 , p00 ) ≥ w̄t−1
Thus, ∀p ≥ pe, w (θ0 , p, w̄t−1 ) = w∗ (θ0 , p) . In addition, this implies L (θ0 , p, w̄t−1 ) =
L∗ (θ0 , p) since w (θ0 , p, w̄t−1 ) ≥ w̄t−1 and also implies market clearing by Proposition
1.
The proof of Proposition 3(ii) follows the same logic as in the benchmark case. By
Proposition 1, for any θ > θR , the equilibrium wage corresponds to the market clearing
wage (i.e. w (θ, p, w̄t−1 ) = w∗ (θ, p) ). It is straightforward to verify from equations (3)
and (4):

∂w∗ (θ,p)
∂p

=

w∗
p .

Consequently, for any θ > θR , the nominal wage will rise to

keep the real wage constant.

8

Appendix C: Data Construction
National Sample Survey
The National Sample Survey (NSS) is a nationally representative survey of over 600
Indian districts. I use the rural sample of all the Employment/Unemployment rounds
of the NSS (rounds 38, 43, 50, 55, 60, 61, 62, 64, 66, covering the years 1983-2009).
Households in each district are sampled on a rolling basis over the agricultural year
(July to June). The survey elicits daily employment and wage information for each
household member over the 7 days preceding the interview. Since the monsoon is
the rainfall shock used in the analysis, I restrict the sample to the Kharif (monsoon)
growing season: the months between monsoon arrival and the end of harvesting in
January.46 Agricultural work is identified in the questionnaire as work activity corresponding to agricultural operations; I include all operations that fall within the period
of monsoon arrival to harvesting: sowing, transplanting, weeding, and harvesting.47
The wage data is restricted to observations in which a worker was paid for work
performed; these do not include imputed wages for self-employment. I compute the
daily agricultural wage as paid earnings for casual agricultural work divided by days
worked. I use total wage earnings: cash plus in-kind wages. 93% of wage observations
in the sample have some cash component. The wage regression results are essentially
the same if log cash wages is used as the dependent variable instead of log total wages.
Across years, the Government of India has split districts and regions into smaller
units; in order to keep the geographic identifiers as consistent across years as possible,
I have manually recoded split districts and regions to maintain the original parent
administrative units. District identifiers are not available for the first three rounds of
the NSS data. For these years, the smallest geographic identifier is the region—there
are on average 2.6 regions per state in the NSS data, and a region is comprised of
46

February-April is the lean season in rain-fed areas. In areas that plant a second crop during
this season, this usually requires irrigation and the monsoon is a less important determinant of labor
demand.
47
In round 61, there is no data specifying agricultural operations. For this round, I identify agricultural work by using the industry code corresponding to agriculture.

1

8 districts on average. As a result, for all regressions using the NSS dataset, the
geographic fixed effects are region fixed effects for the first three rounds and district
fixed effects for the remaining rounds. This is equivalent to using two pooled panels
with separate fixed effects for analysis. Using a common set of region fixed effects for
all rounds gives similar (though less precise) results in the regressions. In addition, all
regressions use the multiplier weights provided with the data.
World Bank Agriculture and Climate Dataset
The World Bank Agriculture and Climate dataset provides yearly panel data on districts in 13 states over the agricultural years 1956-1987. The unit of observation is
a district-year. The wage data were compiled by Robert E. Evenson and James W.
McKinsey Jr. using data from the Directorate of Economics and Statistics within the
Indian Ministry of Agriculture.
The reported wage variable equals the mean daily wage for a male ploughman in
the district-year. This information was collected from sampled villages within each
district. A knowledgeable person in each village, such as a school teacher or village
official, was asked the prevailing wage rate in the village in each month. For each
district-year, the annual wage variable averages over villages and across months in the
agricultural year (July to June). The planting months at the start of the agricultural
year are weighted more heavily than other months (because field activities are larger
in those months). When the data for a male ploughman are not available, wages for a
general male agricultural laborer are used instead.
The dataset includes data on 271 districts. I limit analysis to the 240 agricultural
districts that grow at least some rice (measured as the districts whose mean percentage
of land area planted with rice is at least 0.5%). Since rice is by far the dominant
crop in India, districts that do not grow any rice are unlikely to engage in substantial
agricultural activity. Performing the analysis with all 271 districts gives similar results,
with slightly larger standard errors.

2

Rainfall Data
Rainfall data is taken from Terrestrial Precipitation: 1900-2008 Gridded Monthly Time
Series (version 2.01), constructed by Cort J. Willmott and Kenji Matsuura at the Center for Climatic Research, University of Delaware. Rainfall estimates are constructed
for 0.5 by 0.5 degree latitude-longitude grids by interpolating from 20 nearby weather
stations. I match the geographic center of each district to the nearest latitude-longitude
node in the rain data. These district coordinates are included in the World Bank data;
for the NSS data, I have obtained them using district boundaries from the Census of
India.
Consumer Price Index Data
Inflation is computed from the state-wise Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labourers in India, published by the Government of India. Inflation in year t is the percentage
change in the state CPI from calendar year t-1 to calendar year t. State-level CPI data
is not available before the year 1957. Thus, for the years 1956 and 1957, I use national
CPI numbers and use the national inflation rate across the whole country in the regressions. Omitting these 2 years in the analysis has little effect on the findings (Appendix
Table 6, Col. 1).

3

