                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INTERNATIONAL FINANCE




                         Maurice Obstfeld




                      Working Paper No. 2077




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            November 1986




This article was prepared for The New Palrave dictionary of
economics.  I am grateful for conversations with Arthur I.
Bloomfield. All errors, opinions, and interpretations are,
however, my own. Research support from the National Science
Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation is acknowledged with
thanks. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2077
                                                   November 1986



                               International Finance



                                     ABSTRACT



       his   essay written for The Na Plgrave dictionary of     onomics.
provides     seIectl ye ano interpretive account of the devaiopmert of
thought on intarnatonal financial questions. Attention is 4ocusad on
the process of international adjustment and on the proDer definition of
external balance. Since the first descriptions of the once—specie—flow
mechanism in Humes time, the definition of external balance    has evolved

in response to changes in the world economys structure. The foreign

reserve constraint so central under the gold standard or in the early

Bretton Woods years is less important under conditions of high interna-

tional capital mobility. Increasingly, the current account and the

national intertemporal budget constraint are emphasized in discussions

of international adjustment. In analogy with the idea of a high—

employment government budget surplus, a working definition of external

balance might be a current account that maintains the highest possible

steady consumption level consistent with the economys expected inter—

temporal budget constraint. Intertemporal approaches to external balance

become more difficult to apply when countries face credit rationing as a

result of nonrepayment risk.

                                           Maurice Obstfeld
                                           Department of Economics
                                           University of Pennsylvania
                                           Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                           (215) 898—635o
                            International Finance

                               Maurice tjbstfeld
   UnIversity 0+   Pennsylvania and tiational Bureau of Economic Research

      Introduction. International finance is concerned with the deter-

mination of real income and the allocation of consumption over time In

economies linked to world markets. Fundamental to international finance

is the somewhat elusive iaea of external balance, which In practice

entails a path of external indebtedness that does not threaten a

countrys ability to meet its international obligations. Because the

nature of the linkages among economies has varied across historical

episodes, the requirements of external balance have varied as well.

International finance studies the policies and market forces which may

lead to external balance under various conditions. The history of the

subject illustrates how the nature of world market linkages has itself

been changed by national efforts to cope with external constraints.

     The national Income identity is the necessary groundwork for any

discussion of external balance. The national income of an open economy

equals domestic product plus net factor payments from abroad plus net

international transfer payments; the current account equals net exports

of goods and services (including all net factor payments) plus net

transfers. If national expenditure is defined as the sum of consumption

and investment (by both the public and private sectors), the national

income identity asserts that national income less natiânal expenditure

equals the current account. When in surplus, the current account there-

fore measures the growth of the economy's external assets; when in

deficit, it measures the growth of external debt.
                                           —2—




       The Classical   Paradigm.   The   classical Ricardo—Mill Darter   trade

theory shows how the terms of trade and international production pattern

are determined in a stationary world economy with balanced trade. The

classical analysis of •the transition to balanced trade say be viewed as

an account of the convergence process to the long—run barter equi-

librium. As Ricardo noted in the Principles (1811)1



       Sold and silver having been chosen for the general medium of
       circulation, they are, by the competition of commerce, distributed
       in such proportions amongst the different countries of the world
       as to accommodate themselves to the natural traffic which would
       take place if no such metals existed, and the trade between
       countries were purely a trade of barter.


Historically, however, the classical paradigm of external adjustment

preceded Ricardo. Major elements of the theory had been expounded quite

clearly by the early eighteenth century, but the most coherent and

effective exposition was given by Hume in 1752.

       Hume assumed a world economy that settles trade imbalances ex-

clusively through imports or exports of precious metals that also serve

as money. Building on the quantity theory of money, he constructed a

full   dynamic model of the balance of payments and the terms of trade.
The famous price—specie—flow mechanism was put forth as an automatic

market process that always works to restore balanced trade. Humes goal
was to refute mercantilist and protectionist arguments by showing that

market forces would ensure inthe long run a 'natural' distribution of

specie among countries.

       Hume invited his readers to imagine that four—fifths of 6reat

Britains money supply were 'annihilated in one night.' British prices

would naturally fall1 he argued, cheapening British exportables relative

to foreign goods and creating a trade surplus..As a result of this
 surtus Britain wouid accumul Ste fareicin west in tne tarn c sacie,
 sceina nts money SUpiy, and flonce its prices, race.    road, the dr.eln
 of spcie would lower oricec. Sritain a trare surogus woulc ciwincile an:

 eventually disappear once its terms o trade hao lmproveO su7icaentiy,
 and at this point, the natural dlstributaon of specie woulu prevaii.
 hypothetical   fIvefold ancrease in Britains money supply   would set off
 the reverse process. involvinq an initial improvement in ritsinc terms

 of trade and a trade balace deficit. Over time, specie would flow abroad

 as the terms of trade deteriorated and external equilibrium was re-

 stored.

      There is litti exaggeration in saying that issues raised by Humes

analysis dominated writing in international finance up until the inter—

World War years. In a period that culminated in the classical gold

standard, it was natural to take as the benchmark of external balance an

absence of international specie movements. Hume had placed relative

price movements at the center of his account of how external balance

would be attained, but subsequent writers asked whether direct income or

wealth effects might also b operative, and whether external adjustment

could take place in some cases without price changes. Such questions

arose in the 1929 Keynes—Ohlin debate over the German transfer problem,

but as Viner (1937) showed, the questions had been raised much earlier.

     A simple model of a Humean world makes apparent some of    the   assump-

tions underlying the price—specie—flow mechanism. Such a model also

serves as a springboard for understanding later developments in the

analysis of external adjustment. (A more detailed exposition of a

similar model is given by Darnbusch, 1973, whose analytical approach is

however, somewhat different from that taken here,)

     Assume a world of two countries, each specialized in the production
                                                       -.4-




of a single commodity that is consumed in both countries. With given

supplies of capital and labor within each country and perfect wage

fiexiblity, floine—country output is fi::.ed at the fuil—emoloyment level x

and foreign—country output is fixed at y. Let q denote the price of y—

goods in terms of x—qoods (the terms of trade                           z domestic expenditure

measured in v—goods, and 2*                 foreign         expenditure, also measured in x—

good;. Then the domestic demands for the two goods are c(qz and

cq!Z), while              the foreign demands arec*(q,z*) and c *(q,z*).
                                                                A
 V

       Expenditure is determined by monetary conditions. The money sup-
plies M and M* are for simplicity taken to consist entirely of gold, and

P and P* denote the gold prices of home and foreign goods, respectively.

The exchange rate between domestic and foreign currency can be set at

unity with no loss of generality, so the terms of trade, q, equal P*/P.

In each country there is a desired long run (or natural") money supply

that   is       proportIonal to nominal output, and saving behavior is governed

ty   discrepancies          between natural and actual money supplies. Because a

country; net saving here equals its current account, which by assump-

tion   is settled in specie, saving behavior determines the evolution of

national mono             supplies,      These evolve according to the laws


                   =            — ('1)   d)i*/dt =     *çX*Py — M*)

                *. s       tne reciprocal of the home 'foreign) country a long—run

cronetarvvelocltv and                        15 the home (foreign) marqnal propensity
to ois;a•e         uut c ;onet.arv wealth. Expenditure                 levels are therefore


            =          — e.x +             z* =   (I   -.
                                                                     + e*f'i*,p.

woro              5* x*     I



       The 50001          15 closed      by two   enuillbriLrn conditions. With a aiven
                                                  —5—


 world stock of monetary gold, ?, home saving must equal foreign dissav—

 ing, that is, world expenditure must equal world output. In addition,

 the market for domestic goods must clear. By Walras's law, these two

 equilibrium conditions imply equilibrium in te market for foreign

 goods.

           The condition of zero desired world saving Is (dM/dt) +              (dflt/dt)   t
 0,   or


              GM +   fl(Mw   — M)
 (1) P r
               flx   +   Otleqy

 Equation (1) shows that, for given terms of trade and money supplies,

 the world price level adjusts to maintain consistency between the

countries saving plans. In equilibrium, this condition makes P a func-

tion of q and N, P t          P(q,N),    with


       q IP              —8*X*qy                N $P        (8 — 8*91
       — ———                                    ———a
                                     >—1,
       P $q       Gix + 8*X*qy                  P bM    GlPx +   Gfl*P*y
                                                                           >0.

The   market for x—goods clears when

(2) cCq,(l — 8X)x          + GM/P]   +   c*[qs(l — 8*1*)qy     + G*N*/P]   x.


       Substltutiân of P P(q,N) and Mt a p$W            —   N Into (2) gives the
curve describing combinations of N and q at which both goods markets

clear and aggregate world saving Is zero. The curve Is labelled XX in

Figure 1 and is shown with a negative slope. The assumptions giving rise

to this negative slope are crucial, for analyzing the Humean adjustment

process. An increase in N (which necessarily implies an equal fall In

Nt) causes an excess demand for x-goods equal to
q


    x
               A


                   x
                   dM
                   dt

        M0              M



        p1,.
         e&*M + ii
                       —
                           [c /    — i* iz*]
        FeM + *t1*;


 near the system 5 1 onq—run epu I ibri 'e her dM/dt            oM*idt     . Th
 term c x!z — Ic /Iz*
                 x
                      is the difference oetween the two countries
 marqinal propensities to spend on home—country goods; if the home—
 country marginal propensit 15 larger——the orthodox presumption jr
 transfer analysis         iEamueison, 1971)——a redistribution o nominal
 balances   in favor of the home country creates an incipient excess demand
 for   its output. This excess demand       is eliminated by a fall in q if the
 home—goods market is Wairas stable, so XX slopes downward under standard

 assmptions concerning marginal spending propensities and Walrasian

 stabili ty.

        The curve in Figure 1 labelled dM/dt =        0 describes points at which
P1 =   P(q,M)x.       This locus has a negative slope algebraically smaller than

that of XX. With goods markets continuously in equilibrium the world

economy travels along XX to its long—run equilibrium at point A where

international prices and the distribution of specie give rise to

balanced trade.

       In most respects the model confirms Humes account of the external

adjustment process.           (small) fall in P1 to     for example, leads to

terms of trade q, which are worse for the home country. The terms—of—

trade change is a direct result of the transfer of purchasing power to

foreigners, which produces an excess supply of home goods at the initial

prices. The home balance—of—payments surplus that simultaneously emerges

causes a gradual redistribution of money in favor of the home country,

so the home terms of trade improve during the transition to external

balance.

       If 8 =   8*,    equilibrium P is a function of q alone, with a negative
ciasti C: tv preater        then     —1     The rise in p caused by        a fail    in P1 is    thus

accoeoanie by a iess—than—pr000rtlonal fall in P and a                           rise in    P* that
are reversed as the economy returns to point A. These results are in

accord with Rumes           prediction;,         but they need not hold if          the   expendi-

ture responses to real balances differ sufficiently in the two

countries, if 8         8*,    a.    transfer of money abroad raises world saving for

given terms      of trade, so P* may fall along with P and then rise during

the sLibsequent adJustment Likewise, if 8                       8*, a money transfer abroad

may reduce world savinq sufficiently that P must rise, along with P*, to

restore goods—market equilibrium in the short run. In this case, the

initial response       to the        disturbance is followed by price deflation in

both countries.

        This stylized version of Humes paradiom may be used to analyze the

trensfer problem. Suppose that ownership of a                     portion    of the foreign

country s endowment is              transferred to the home country. Does the               home

trade    deficit    necessarily increase by the amount of                  the transfer,        or   is
the transfer undereftected, requiring a flew of specie to the home
country to balance nternatl oral accounts? A second focus of debate in

the literature is the possibility that the transfer impose; a secondary

;urden on tre paying country by adding en equilibrium terms—of—trade

deterioration to toe primary income burden. ceynes and Bhlin clashed on

this    polnt    in 1929,    wltn     teynes arguing that the secanaarv burden is

nevtable
        To      olify, suppose that             8 = 8*    and   = *. Since       long—run money

demand riSes 1 ch income,                 the diii dt =     locus shifts    to   the right,
impivino     that the transfer is             underefcteb       and   that the world       s gold

;toc: 15     redi stni huted        toward the name country. Under           the standard

assumptIon reoaro:nq marg:nal spendIng propensities, toe transfer alma
 craatss. n -c2ss          denann   or   -noods   at tns   initial   terms of trade sc
       ;n ft;    do •ari . A secorlar' buroen       s thus i rpose on the payl r!Q

:ountr          and this bnrciei worsens over tIme as balanced trade         is   re—

e-stab 1     shed




        lhelnterarPerod. Inc years ostween tre World Wars saw a partial

ann ultisately unsuccessful return to tne noid standards followed by
extensive experImentation with floatIng excnanoe rates and direct con-
trol s or,    interna.ti   onal ra sent; as means of attaining external balance.
Murxses (l94 account of the period is probably the                    most influential

one.    Writers or international finance continued to conceptualize               exter—

nai    balance in terms of reserve movements. The spread of the gold—

exchange standard, under which central banks held as                 foreign reserves
currencies       tied to gold as well as gold itself, broadened the class of

assets through which balance—of—payments deficits were financed.

        InternatIonal capital movements were discussed increasingly in the

theoretical literature, but they were viewed for the most part as an

aOjunct to the c1as;cai balance—of—payments adjustment mechanism. The

theoretical discussions merely formalized a mechanism that had long been

exploited by the Bank of Engiano to regulate gold flows.                   country that

suddenly developed a trade deficit would face declining international

reserves, a declining money suprlv, and higher interest rates. Higher

interest rates would, however, attract foreign capital inflows and thus

dampen the resulting fluctuations in the balance of payments. On this

view, interest—sensitive capital flows had a potentaily stabilizing

role to p1 ay ifl discouraging protracted reserve flows. Biven the tur-

bulent conditions of the pcrod, contemporary writers fully reconizen

that capital flows sotvated by fears of devaluation or political in--
etabliitv cOuld lUSt as eil destmbilze          an already cc-: external.   nay—


aents poblem.
        E;uct short—core     or nterest-sensi.tve capital movements were

qen'erallv discusses separately from "loop—term international capital
movements which directly financed investment or poverrinont expenditures.

Thooret cal discussions of 1 ong—tere capi tel movements focused mmmi y or
the transfer       harccn, the eal ance—of    —payments and terms—of—trade

adjustments that would accompany an inter—countr trartster of capital.

Conspi cuously absent + rocn the I terature were attempts to develop a

normative intertemporal theory of international capItal transfer. Suc a

theory naturally would have       extended tne prevail inq external tual ance

concept to comprise changes jr       nations overall indebtedness rather than
iust    chanqes 10 the central bank's +oreiqn assets. It had been known, at

least sance Racaroo's Principles, that producers and consumers could

pain if lonq—tercn foreign investment equalized profits internationally.

The I nsi abt d d rot alter thi nk nq about the nature of external balance.

        This pap in the literature is surprlsinq in view of the develop-

ments in international capital markets over the previous century. Huge

flows of long—term capital, primarily from Britain, had financed rail-

road constructIon ano other investment in the western Hemispnere. France

and Germany also made sgni+icant foreign loans. In the early l93Os

widespread foreIgn debt default by the Latin imerican countries high-
lighted the reed to analyze formally the sustaneb1 ii ty of external debt

paths. in the world assumed by Hume! specie flows had oeen the only'

means    cf settling current—account imbalances, ano a concept pf external
balance based on balance—of—payments equilibrium hal been defensible.
Such a concept cf external balance was outmoded howEver in a world

where c,ther types 0+      asset trade coulo -fi narce   tne current account.
      in r1;s ry chanqe     of   persoectve   oij   not occur for several
 Occades. Instead,   the events nd ideas cf the lnterwar nerod led i.ter—
 national financial theory to turn away aitoqetner +ro the concern with
 the dynamics ot international ad3ustment underlyinq the classical model.
 Emonasi; shifted lnward, to the interaction between the balance of

 payments and domestic economic conditions.



      The Bretton Woods Period. The interwar experience had a profound

 influence on both the institutional framework of postwar international

finance and the theoretical orientation of researchers. The interna-

tional agreement reached at Bretton Woods in 1944 set up a world trading

community linked by fixed dollar exchanqe rates, with a United States

commitment to peg the dollar price gold at $35 per ounce providing an

anchor for the world price level. The agreements provisions aimed to

promote free trade in goods, but private capital movements were viewed

as potentially disruptive and the widespread capital controls then in

force were not discouraged. A prevailing view that flexible exchange

rates had failed during the interwar period motivated the adoption of a

fixed—rate system. Provision was made, however, for infrequent exchange—

rate adjustment, after due consultation, in circumstances of 'fundamen—

tal disequilibrium in the balance of payments.

     Central to the design of the Bretton Woods system was a desire to

avoid unemployment and ensure price—level stability. In the interwar

years, many governments had resorted to competitive currency deprecia-

tions and trade restrictions aimed at reducing domestic unemployment.

These Hbeggar_thy_neighbor moves made all countries worse off. Having

recently experienced the hardships of the worldwide Sreat Depression,

the Bretton Woods signatories recognized the goal of internal balance'—
                                          —l 1—



—uil employment with price stability——as a key aim of government

policy. .n International Monetary Fund was set up to reconcile the goals

of internal and external balarce. It was hoped that the availability of

Fund credit would make it unnecessary for members to tolerate high

unemployment in pursuing external balance, or to interfere with trade

flows in pursuing internal balance.

      in an environment of fixed exchange rates and extremely limited

capital mobility, the overriding external consideration for governments

was the available stock of foreign, particularly dollar, reserves. The

operative external target was therefore the acquisition of as many

dollars as possible throuah balance—of—payments surpluses. As the

reserve center, the United States enjoyed the privilege of being able to

finance its own balance—of—payments deficits by borrowing dollars from

foreign central banks. In reality, however, the United States was not

totally free of a reserve constraint. Foreign central banks could, and

din. use their dollars to buy gold from the U.S authorities at the

official price. The problem of gold losses became important as the

oostwar period of dollar shortage ended in the late 1950s. In 1960,

miff in    put   the American external dilemma in its most somber light Once
+orelqn official dollar holdings exceeded trie official value of the U.S.

odd   stock, it    would become impossible to satisfy all foreign claims to

U.S. qoid without      a rise in the    dollar price of gold. The resulting

confidence problem, Triffin predlcteo, would undermine the stability of

the Bretton Woods system.

      s it developed immeoiatel          after Jorld War Ii, international

financial    theory reflected tne new institutional arrangements, along
with the    ec000cic   assumptions LnderlvInn EvflCS s i3)          diagnosis   of
the unemployment of the i51ys.         Toe new    ocradiqe, set fortn very e+fec—
 t1s1v b Mmtzer 194B, pa. 4I2—.l3, assuced            stichy   price   levels along

 with fIxed e.:chanoe rates. .bus preciudin the relative—price adjust—
 cents at the heart of tne classical paredgm wriiie onening the door to
 employment fluctuatIons;


        Inc important feature of the classical mechanism    is the central
        role it attributes to the monetary system. The classical theory
        contains ar explicit acceptance of the Quantity Theory of Money as
        well as an implied assumption that output and employment are un-
        affected by international monetary disturbances. In other words,
        the classical doctrine assumes that an increase or decrease in the
        quantity of money leads to an increase or decrease in the aggregate
        money demand for goods and services, and that a change in money demand
        affects prices and costs rather than output and employment.... The
        essence of the new theory is that an external event which increases
        a countrys exports will also increase imports even without price
        charges, since the change in exports affects the level of output and
        hence the demand for all goods. In other words, movements of output
        arid employment play the same role in the new doctrine that price
        movements played in the old.


n increase in external demand for a. countrys exports, for example,

would raise the couatrys trade surplus in the first instance, but once

the   multiplier effect of the disturbance had raised income and hence
import    spending, the initial impact on     the trade balance would be

reduced. tletzier noted, however, that even if one assumed that invest-

ment spending responds positively to a rise in real income, it was

unlikely that multiplier effects alone would ensure complete trade—

balance adjustment in the short run.

        The   Keynesian account of   external adjustment therefore contained an

important      gap. Private capital movements were largely ruled out in the
Keynesian models, so incomplete trade—balance adjustment implied incom-
plete   balance—of—payments adjustment and growing      or shrinking central—
bank foreign reserves. Inc models pushed monetary factors to the back—
qround implcitiy or exolicltlv assuming that          central—bank steriliza-

tion operations were ct+settinn       any monetary effects of the balance of
oavments. Univ a                 of the early ostar theorists notably            Meaoe

l91 . assioned            an    mcortant     role to monetary factors.

       Even i.f    the    steriization assumption were granteo, however con—

siderati on      of the systems inherent dynamics made clear the ln—
feasability of a pareanent steriilzatiOfl policy. LountrIes                    with   persist-

ent defIcits       would ultlmateiy          exhaust their available international

reserves including IMF credit; and even surplus countries miqht be

unable to sterilize indefinitely if domestic financial markets were

thin. How, then, rould trade—balance equilibrium ever be restored after

a permanent external shock? Fiscal policy could be effective in situa-

tions where the needs of internal and external balance were both served

by   the same measure. In dilemma situations,                 however where fiscal

measures could move the             economy toward external balance only        at the cost

of increasing       its    distance from internal balance, the Fundamental

disequilibrium        clause       of the IMF Articles of      Agreement   could be   invoked

and the currency devalued. No automatic market mechanism pushing the
economy toward balance—of—payments equilibrium was featured in the early
postwar writing.
       In a series of remarkable napers published in the early 194Os

Mundeil revived the explicit dynamic analysis of international adjust—
sent. His models placed the monetary sector in the foreground.                    adopting
a KCyOCSI an      I quldlty--pre         erence view of interest—rate determi nation

prescient paper y              ietzler   i9bO) wrItten at about the sace timE took

a similar approach.

       dunici 1    s paper      on The I nternat.i onal Dsequ II     riur   System       19a1

cr1 tIci   zBi   the xevnEslan model           -fail ure to   accounr for te   ovnsac
e    acts of payments          1 stal ances.   Even n a. evnesi an worlo hurdol I

arauad ar incone—specie—ilow mecnaism                   analogous to iusss prica-
                                      —1 -i—




 speci s—flow sechanism. ensures 1 onq—run oalance—o+---pav(nents equi I Ibrium.

 A   -fivefold increase in a countrys money supply, -for example,

 depresses domestic Interest rates, stimulate; investment spendnq, and

 creates a deficit in the balance of payments. As the      certra.l bank   loses

 reserve;, however, the interest rate gradually rises and reduces invest-

 ment, the process coming to an end (for a small country) only when the

domestic money supply,    the interest rate, investment, and output have

returned to their oriqinal levels. The introduction of dynamic adjust-

ment made it clear that sterilization could have only limited success as

a policy response to permanent balance—of—payments di sturba.nces. One

source of dynamic effects, however, was not explicitly analyzed in

Mundelis work of the period. The omitted effect was the real—balance

effect on expenditure,   central to   the   classical account but possibly
relevant (as Pigou had shown) under Keynesian conditions as well.
      In line with the increasing international capital mobility that

followed the European move toward currency convertibility in 1958,

riundell gave the capital account a prominent role in his models. The

presence of capital mobility suggested a solution to the policy dilemmas

that could arise under fixed exchange rates when the goals of internal

and external balance appeared to conflict. Mundell showed that by gear-

ing monetary policy to external balance and fiscal policy to internal

balance3 governments could simultaneously attain both goals. The key to

the argument is the observation that monetary and fiscal expansion both

raise output but have different effects on the capital account, monetary

expansion causing capital outflows (by driving down the home interest

rate> and fiscal expansion causing capital inflows (by raising the

interest rate). With two independent instruments, both internal and

external policy targets can be attained simultaneously.
                                          —15--




       While a major step forward, the Mundellian argument          for   a policy

six   suffered from       two drawbacks. First, the theoretical specification of

the capital        account as a function of international interest—rate levels

was weak      it    seemed unlikely that capital would flow at a uniform level

forever even if the interest dierential remained fixed. Missing was a

discussion of stock equilibrium in international asset markets. The

second problem with the policy mix was its definition of external

balance. Would any policymaker view with satisfaction a permanently high

interest rate that brought about balance—of—payments equilibrium by

crowding out domestic investment and encouraging a buildup of external

debt? Key considerations omitted from Mundeli s model vere the stock of

net foreign claims and the associated flows of interest payments. Mun—

dell himself (1968, p. 207) recogni2ed that in many contexts, the

definition     of external balance as balance—of—payments equilibrium might

be inadequate



      Just as the composition of output is important (the division of
      output between investment and consumption affects additional
      growth tarqets) so an appropriate composition of the balance of
      payments is a legitimate target of policy.


       inoeed, in spite cf       the continuing obligation to peg dollar ex—

change   rates tne        standard definltl on of external   balance was becoming

ncreasingiy outmoded ny          the late i90s The balance      of payments

rem-aired   a legitimate conrerrq oi- course, n part because a large or
Oersistent I abmi ance mi oat i oak lIke fundamental disequ I brius to the
manor anc sn-ark: a specul atve attack: on the currency invol ve. But the
increasing i rtegrati an a-f nat anal financial markets——a deei c.pment
Oi tomi red    u    the   oroxth of Eurocurrencv trading——weakened the aite Of
tue hal ance—o+—pavnients constraint, Jr a rvpothet ECI won o a-f pere:t
                                  —16—


capital mobility, a central bank short on reserves can (within limits)

bnrrow them from abroad at no net cost simply by contracting domestic

credit. Such an action, by causing an incipient rise in the home inter-

est rate, leads to an instantaneous private capital inflow and an offi-

cial reserve gain equal to the fall in domestic credit. The home Inter-

est rate, the money supply, output, and the national external debt are

unchanged in the final equilibriumi the central bank holds more foreign

assets and fewer domestic assets, while the home private sector, having

made the mirror—image adjustment, holds fewer foreign assets and more

domestic assets.

     The case of perfect capital mobility is an extreme one that does

not fit the facts of the late Bretton Woods period. Nonetheless, the

opportunities for central banks other than the Federal Reserve to borrow

dollar reserves in the International capital market had grown since the

early 1960s. The situation facing the United States was quite different.

As the primary International reserve Issuer, its responsibility was to

peg the dollar price of gold, a responsibility that would have required

the gearing of U.S. monetary policy to that external commitment. In

spite of such expedients as the two—tier gold market established by

central banks In 1968, the U.S. did not succeed in preserving the

dollar's link to gold. Triffin had been right. After a series of violent

speculative attacks, the U.S. severed the dollar's gold link in August

1971 and in December 1971 devalued the dollar against major foreign

currencies. The patchwork system of fixed exchange rates proved un-

stable, and in the first months of 1973 the postwar period of floating

exchange rates began.



   Floating Exchange Rates. The industrialized countries adopted float—
                                  —17—


ing dollar exchange rates as an interim measure, but in fact a sig-

nificant body of economists had come to advocate floating rates by 1973.

Friedman's (1953) powerful case for flexible rates was the opening shot

in a campaign to revise the then—prevailing view, expounded by Nurkse

 (1944), that the floating—rate experiments of the interwar years were

disastrous. By the time Johnson wrote his well—known polemic of 1969,

Friedman's views had gained many adherents.

      The fundamental argument for floating rates was that they would

free governments of the balance—of—payments constraint and allow them to

use monetary policy to attain domestic economic goals. Equilibrium in

the balance of payments would be automatic if central banks simply

refrained from intervening In the foreign exchange market. At the same

•time, floating rates would permit central banks to target their nominal

 money supplies without being frustrated by offsetting interest—sensitive

 foreign reserve flows. Widespread restrictions on trade and capital

movements, motivated in part by a desire to impede reserve flows under

 the fixed—rate regime, could be dismantled.

      Subsequent experience was to provide only partial vindication to

 the advocates of floating. In the decade after 1973, barriers to capital

 movement were reduced to insignificant levels in many of the industrial

 countries. This development helped spark unprecedented growth in inter-

 national financial intermediation. Under the new exchange—rate regime,

 however, policymakers became mere acutely aware that the traditional

 definition of internal balance as full employment cum price stabilty

 really involved two, quite distinct, goals. Under a floating exchange

 rate4 monetary expansion aimed at domestic unemployment translates

 immediately into currency depreciation, higher import prices, and

 heightened inflationary expectations. Conversely1 a rapidly—adjusting
 •chanpe rate provides a powerful channel throupn hi ch          nf I ati onary

expectations    can nave a direct and jemediate effect on inflation          ifl   Cfl

open econom. ny short—run tradeoff between inflation and urieeploycnent
would therefare be lass    favorable under a floating rate. Floating rates
certairiv allow    countries to choose their own trend inflation rates. But

it soon became vidnt that if disturbances to the economy oriqinated

predominantly outside the money market, the inflationary cost of             usina
monetary policy to target employment could be quite high.

       Sharp exchanqe—rate movements might CISO      have adverse distribu-
tional effects in the economy and       these together with a desire for

price—level    stability, led central banks to intervene,       at    times heavily,
in   tfle foreign exchange market. Correspondingly, the predicted drop in

central    banks' demand for international reserves did not materialize
(although the composition of      reserves did change over time as the
deutschemark and yen became important reserve currencies and the pound

sterling retreated). Central banks' use of foreign reserves to manage

exchange rates did not necessarily imply an operative balance—of—

payments constraint, however, since in many        countries   the same exchange—

rate   effects could have been achieved at an unchanged reserve level

through domestic credit measures.

       Under conditions of limited capital mobility, such        as those exist-
ing in the early 1950s when Friedman wrote, the automatic balancing of

international reserve payments by a     floating   exchange    rate   amounted

essentially to the automatic balancing of the current account. With

means other than reserve flows available to settle current—account

imbalances, however, there is no theoretical necessity for a floating

rate to balance the current account in the short run. A current—account

deficit,   say, can be financed   entirely through dosestic borrowing abroad
                                              —19—



with no decline in the central banks foreign assets. Experience was to

show that floatinQ exchange rates themselves could not prevent the

eaerqence of          large   and persistent current—account imbalances. Tiese

imbalances were problematic not only because they usually entailed

problems of shifting productive resources between the economys tradable

and nontradable sectors, but also because they implied changes in for—

eiqn debt and thus in sustainable future consumption levels.

            ttention therefore shifted to the mechanism of current—account

adjustment under floating exchange rates and capital mobility, with

researchers askino., as Hume had, if market farces would automatically

push economies toward            current—account balance. The new. generation of

dynamic          open—economy models produced in the ci d—1970s           built on a   number

of antecedents in the literature. One                of   these was the    neo—classical

monetary approach to            the   balance of payments, which stressed the real
balance effect and the transition to long—run payments equilibrium.
(See, for          example, Frenkel and Johnson, 1976.) The second important
antecedent was          the   closed—economy literature       on money    and growth, which

had clarified the stock—flow              distinction in multi—asset models with

wealth accumulation. Building on the rational—expectations revolution in
macroeconomics, many model builders endowed agents with -forward—looking

exchanae—rate expectations that played                a key   role in clearing the asset
mar   k e t a.

            The intrinsic     dynamic mechanism in these models is fueled by
wealth, broad Iv cief nod to inc uds not oniy real monetary balances, but
also -foreion assets and O55i bly capi tal , physi cal as weli as                 human.

cEme Uhst-fel and Stockm;r,              l9BH for a aurvo, in line wIth the long—
run nature of thai nqui rv the ci asa cal condit ons a-f price
+1 mx   I   bit Icy ano tui I employment warm qenaral y assumed giving a prduc—
ti .n structure 5151 br to the HLrnCan                 mod2 set out above. Where the

sodel s   i f+ere       essenti cliv from Husa          w      in   the der scectrum of
marketable •asets., and in the resultIng portfolio problem of private

agents. Each pi yen        con+ i   o.urction   of    orl d    asset   stocks determines a
short—run epUllibrium defIned by the the requirement of market clearing
in asset    as   well    as goods markets,           The resuitinp equilibrium wealth
levels    and real interest rates determine                   corsumpti on levels         at home and

abroad,    but there is no necessary requirement of current—account balance
in the    short run goods—market equilibrium implies Ofli                           that one
country    s planned current—account surplus equals the other s planned

current—account         deficit,    The international adjustment process can now be

visualized. ll else          equal, the deficit             country is running down its

wealth by borrowing from abroad, so its consumption is                             falling      and

foreign consumption is risinc. Under                  the othodox transfer criterion,
this redistribution of wealth between the countries causes the deficit

country's terms of trade to deteriorate over time; if anticipated, the

evolution of the term; of trade has further repercussions on world real

interest rates and expenditure levels. The process comes to an end once

the deficit countrys consumption has fallen                         into    line   with   its    inrome
which is    lower than initially because of the increased interest burden

of the external debt. ( very similar adjustment process would take

place with mobile capital and a fixed exchange rate, but reserve move-

ments rather than exchanqe—rate movements would contribute to asset—

market    balance during the transition to long—run                        equilibrium.)

      This sieple picture o the adjustment process become; more comq1—
cated once domestic capital eccumulaton is allowed. W current—account
deficit say now Finance an investment boom in which the deficit
country s terms of trade imorove over time. Eventually, however, the
                                  —21—


international wealth—flow mechanism restores a balanced current account.

Further complications arise when the classical assumptions are dropped

and Keynesian price stickiness in output markets is assumed. In such

models, the approach to the long—run, full—employment equilibrium can be

oscillatory.

     For a single economy with Keynesian features, there is an analogue

to the Nundellian Idea of using monetary and fiscal policy simul-

taneously to attain internal and external targets. Figure 2, which is

developed more fully in Obstfeld (1985, pp. 408—410), illustrates this

approach. The downward sloping internal—balance schedule shows combina-

tions of monetary and fiscal ease consistent with full employment. On

the assumption that monetary ease improves the current account by

depreciating the currency, the external—balance schedule, which shows

policy settings consistent with some current—account target, slopes

upward. The intersection of the two schedules shows how policies should

be set to achieve both of the government's goals in the short run.

     Even if one leaves aside the complex game—theoretic problems sur-

rounding interactions between expectations and policy, the usefulness of

the above framework as a normative guide is limited by its failure to

incorporate some key dynamic elements. If the government can hit its

targets only by running a budget deficit, its fiscal stance must even-

tually be reversed if the government debt is to be serviced. In addi-

tion, the policy equilibriam shown in Figure 2 may Imply a domestic

investment rate that is socially sub—optimal. Finally, the framework

itself gives no guidance as to the appropriate external—balance

criterion. The balanced current account reached in the hypothetical

long-run equilibrium of a stationary world economy may be far off the

eark in the short run in which policy decisions must be sade. Recently,
    t
 FISCAL
EXPANSION
                 EXTERNAL
                 BALANCE




                 INTERNAL
                 BALANCE


                   MONETARY
                   EXPANSION



            2—
the theory of international            finance has made partial progress in     ad-
dressing these i       ssues

     The Intertemporal Analysis of External Balances In the 1980s, it

became increasingly common to analyze the dynamic behavior of open

economies in terms of the intertemporal maximization hypothesis applied

by Fisher (1930) to the theory of saving and investment, As usuai this

trend was the result of both new theoretical approaches in macro-

economics generally and of economic events that existing open—economy

models seemed ill—equipped to analyze.

     Lucass (1576) influential critique of econometric policy evalua-

tion was important in motivating the intertemporal approach. Lucas

argued    that   the standard econometric models of the time would generally

rot oe invariant to policy changes. Because the parameters estimated

were not the deep parameters describing preferences or technology but

instead reflected both deep structure and the policy environment

prevailing over the estimation period! the models could not he used to

analyse ch&nqes        ifl the   oiicv environment. LucSS s analysis suggested

tflat more reizable policy conclusions sight oe drawn from open—economy

soeis if demand and supply functions were derived from the optimal

decision rules of maximizing households and firms

     Further impetus to develop an ntertemporal approach came from

events in    the   acrid capital market, particularly the          znteraatlonal
cattern   c-f current accounts -fal      lowing tne sharp ci i--price ccreeses of
1i i—i4 ann      19./S-Si.   I he   divergent Datterns o current—account ed3ust—
sent bvindustri cii zEh          ann ievelooino    r o;intri os rcsed the innerently
                   p           ot c-r -:e         rg   tie Cot cr ess:s J
sho:(s, Nez ther classical nor .eynes ian transter analysis oered cry
 reilable ouadanc.e or this question. SmiIar1v, the epicsion in bank
 lendna to deVe1QPnQ countries         atter the first oil shok sparked    fears

ttat     soee coLntres e:terna1 oebt burdens ouid become unsustalnabie.
        nesu to asses; deveioo ng—country debt levels again    led naturally   to

the notion     of an intertemporally optimal current—account deficit.

         Any intertemporal analysis of external    balance must begin by
specifying     trim   economy   technological and market opportunities for

shifting consumptIon over time. These opportunities are described by the

mconomys intertemporal budget constraint, which specifies the terms on

which the economy can borrow or lend abroad, as well as the domestic

investment technology. Separate analysis of the public and private

sector's budget constraints illuminates the link between the public

finances and external imbalance, as measured by the balance of payments

or by the current account. The economy—wide budget constraint results

from consolidation of the public— and private—sector constraints.

         Assume for simplicity that a single good is consumed and produced

on each date, and consider the position of a small open economy that can

borrow or lend internationally at the real interest rate p. For each

date t, the government of the economy chooses a level of real government

consumption, g(t), and a (possibly negative) level of real transfers to

the priveite sector, 7(t). The government finances its outlays by issuing

debt, by printing money, and by drawing on the interest paid by the

central bank 's foreign reserves. (For present purposes, the central

bank.   's budget best is viewed   as a component of the government   s budget.
Let     hkt) denote    real government bone holdings (cither than central—bank

foreign    reserves;, D(t the money value of central—bank, domestic credit,
P(t the •onev price level and r t) real foreion reserves. if the
government pays the interest rate p on its domestic debt (_bb(t), then
                                                 —24—


the path of government bond holdings satisfies the equation:


(3) db6(t)/dt =    (b6(t)    +   r(t)]       +   £l/P(t)]dD(t)/dt          —
                                                                                   g(t)    —       itt).
     Changes in the economy's money supply, P19(t), result from changes

in the central bank's foreign or domestic assets. If the world price

level Pa is constant (so that proportional changes In Pit) equal propor-

tional changes in the exchange rate), then the central—bank balance—

sheet identity implies dN9(t)/dt =                P(tfldr(t)/dt]       +       dD(t)/dt.             Let m(t)

denote the private sector's desired real money balances and sit) the

home inflation rate. On the assumption that the money market is con-

tinuously in equilibrium, mit)                H9(t)/Pit) and equation (3) becomes


(4) d(b6(t) +   r(t)1/dt    =

            pCb8(t) +   nt)) + i(t)m(t)                 +   (dm(t)/dt3         —
                                                                                    g(t)       —    ytti.

Integrate (4) forward from t = 0 and Impose the condition

limt4exP(—Pt)tb9(t) +       nt)]         0, which restricts the government to

borrowing paths such that the public debt is asymptotically paid off.

The result is the intertemporal budget constraint of the government1


     J'(g(t) +   vtt)]exp(—pt)dt         S


                 :;citt)m(t) +     dm(t)/dt]exp(—pt)dt             +   b6(0)          +    riO).

     The inequality states that the present value of net government

outlays must be less than the present value of th! seigniorage from

money creation plus the government's intial asset position. The latter

quantity, in turn, equals central—bank foreign reserves less the public

debt. For a world of perfect capital mobility, the constraint makes

clear that it is the government's overall asset position that is

relevant for assessing solvency. The level of foreign reserves r(O) has
                                                       -25-

little s-iqn$can            in itse. ls            noted      earlier,     the central bank can

i   ncresse its reserves by sell jog other qoverneent assets (thus reducing
b(O.i    by   ar amount equal to the rise in reserves. The transaction
reauires no chanqe in the path of planned government outlays, g(ti +
7(t
        Consider     next the private sector. Let b(t) denote net private real
bond holdings and k(t) real capital holdings.                            (By       assumption capitals
real price equals unity.)              Foreigners        do not hold domestic                  money or

capital, althouqh the analysis could easily be modified to                                      account for
these possibilities. Biven an                 inelastic        labor supply normalized at                  unity
and a neo—classical production function x[k(t),t] private—sector assets

obey the equation


(5)   dtb   (t)   + k Ct) ÷ a Ct) 3/dt
                    x[k(t),t) +       pb(t)    +   T(t) — c(t)       —   1T(t)m(t).

      Define investment i(t) as               dk(t)/dt.        The sum of (4) and (5) is


      dEb(t) +      b6(t)   r(t)]/dt =
                            +


                     x[k(t),t] + pEb(t)            +   b6(t)   +   r(t)]       -    c(t)   -   i(t)   -


The sum b(t) +        b6(t)     +   r(t)   will be denoted by f(t); f(t) equals the

economys overall net claims on the rest of the world. Integrated                                          for-
ward and combined with the condition hat exp(—pt)f(t) i 0, the above

equation implies the economys overall intertemporal budget constraint,


(6) ,c{c(t) +        1(t) + g(t)       —
                                           xEk(t)t]}exp(—pt)dt                     f(0).


(The same constraint is relevant when the private sector is prohibited

from transacting in the world capital market, but the paths of consump-

tion, investment, and output would generally change H such a prohibi—
tlon were moosed.

        Inequality 4) states that the present value of the economys

expenditures cannot exceed the present value of output plus initial             net
external assets. Alternatively (6) constrains the present value of the

economys trade balance deficits to its initial foreign asset stock. The

initial foreign asset stock thus limits the economys ability to main-

tain absorption levels      in excess   of output.

        An implicatior! of the analysis is that the most appropriate in-

dicator cf flow disequilibrium in external transactions is the change in

the economy s overall external assets——the current account. A surplus in

the balance of payments may indicate low domestic credit expansion or

growing domestic money demand; but when the government has unilimited

access to the world capital market, a growing stock of foreign reserves

is in itself, neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for a

sound    external   position. Only when the domestic government and private

sector cannot borrow abroad does the balance of payments equal the

change in external claims.

        The important consequences of current—account flows do not imply

that external balance and current—account        balance are the same. In
analogy wxth the idea of a high—employment government budget surplus,
external balance could be defneb roughly as          a current   account that

maintains the highest possible steady consumption level consistent with

the economy s expected intertempora.i budget constraint. (A more exact

definition would     require   a more explicit treatment of t.re preferences of

households and the government. Temoorarv unfavorable movements in

output    world interest rstes cr       the terms of trade are aporopriately

oi+sat   dy temporary cx rrent—account de+ mi ts4 hi Ic temporary surpluses
are an appropriate response to temporary favorable shocks. E;;ternal
tian:e in       tfle lacE? 0+ a   perirarient shock. nowever eneral lv reouirea a
rapid a0Ju?iUnEnt to      cL?rrent—accourtt EqLII   ior1L?m.
         1aiiarl,    increas       ifl   the productivity of   investc'ent can   Justily
.3    r-jrrent—accnn- ef i cit that 15 fully        consistent witn external balance
Ifl    a Ionq-run SEnse. In terms of euat ion            ,   a technological innova-
tion implying a graouai upwarj shift of the production function
x[k(t,t) generates higher levels             Of consumption and investment, and

thus an initial current—account deficit. The ability to borrow abroad

prevents the sharp rise in          the interest rate and drop in consumption
that would occur initially in a.           closed economy a higher investment

level than under intertemporal autarky is supported by the foreign

capital inflow, As productivity growth returns to normal, investment

falls and current—account balance is restored with consumption and

output at permanently higher levels.

        These points car be made graphically in terms of a two—period

Fisherian model (see Figure 3). The axes measure amounts of the two

goods available, present and future consumption, and the indifference

curves show preferences over those goods. Investment opportunities are

described by the production—possibilities frontier, which indicates the

amount of future con;umpton obtained from a given input of present

consumption. With the opportunity to borrow abroad at an interest rate

p,    the economy chooses to invest at point A and consume at ooint B, both

of these paints lying on the economys budget line, which has slope —)l

4 p;.    l3iven preferences and technology, t is optimal for this economy

to run a first—period current—account deficit egual to the horizontal

di stance between B and A in per lad           two, the country runs a surplus to

repay    its   earlier borrowing. External balance thus entails an initial

current—account den cit for tne country shown but a surplus for
FUTURE
GOODS




                     B




                            PRESENT
         PRESENT CURRENT-   GOODS
          ACCOUNT DEFICIT




               3
                                              —2.8--



 countries whse autarky interest rates are less than the equiiibrium
 world rate p The model is a parable of the development process.
      When distortions       in the economy cause the actual current account to
 diverqe from its      optimal   level. governments        may find it appropriate to

 adopt policIes, such as taxes or           subsidies on capital movement, that
move the economy closer to the ideal external balance. Policies that

operate directly on the distortions in question (if these can be iden-

tified) will, as usual, be best. Interesting problems arise when the

countries being analyzed are large enough that their governments can

affect world real interest rates (and other world prices) through their

actions. In this situation, the normative guidelines offered by the

above approach are not directly applicable to policy analysis3 and

governments instead condition their actions on the conjectured responses

of other governments. A Nash—Cournot equilibrium, in which each govern—

meat maximizes over policy settings taking as given the policies of

other governments, will in general be Pareto—inefficient from a global

viewpoint. When governments recognize their policy interdependence,

welfare in each country can be improved though policy cooperation. The

practical difficulty lies in the negotiation process through which all

parties agree to choose a particular point on the world contract curve.



     Sovereign Borrowing and Credit Constraints. The intertemporal

analysis of external balance sketched above assumes a world in which

individuals or at least governments can borrow unlimited amounts in the

world capital market, subject only to their interteniporal budget con—

striats. Individual and sovereign borrowers alike however, often

appear to face binding credit constraints as a result of nonrepayment

risk. After the early 1980s, the extreme difficulty for many in—
                                        —29—


dustrializinq countries of tapping world credit markets focused atten-

tion on how countries' borrowing possibilities are affected by the

possibility of sovereign debt default. The problem is a central one

because most developing—country debts are either contracted drect1y by

government      agencies or are government—guaranteed.
       Eaton ard Gersovit: (1981) presented        the   first explicit analysis of
the sovereign repudiation problem in an international setting. Claims on
sovereign debtors are usually not legally enforceable3 so the analysis

of sovereign      default cannot be conducted in terms of bankruptcy laws
that govern      cases of individual default. Eaton and Gersovitz

hypothesized that a sovereign debtor defaults whenever the present

discounted benefit of doing so exceeds the present discounted cost.

Potential lenders understanding the debtor's decision rule, will never

lend so much that a sure incentive to default is created. ccordingly,

sovereign borowers will in general find themselves credit—rationed,

unable to borrow as much as they would like at the interest rate quoted

by lenders.

       There are several potential costs of sovereign default.            default-

ing countrys external assets, such as foreign reserves or goods in

transit, can be seized. The country could, in addition, find itself

unable   to borrow in the future     in response to unexpected changes in Its

income or tecMnoiogy. Continued       participation in     the world trade and

payments      system iniqht become infeasible altogetner.
       This     wlliInqness   to pay nypotnesls has raicai impiicatons for
tJie analysis of external balance. The borrowing country snown in Figure

3, for examrle would repuda ate        its oreigr debt if that      acti on   were

costless,      thus avoloing tne   resource transfer it would otnerwise have to
mcxc       the second pen od s a      result •   period—nne borrewinc would taxe
 place at       a cJuntrv—soeo1ic interest       rate   reflecting the probability of

 oaf eul   t   , w cr   the extent o±   borrown I isi ted   by   the maret s estImate
01     da+ault casts. t Interest rates so hiqh tbat              default   was certain, no
iend1r         at au would occur.
        The analysis of external balance becoces much             more complex in such

a setting. Not only s the allowable current—account deficit more

severely circumscribed; in addition, the policymaker must consider how

various policy actions           will   affect the costs of default and hence the

availability of foreign credit. Trade liberalization measures that move

the economy away from an autarkic production allocation increase the

cost of default by making the economy more vulnerable to disruption of

its foreign trade. Such measures will therefore ease international

credit constraints at the same time as they improve the static alloca-

tion of national resources. Conversely, trade restrictions aimed at

improving the current account may well reduce a countrys creditworthi-

ness.

        The traditional balance—of—payments target has a rationale if the

government believes that foreign credit lines may disappear unexpec—

tedly There is then a case for holding precautionary reserves to

finance current—account deficits that may become necessary at times when

credit happens to be tight or nonexistent. The same purpose would be

served, however, if foreign assets held by government agencies other

than the central bank were run down at such times.

        Internal and external balance may be irreconcilable for countries

ttat seek to continue external debt service in the face of severe

limItations on -forexgn borrowing. fter the early 1980s, many developing

countries were able to obtain external finance only through forced

bank    lending orchestrated by the IMF and central banks Measures to
reduce current—account ef 1Ci ts in I iflE             witfl th external +urds avail —
able      cand ifl    line   with IMF stabilizaticn tarqets pushed many economies

Into      deep recession.          of   tais   writing, it   is unclear how long .t will

remain politically feasible for debtor governments to downplay internal—

balance goals in order to continue avoiding efault. There are

increasingly—trequent call; for some form of debt                 relief. Such proposals
amount to the cx post indexation o+ debt contracts to adverse contin—

qercies that were not entirely under the debtors control.

          The    debt crisis of the 1950s has raised deep and serious questions
about the         type;   of asset; traded between developed and developing
countries. Before the debt crisis, the                typical loan contract between

banks      and developing—country borrower; was indexed only to the                  London

Inter—Bank Offered Rate, and not to other factors that might alter the
borrowers ability to repay. Trade between developed and                      developing

countries in a wider spectrum 0+ state—contingent                 assets would improve
the international allocation of risk, and thus help to avoid future debt
crises.           greater share for equity in settling current—account im-

balances is one possible step in this direction. Such reform; would not

eliminate the sovereign—default problem entirely, nor would they

eliminate the moral—hazard problem emphasized by critics of debt—relief

proposals. The possibility of a widespread and synchronized default

coul a oe sharply reduced, however unaer innovatl ye eternel financing

a r ran a, em eats.


          Tnc structure of nternatloaal financial irtermed ati                on   also has

i5fl i   Icati on;    for the   mutual adust;ent process 0+ industrialized
countr es.        Current—account i ebal ances are only one avenue throuqn whI ch

countrl as can ma?ntan ion g—run consumption Ievei 5 ifi              tile    face of real

acome       +   I uctuati ons or chance; in investment orocuct lvi t i ml I ar
                                  —32—


consumption—smoothing can be obtained with smaller current—account

imbalances, however, if there is a greatmr degree of international

portfolio diversification. Lucas (1982), for example, models a world of

two exchange economies with perfect International risk sharing in which

consumption levels can be perfectly correlated internationally even

though current—account Imbalances never take place. The problem of

external balance thmref ore never arises in Lucas's idealized setting. In

reality, the extent of international portfolio diversification seems to

be much smaller than plausible financial models of an integrated world

capital market would predict. Why this should be so Is a major empirical

puzzle, and a problem for policy as well.
Re f e r en cc;

Dornbusch, F, (1973). Currency Depreciation, Hoarding, and Relative Prices,"
     journal of Political Economy, July/August.

Eaton, J. , and M. Gersovitz. (1981>. "Debt with Potential Repudiation:
     Theoretical and Empirical Aspects," Review of Economic Studies,
       Apri I.

Fisher, 1. (1930). The Theory of Interest, New York, Macmillan.

Frenkel, J.A. and H.6. Johnson, editors. (1976). The Monetary Approach
     to the Balance of Payment;, Toronto, University of Toronto Press.

Friedman, N. (1953). 'The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates," in Essays
     in Positive Economics, Chicaqo, University of Chicago Press.

Hume 0. (1752). "0+ the Balance of Trade," in Essays Moral, Political , and
     Literary, London, Longmans Green, 1898.

Johnson, H.G. (1969). "The Case for Flexible Exchanqe Rates, 1969,"
     Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, June.

Keynes, J.M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment Interest and Money,
     London, Macmillan.

Lucas, R.E. ,  Jr. (1976). "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,"
       in The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, edited by K. Brunner
       and A.H. Meltzer, Amsterdam, North—Holland.

           1982:. ulnterest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two—Country
       World," Journal of Monetary Economics, November.

Meade, J.E.       (i9i). The Balance of Payments. London, Oxford       University
     Press.

Metzler, L. A:. (1948).         The Theory of International Trade," in A Survey of
       Conteorary Economics, edited b H.S, Ellis, Philadelphia, Blakiston.
              19b01 .   'The Process of international Adjustment under Condition;
       of Full Ee,p(oy;ent: A Keynesian View,' in Readinqs in International
       Economics. ecitcu by R,E, Caves a.no H.B Johnson, Homewood, Irwin,

inie1l.      RA. 1c61h 'ftc Iriternasoial Disequilibriuc.           E;tec," in
       lflterflCt?oflOi    Econocic;, Paew york., Nacmillan 19a8.
                    .     The Nature of Pci icy Choice; ' in internati on-el
       Econceics, New York. Moccnllan.
Nurkse, F. ilP44 . Internatonal Curronc'v E.perence:__Lessons—of the
     intcr—wa.r Period, ereva, LeaquC 0+ Nations.
0stfei d 1. I25; . Fioatng Eicano.a Rote;: Experience ano Prospects
       Brookinapers on Ec:onc'mic Activity, 2.
                                      34—


Jbstield, M an H.C. Stock;ran. i1985.i      uE.rnan.Fr_   Dvnaacs, jr
     Handooo o-f internatonai Econci Cs, eoi ted by R W Jones and P. B.
     eran.       rsterdas. North-oliand.

         Li.18 i7 . Tue Principles of Poiit cai Economy   and Ta>ation
     London, 3.M. Dent & Sons! 1911.

Sa.euelson, P.A. 1971). "On the Trail of Conventional Beliefs about the
     Transfer Problern in Trade, Balance of Paynierts, and Bro,th,
     edited by J.N Bhaqwati et. al. rnsterdam. Nortn-Hoiiand.
Triffin, R. 156i). Gold and the Dollar Crisis! New Haven, Yale University
     P r e ss.



Viner, 3. ti.937). Studies in the Theory of International Trade, New York,
     Harper & Brothers.
