NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RESERVATION PRICES:
AN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF CIGARETTE PURCHASES ON INDIAN RESERVATIONS
Philip DeCicca
Donald S. Kenkel
Feng Liu
Working Paper 20778
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20778

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Philip DeCicca, Donald S. Kenkel, and Feng Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Reservation Prices: An Economic Analysis of Cigarette Purchases on Indian Reservations
Philip DeCicca, Donald S. Kenkel, and Feng Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 20778
December 2014
JEL No. H26,I18
ABSTRACT
The special legal status of Indian tribes in the U.S. means that state excise taxes are not necessarily
collected on cigarette purchases on Indian reservations. We focus on two under-studied but basic empirical
economic questions this raises. Using novel data from New York surveys that asked directly about
cigarette prices and purchases from reservations, we first ask: What is the economic incidence of the
tax break? In data from New York over a period when the state did not attempt to collect taxes on
reservation purchases, our estimates suggest that the tax break is usually fully shifted to the consumer.
The notable exception is on one reservation where a tribal monopoly captures almost half of the tax
break. Second, we ask: Has the tax break increased consumer demand for low-quality cigarettes relative
to high-quality cigarettes? New York's cigarette tax is a fixed amount per pack, providing an opportunity
to test the Alchian and Allen substitution theorem. We find some support for the prediction that the
tax break increases consumer demand for lower-quality cigarettes.

Philip DeCicca
Department of Economics
422 Kenneth Taylor Hall
McMaster University
Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4
CANADA
and NBER
decicca@mcmaster.ca

Feng Liu
School of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Shanghai 200433, China
fliu22@gmail.com

Donald S. Kenkel
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
College of Human Ecology
Cornell University
Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401
and NBER
dsk10@cornell.edu

I.

INTRODUCTION
As >domestic dependent nations,= federally recognized Indian tribes in the U.S. have

limited sovereignty over their members and territory. Supreme Court decisions have established
that while the individual states do not have the authority to collect taxes on cigarettes sold to tribal
members on Indian reservations, they can collect state cigarette taxes on reservation sales to
non-members.2 Over the years, in many states cigarette sales on Indian reservations have been
substantial. In its 1994 decision upholding New York=s taxation scheme, the Supreme Court cited
evidence that Athe volume of tax exempt cigarettes sold on New York reservations in 1987 - 1988
would, if consumed exclusively by tax immune Indians, correspond to a consumption rate 20 times
higher than that of the average New York resident...@ (Department of Taxation and Finance of New
York v. Milhelm Attea & Bros, Inc. 1994). Until a few years ago, reservation cigarette sales
continued to flourish in New York. A report for the New York State Department of Health
estimates that reservation sales resulted in between $254 million and $329 million of lost tax
revenues in 2004 (Davis et al. 2006). This corresponds to reservation sales of between 169 million
and 219 million packs, which is around one-quarter to one-third as large as the tax-paid sales of
648 million packs that year (Orzechowski and Walker 2008).
Collecting cigarette taxes on reservation sales has repeatedly been advocated as a way to
address New York=s and other states= budget problems, but it has often been strongly opposed by
2

Fredericks (1989), Folster (1998) and EchoHawk (2003 - 2004) provide detailed
discussion of the legal status of Indian tribes and States= taxation authority. We follow the court
cases and the federal government and use the term AIndian@ to refer to descendants of the
indigenous peoples of the Americas. Another term in common usage is ANative American.@ Most
style guides describe the terms as inter-changeable. In data from a 1995 supplement to the Current
Population Survey, 50 percent of members of this ethnic/racial group prefer the term Indian, and
37 percent prefer the term Native American (Tucker, Kojetin, and Harrison, 1995).
2

the affected Indian tribes. The most dramatic opposition took place in 1997 in response to New
York Governor Pataki=s attempt to enforce the tax collection scheme ruled constitutional in the
1994 Supreme Court=s Milhelm Attea & Bros decision. On April 20, 1997 a protest against
cigarette tax collection shut down highways near reservations, resulted in 11 arrests and 12
damaged police cars, and sent a dozen New York State Troopers to the hospital (Folster 1998, pp.
707-708). A month later, Governor Pataki announced that the state would abandon efforts to
collect cigarette taxes on reservations. Literally a generation after Governor Mario Cuomo
proposed in 1988 to collect taxes on reservation sales, in June 2011 Governor Andrew Cuomo=s
administration began enforcing tax collection on New York Indian reservations (Associated Press
2011).
State taxation of cigarette sales on Indian reservations raises interesting legal questions and
has implications for state revenues and public health. In this paper we focus on two under-studied
but basic empirical economic questions raised by the unusual tax situation.
First, we ask: What is the economic incidence of the tax break given to cigarette purchases
on Indian reservations? We do not know of any previous studies of the incidence of this tax break,
and the degree of tax shifting is difficult to predict a priori. On the one hand, the strong opposition
from the Indian tribes suggests that part of the tax break might be shifted back to them as
monopoly profits. On the other hand, most previous empirical studies suggest that cigarette excise
taxes are fully shifted or even over-shifted to consumer prices. At least part of the tax break must
be shifted to lower consumer prices, to induce non-residents to travel to the reservations. To
estimate the incidence of the tax break we analyze data from the New York State Adult Tobacco
Survey (NYS-ATS) from 2003 – 2009. The NYS-ATS asked smokers directly about cigarette
prices and their purchases from Indian reservations. Section II provides more background on
3

cigarette markets on New York Indian reservations. Section III reports results from ordinary least
squares estimates of a tax-break incidence equation. We estimate that New York consumers who
purchase cigarettes on Indian reservations on average pay about $1.73 less per pack, exactly the
average size of the New York cigarette excise tax over our study period. To address the possible
endogeneity of a reservation purchase, in section IV we propose and provide support for the use of
an instrumental variable approach based on the consumer’s distance to a reservation. The
instrumental variable results reported in section IV are similar to the OLS results and suggest that
the tax break is fully shifted to lower consumer prices.
In section V we extend the specification to test the prediction that the incidence of the tax
break varies depending upon within-reservation market structure. Our OLS and instrumental
variable results suggest that the tax break is not fully shifted to consumers who purchase cigarettes
on the Onondaga reservation: the tribe appears to capture a substantial portion of the tax break.
Unlike other reservations where multiple, competitive vendors are the norm, on the Onondaga
reservation there is a single tribal-run monopoly.
Second, we use the New York data to explore a prediction from the economic model of the
consumer: Has the tax break increased consumer demand for low-quality cigarettes relative to
high-quality cigarettes? New York=s cigarette tax, like virtually all current excise taxes, is not ad
valorem but instead is a per unit tax, i.e. a fixed amount per pack. As a result, the tax break on
reservation sales sharply reduces the relative price of low-quality cigarettes compared to
high-quality cigarettes. In section VI we test the prediction that the tax break should therefore shift
demand towards low-quality cigarettes. In models that treat reservation purchases as exogenous,
we find that consumers who purchase their cigarettes on New York Indian reservations are almost
20 percentage points more likely to purchase low-quality generic/ other brands, and are about 15
4

percentage points less likely to purchase high-quality premium brands. However, based on our
instrumental variable results we cannot rule out the possibility that these patterns reflect
unobserved heterogeneity between reservation and off-reservation purchasers, rather than the
predicted substitution effect.
Our study contributes to a growing body of empirical studies that use finer-level data to
study questions related to tax incidence and consumer behavior. Lacking finer-level data, many
previous tax incidence studies compare prices across markets with different tax rates, observing a
single price (e.g. the average price) in each market (e.g. Keeler et al. 1996, Besley and Rosen 1999,
Delipalla and O'Donnell 2001, Alm, Senoga, and Skidmore 2009). A series of recent studies use
finer-level data on prices across retailers (Kenkel 2005, Hanson and Sullivan 2009), store-level
transactions (Chiou and Muehlegger 2010, Espinosa and Evans 2011), individual consumers
(DeCicca et al 2013a), and individual-level transactions (Harding et al 2012). With finer-level
data, these studies move beyond estimating the average rate of tax shifting to explore
heterogeneous responses along several dimensions. The recent empirical focus on heterogeneous
responses is consistent with theoretical predictions that a range of tax shifting outcomes is possible
under different market conditions (Katz and Rosen 1985, Stern 1987, Besley 1989).
We explore tax shifting and its implication for consumer behavior in a policy-relevant
context with several novel features. First, previous research necessarily studies the shifting of tax
hikes because they have been much more common. In contrast, we study the shifting of a complete
break on some of the highest excise taxes in place in the U.S. Second, we exploit an unusual set of
market conditions: for the same good during the same time period in the same state we can identify
competitive and monopolized local markets on reservations.

5

II.

BACKGROUND ON CIGARETTE MARKETS ON NEW YORK INDIAN
RESERVATIONS
There are nine New York Indian reservations with Asmoke shops@ that sell cigarettes to

non-tribal members. Two of the reservations B the Poospatucks and the Shinnecocks B are on Long
Island. Four of the reservations B Allegany, Cattaraugus, Tonawanda and Tuscarora B are in
western New York, near Buffalo. Two of the reservations B the Oneidas and the Onondagas B are
in central New York, near Syracuse. The St. Regis Mohawk Tribe reservation is in the far
northeast of the state and spans the border between U.S. and Canada. In addition, since 2003
members of the Cayuga Nation have operated smoke shops in Seneca Falls and Union Springs in
central New York. However, the Cayuga Nation=s claims of Indian sovereignty are currently
disputed because the shops are not on officially recognized reservation land.3
By statute, the incidence of the New York excise tax on cigarettes Ashall be upon the
consumer@ (New York Tax Law Section 471 (1)). In practice, the tax is pre-paid by wholesalers
who purchase tax stamps and attach them to the cigarette packages. Until June 2011, Indian
retailers were allowed to purchase unstamped cigarettes from wholesalers. The New York
cigarette tax was uncollected whenever these unstamped cigarettes were sold to non-tribal
members. Because the sales were not taxed or centrally recorded, there are no official data on the
volume of cigarette sales on New York Indian reservations to non-tribal members.
The tax break on reservation cigarette sales offers an opportunity to empirically study tax
incidence in a unique market context. Regardless of the wording of the New York statute, a basic
3

The smoke shops are located within the area of the original reservation established by the
Treaty of Canandaigua in 1794, but the Cayuga land claim is under dispute. On November 25,
2008, county law enforcement agencies raided the Cayuga smoke shops and seized more than 1.5
million untaxed cigarettes.
6

insight from public finance is that the behavior of buyers and sellers in markets determines the
incidence of a tax (Fullerton and Metcalf 2002). Because of the demand and supply conditions of
reservation cigarette sales, it is an open question the extent to which the incidence of the tax break
on the sales is enjoyed by consumers as lower prices, or by the Indian retailers as monopoly
profits. The OLS and instrumental variable models we use next in sections III and IV provide
estimates of the incidence of the tax break on average across the nine New York reservations. In
section V we extend our analysis to reflect differences in within-reservation market competition.
Within-reservation competition is the most direct, but Indian retailers face several other
sources of potential competition. Retailers on most reservations face competition from smoke
shops on other nearby reservations. Indian retailers in New York also face potential competition
from low-taxed cigarettes from other states and Canada and from other untaxed sources such as
duty-free shops and sales over the internet. Currently, aside from reservation purchases,
purchasing cigarettes across state borders is the most common form of consumer tax avoidance
(DeCicca, et al 2013b). While New York=s cigarette tax was relatively high during our study
period, so were the taxes in most of its border states and Canada.4 New York Indian reservations
face some competition from cigarettes smuggled in over longer distances from very low-tax states
such as North Carolina and Virginia. During our study period, brick-and-mortar Indian smoke
shops also faced competition from mail order and internet sales. However, in national data over
this period less than one percent of smokers report purchasing cigarettes over the internet
4

We use data from the fourth quarter of 2003 through the fourth quarter of 2009; New
York=s tax rate was $1.50 per pack until June 2008, when it was increased to $2.75 per pack. By
comparison, over this time period the tax rates in its border states were: $1.51 / $2.00 (July 1,
2008) in Connecticut; $1.51 / $2.51 (July 1, 2008) in Massachusetts; $2.05/ $2.40 (July 1, 2004)/
$2.575 (July 1, 2006)/ $2.70 (July 1, 2009) in New Jersey; $1.00/ $1.35 (July 1, 2004) in
Pennsylvania; and $1.79/ $2.24 (July 1, 2009) in Vermont.
7

(DeCicca et al 2013b).5
III.

INCIDENCE OF THE TAX BREAK ON INDIAN RESERVATIONS: OLS
MODELS

A. Data and Empirical Model
We use repeated cross sections from the fourth quarter of 2003 through the fourth quarter
of 2009 of the New York State Adult Tobacco Survey (NYS-ATS). The NYS-ATS, conducted by
the New York State Department of Health, is a random-digit dial telephone survey designed to
yield a representative sample of New York residents over age 18. After dropping observations with
missing or invalid responses on the key variables of interest, our sample consists of 6,539 current
smokers. Table 1 contains descriptive statistics for the dependent and independent variables used
in the empirical models below.
We use the NYS-ATS data to estimate a tax-break incidence equation that shows the price
paid by consumer i as a function of a 0-1 indicator of whether the purchase was on an Indian
reservation, a vector of control variables X, and an error term:
Pi = β0 + β1 (Indian reservation purchase)i + β2 Xi + εi

(1)

The vector X includes sex, age, race/ethnicity, sex, schooling, income, marital status, employment
status, and car ownership. We also include indicators for regions within New York (New York Visitors Network 2010), county population quintile, and a set of indicators for years (defined as
starting in July of each year). The region, county population quintile and year indicators help
The low prevalence of internet purchases might seem surprising, and could reflect survey
respondents’ reluctance to report actions of questionable legality. Goolsbee, Lovenheim, and
Slemrod (2010) point out that there is very little systematic evidence about the volume of internet
cigarette sales. The Senecas in western New York apparently dominated national sales of
cigarettes over the internet. Under pressure from the New York attorney general, in 2005 private
carries including FedEx and UPS agreed to stop delivering cigarettes. The 2010 Prevent All
Cigarette Trafficking (PACT) Act bans the U.S. Postal Service from delivering cigarettes.
5

8

control for differences in market conditions across the state and for time trends. We estimate
equation (1) by OLS and report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors that account for
clustering within counties.
Our empirical approach to study tax incidence in equation (1) is similar to Poterba (1996)
and Besley and Rosen (1999). These studies estimate reduced-form equations that show the price
of the taxed good as a function of the applicable tax and a vector of demand- and supply-shifters.
The basic prediction to be tested is whether the estimated coefficient β1 shows one-for-one shifting
of the tax break to consumer prices. Evidence of one-for-one shifting is consistent with the
competitive paradigm. Different models of imperfect competition can predict either under- or
over-shifting, depending upon demand elasticities, the degree of market power, and firms’
strategic behavior. For example, some models of imperfect competition predict that firms will
raise the price by more than the tax (over-shift) to compensate for the revenue loss from decreased
demand. Given the variety of theoretically possible outcomes, as Poterba (1996, p. 168) observes,
the degree of tax shifting is Aprimarily an empirical issue.@
The dependent variable in equation (1) is based on smokers= responses to the NYS-ATS
question about how much they paid for the last pack of cigarettes they purchased. Most smokers
make fairly frequent cigarette purchases, so self-reported data on their most recent purchases seem
likely to be reasonably accurate. Many previous studies use data on cigarette prices from the Tax
Burden on Tobacco (TBOT) published by Orzechowski & Walker (2008). A number of recent
economic and public health studies use self-reported data on cigarette prices from the Tobacco Use
Supplements to the Current Population Survey (TUS-CPS).6 A report on alternative measures of
6

Recent studies that use the TUS-CPS price data include Pesko et al (2012, 2013),
Vijayaraghavan et al (2013) and DeCicca, Kenkel and Liu (2013a, 2013b).
9

cigarette price data concludes: “The comparisons of the TUS-CPS and TBOT price measures
provided in this report suggest that self-reported price data collected in population surveys can be
used to construct valid measures of cigarette prices that capture the prices smokers actually face in
the market ....” (Chaloupka et al 2013). Because the NYS-ATS used the same question about
cigarette prices as in the TUS-CPS, this conclusion supports the accuracy of the measure we use.
Scanner data on actual prices paid for cigarettes could be more accurate, but these data are just
becoming available and might not include purchases on reservations. Finally, we note classical
measurement error in the dependent variable will not lead to bias in our estimates of the parameters
of equation (1).
On average, NYS-ATS respondents report paying about $4.50 per pack for their last
purchase of cigarettes. This is very similar to the average cigarette prices reported by New York
respondents to the 2003 and 2006 - 2007 TUS-CPS (DeCicca, et al 2013a, Appendix table).
The key explanatory variable B whether the purchase was made on a reservation B is based
on smokers= responses to a series of NYS-ATS questions about their purchases of cigarettes for
their own use in the past 12 months. Smokers were asked whether they made purchases from
Indian reservations Aall the time,@ Asometimes,@ Ararely,@ or Anever.@ About 19 percent of
NYS-ATS respondents report that they Aalways@ purchase cigarettes on Indian reservations, which
we use as our indicator of a reservation purchase.7 This is somewhat higher than the 13 percent of
smokers in the New York sub-sample of the May 2010 TUS-CPS who reported that their last
purchase was on a reservation. We speculate that some NYS-ATS respondents exaggerate when
In an alternative specification (not reported but available upon request) we include
additional indicators for whether the respondent reports “sometimes” or “rarely” making a
reservation purchase. The estimated coefficient on “sometimes” is about one-third the size of the
coefficient on “always.” “Rarely” making a reservation purchase is not statistically or practically
significantly associated with the price respondents report paying for their last pack of cigarettes.
7

10

they claim to Aalways@ purchase cigarettes on reservations. For our analysis the key issue is how
respondents’ reports of reservation purchases match their reports of the prices they paid. If
respondents who exaggerate their reservation purchases also tend to report the price paid on the
reservation, exaggeration does not necessarily create misclassification error in our indicator of a
reservation purchase.8 The possibility of misclassification suggests our estimate of β1 might be
biased towards zero (attenuation bias), as long as the error is classical.
Like standard tax incidence studies, our approach is descriptive: we describe how in
equilibrium the price paid varies across different tax regimes. However, in our case the applicable
tax regime B whether the purchase is made on- or off-reservation B is a consumer choice variable.
This raises a potential endogeneity problem that we will address through the use of instrumental
variables in the analysis below in section IV.
B. OLS Results
Table 2 presents our OLS estimates of the impact of the tax break for reservation purchases
on the price paid for cigarettes. The results suggest that the tax break is about fully shifted to
consumer prices. In column 1, the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimate is that always purchasing

8

For example, the same respondent who reports in error that he “always” purchases his
cigarettes on reservations because he overlooks his occasional last-minute purchases at
convenience stores might also overlook those purchases when he reports the price he paid for his
last pack. Because cigarette packs purchased on reservations did not have tax stamps, the study by
Chernick and Merriman (2013) of cigarette packs thrown away on the street as litter provides
another source of evidence on the prevalence of reservation purchases. In data collected in May
2008 the share of littered packs in New York City with no tax stamp was 15 percent. In the
sub-sample of NYS-ATS respondents from New York City, about 4.5 percent of smokers report
that they always purchase cigarettes from reservations. Chernick and Merriman (2013, p. 646)
note that there are other sources of unstamped littered packs including Internet purchases and
purchases from organized smugglers. In addition, the prevalence of reservation purchases among
litterers is not necessarily representative of the prevalence among all smokers. Taking these factors
into account, the two prevalence estimates are broadly consistent and do not suggest exaggeration
in the NYS-ATS measure.
11

cigarettes on a reservation is associated with a price savings of $1.73 per pack. For most of our
sample period, the New York tax was $1.50; in June 2008, the tax increased to $2.75. Weighting
by the number of observations in our data pre- and post-2008, the average New York tax for our
sample is $1.73.9 The OLS estimate in column 1 is thus consistent with one-for-one shifting of the
tax break on average. In column 2, instead of looking at the average effect over the sample we
include an interaction term between the indicator for a reservation purchase and an indicator for
post-July 2008. For pre-July 2008 observations the estimate of β1 is - 1.44, and we cannot reject the
hypothesis that this equals the pre-July 2008 tax rate of $1.50, consistent with one-for-one shifting.
For post-July 2008 observations we estimate that a reservation purchase is associated with an
additional $1.50 of price savings. This estimate is statistically significantly different than the
post-July 2008 tax hike of $1.25 and implies slight over-shifting of the increase in the tax break at
a rate of 1.2. We note that the estimated coefficients on the relevant year and region indicators are
broadly consistent with the claims that the 2008 New York tax hike, the 2009 federal tax hike, and
the New York City tax are also mainly shifted to consumer prices.10

9

As reported in Table 1, 13.6 percent of the observations are from NYS-ATS surveys
conducted from July 2008 - June 2009 (AYear 2008") and 4.3 percent are from NYS-ATS surveys
conducted from July - December 2009 (AYear 2009"). The other 82 percent of the observations
are from before the 2008 tax hike. Because we lack information on the exact month of the survey,
we cannot identify which observations are from June 2008, so we treat them as pre-tax hike
observations.
10

The coefficient on the 2008 year indicator variable is about $1.00 larger than the
coefficient on the 2007 year indicator (not reported but available upon request). This is consistent
with about 80 percent of the $1.25 hike in New York=s tax in June 2008 being shifted to consumer
prices. The coefficient on the year 2009 indicator is another $0.54 larger, consistent with about 89
percent of the $0.61 April 2009 federal tax hike being shifted to consumer prices. Similar
comparisons of coefficients on the relevant region show that prices in New York City are about
$1.07 higher than in neighboring Long Island, consistent with about 71 percent of New York
City=s extra $1.50 tax being shifted to consumer prices.
12

IV.

INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLE MODEL

A. Identification Strategy
In addition to OLS, we also estimate equation (1) using an instrumental variable (IV) to
treat the indicator of a reservation purchase as potentially endogenous. Unobservable
heterogeneity across consumers, for example in thriftiness or the propensity to search for low
prices, could bias our OLS estimate of β1 if consumers who make purchases on Indian reservations
usually find lower prices on- or off-reservation. Our first stage is a linear probability model of a
reservation purchase, where we use an IV based on the consumer=s distance to the closest
reservation.11 We use Google Maps to measure the distance from each respondent=s county of
residence to the zip code of the nearest Indian reservation with cigarette smoke shops.12 For
NYS-ATS respondents, the average distance to a reservation is about 58 miles.13
The key identification assumption is that conditional on the other explanatory variables,
distance is only related to the price paid through its effect on the probability of a reservation
purchase. There are solid conceptual grounds for the claim that a consumer’s distance to the
closest Indian reservation is econometrically exogenous and creates a useful quasi-experiment.
The locations of reservations within New York are not the result of profit-maximizing choices of
suppliers, but instead trace back to the histories of the Indian tribes and their negotiations with the
11

Angrist (2001) discusses the advantages of the linear probability model in this type of
application.
12

This includes the smoke shops operated by the Cayugas in Seneca Falls and Union
Springs. We do not include the very small Oil Spring Reservation in western New York
(population: 11, none Indian).
13

On average, respondents who live on Long Island and in the Niagara region near Buffalo
face the shortest distances to a reservation (16 and 28 miles, respectively). Respondents in the
Saratoga - Capital region, the Catskills, and the Hudson Valley on average live about 100 to 150
miles away from an Indian reservation.
13

U.S. government. On the consumer’s side, residential location choices are driven by factors such
as employment opportunities, housing prices, school quality, crime rates, and other local public
goods. Because the first stage includes indicators for New York regions, the model is identified by
within-region differences in distance to a reservation. Our empirical model also includes measures
of county-population to help control for general cost-of-living differences that might influence
location choices. Conditional on these and the other control variables in our model, it seems
unlikely that there is problematic unobservable heterogeneity in a factor such as consumer
thriftiness that might invalidate the IV. That is, the availability of low-price cigarettes is unlikely to
drive consumer residential location decisions. Our IV approach rests on the argument that location
decisions driven by other forces create useful and valid quasi-experimental variation in cigarette
consumers’ distance to a reservation. This argument parallels the justification for similar IVs
based on distance in a well-cited labor economics study of the effects of schooling (Card 1995) and
a well-cited health economics study of the effects of heart surgery (McClellan et al 1994).14
To explore the validity of the distance IV, we undertake three empirical analyses (detailed
results are available upon request). First, we follow standard practice and explore whether the
distance IV appears to be random in terms of observable consumer characteristics. The logic is that
the extent of randomness in observed characteristics is suggestive evidence about instrument
exogeneity. Although we find a few more statistically significant differences than would be
expected by chance, the pattern of results does not point to a common source of problematic
heterogeneity. Second, we conduct an auxiliary analysis of data from the Simmons National
Consumer Survey that include measures of consumer thriftiness – a potential source of
14

In a recent review article about the IV approach, Imbens (2014, p. 11 and p.38) uses
distance as an example of an IV that is plausibly exogenous, at least after conditioning on other
covariates.
14

problematic heterogeneity which is unobserved in the NYS-ATS data. We do not find any
evidence that the types of consumers who live near reservations are the same types of consumers
who report thrifty attitudes or behaviors in the consumer survey. Third, we use scanner price data
from yet another data set -- the Nielsen Consumer Panel Data -- to conduct falsification tests of our
IV. Here the logic is that if there is problematic heterogeneity in consumer thriftiness or market
conditions, we would find that distance predicts lower consumer prices paid in general, not just
lower cigarette prices. We do not find any evidence that the prices paid for other frequently
purchased items – bread, eggs, and milk – are systematically lower for consumers who live near
reservations. Although the exclusion restriction required for the IV is untestable, the conceptual
arguments and additional empirical analyses help rule out important threats to exogeneity and
support the claim that distance provides valid quasi-experimental variation for identification.
B. Instrumental Variables Model: Results
The first-stage results are reported in the Appendix. As expected, longer distances
significantly decrease the probability of a reservation purchase. The F-test of the joint
significance of the distance variables is 17, above the standard rule of thumb that the F-statistic
should be above 10 to avoid weak IV problems.
Column 3 of Table 2 presents the IV estimates of the NYS-ATS tax-break incidence
equation. The IV point estimate of the effect of a reservation purchase on price paid is -$1.85, very
close to the OLS estimate of -$1.73. A Hausman test fails to reject the null hypothesis that
reservation purchase is econometrically exogenous.
Although the conceptual arguments and auxiliary empirical analyses discussed above help
rule out important threats to the validity of our IV, we note that a more subtle problem might
remain. The substitution theorem implies that holding the tax break constant, higher costs of
15

traveling to a reservation will tend to shift consumer demand towards higher-quality cigarettes.
The model includes empirically important determinants of the demand for quality, including
income and age.15 However, remaining unobserved quality differences are captured by the error
term ε. As a result, there may be a correlation between the distance measures used as IVs and ε,
violating the exclusion restriction.
To address this, as an alternative to the IV approach column 4 of Table 2 reports an OLS
specification of the tax-break incidence equation that includes explicit controls for the quality of
cigarette brand purchased. Questions included in the 2003 - 2007 waves of the NYS-ATS allow us
to create indicators for consumers whose usual brand is a discount cigarette or a generic/other
brand cigarette, with premium brands like Marlboro making up the omitted category. We discuss
our measures of quality in more detail below in section VI. After controlling for quality with
these measures, the estimated effect of a reservation purchase on price paid is -$1.23, implying that
the pre-2008 tax-break of $1.50 was shifted at a rate of about 0.8. The problem with the column 4
specification is that the measures of cigarette quality could be considered endogenous outcome
variables; indeed this is the approach we take in section 4.16 As such, they are what Angrist and
Pischke (2009, pp. 64 - 68) call Abad controls@ and their inclusion gives rise to a version of
selection bias. Although in principle the bias from bad controls is difficult to sign, we view the
15

The models of brand choice reported below in Table 5 show that younger consumers and
higher income consumers are much more likely to choose higher quality cigarettes. For example,
compared to those aged 18 - 29, smokers in their 50s are 15 percentage points more likely to smoke
a generic/ other brand, and 24 percentage points less likely to smoke a premium brand. There are
also large differences across income groups: compared to those with household income less than
$20,000, smokers with incomes of $50,000 - $90,000 are 8 percentage points less likely to smoke
generic/other brands, and 10 percentage points more likely to smoke premium brands.
16

We do not have enough IVs to treat reservation purchase and cigarette quality variables
as jointly endogenous in a 2SLS model.
16

column 4 results as corroborating the IV results in column 3. Both approaches yield evidence that
most of the tax-break is shifted to consumer prices, although perhaps at a rate less than
one-for-one.
V.

TAX INCIDENCE IN COMPETITIVE AND MONOPOLIZED
RESERVATION CIGARETTE MARKETS

A. Competition in Reservation Cigarette Markets
We use a combination of data on retail establishments, anecdotal evidence and the results
of industrial organization research to describe the degree of competition in local cigarette markets
on New York Indian reservations. We use a standard commercial source of data on retail
establishments: the National Establishment Time-Series (NETS) database, a joint venture by
Walls & Associates and Dun and Bradstreet. The NETS data provide the SIC code, location, and
establishment and headquarters name. We identify establishments with an SIC code for “tobacco
store or stand” that were located in the same zip code as an Indian reservation.17 Using the year
2005 to illustrate, in the NETS data there are 72 establishments identified as tobacco stores and
located in the same zip codes as Indian reservations. The zip codes with Indian reservations had
1.25 tobacco stores per 1,000 population, which is over five times the average in other New York
zip codes. Over our study period of 2003 – 2009, across the New York zip codes that include
Indian reservations the average number of tobacco stores ranged from four to almost 30. Based on
the establishment and headquarter names in the NETS data, the vast majority of the Indian
To the best of our knowledge there is no registry of establishments that sell cigarettes on
Indian land. We took additional steps to verify that establishments in the NETS data are tobacco
stores on Indian reservations. We reviewed establishment names that might indicate Indian
ownership, such as “Big Indian Smoke Shop” and “Seneca Smoke Shop.” We used geographic
information software to determine whether the establishment’s latitude and longitude (in the
NETS data) corresponds to an Indian reservation. For those locations with a Google Earth street
view, we visually confirmed the presence of a tobacco store.
17

17

reservation tobacco stores are stand-alone businesses, not parts of chains. Although we could not
verify all of the establishments, we note that there might be additional tobacco stores that are not
included in the NETS data, as well as establishments in other SIC codes (e.g. convenience stores)
that might sell cigarettes. We further note anecdotal evidence that low entry costs and low
overhead help stimulate competition. For example, news reports describe some of the smoke shops
on the Long Island Poospatuck reservation as Aone-room trailers with a single sales clerk working
behind a Formica counter@ (Saul 2008).
Industrial organization research into other markets suggests that the number of tobacco
stores on most reservations is probably sufficient to result in substantial competition. Bresnahan
and Reiss (1991) analyze data on the number of firms in five retail and professional service
industries: doctors, dentists, druggists, plumbers, and tire detailers. Although there are differences,
the markets Bresnahan and Reiss study share some similarities with reservation cigarette markets:
they intentionally limit their study to narrowly defined products and services; and they focus on
geographically isolated local markets. Their empirical results suggest that the competitive effects
of the entry occur rapidly, with most of the increase in competition coming with the entry of the
second and third firms. Berry and Reiss (2007) review the results of this line of industrial
organization research. Assuming these results broadly carry over to cigarette markets, the NETS
data showing that the number of tobacco stores on Indian reservations ranges from four to almost
30 suggest there is substantial within-reservation market competition.
The main exception to within-reservation competition is the Onondaga reservation. In the
early 1990s, Onondaga tribal members agreed to shut down a number of private smoke shops and

18

replaced them with a single tribal-run shop.18 According to the Onondagas= general council Joe
Heat: AOn other nationsY there are dozens of stores, and none of the profit goes to benefit the
general welfare....We don=t have ten different stores cutting their prices to compete with each other
and driving the price down, so our price isn=t that problematic. It=s closer to the price on the
off-territory.@ (as quoted in Cole 2009).
The contrast between substantially competitive markets on most reservations versus the
monopolized Onondaga market provides a unique opportunity to examine the impact of market
structure on tax incidence. The standard textbook result is that: in competitive markets with
constant marginal cost taxes will be shifted one-for-one to consumer prices; while in a
monopolized market with linear costs and linear demand curve exactly half the tax will be shifted
to consumer prices (Fullerton and Metcalf 2002). The Onondaga market does not fit the textbook
example perfectly because they only have a local monopoly and might face competition from other
Indian reservations. However, only the Onedia reservation is within 100 miles of the Onondaga
reservation (the other reservations are from 123 miles to 311 miles away). The distance from the
Onondaga reservation to Syracuse (the largest city in central New York) is one-third the distance
from the Oneida reservation to Syracuse (11 miles versus 33 miles). On the assumptions that the
Onondagas have some local monopoly power and face approximately linear costs and demand, the
textbook results about shifting half of the tax break provides a benchmark prediction to be tested.

18

Within-reservation competition can also be limited by private, illegal means. For
example, federal prosecutors charged that Rodney Morrison, the owner of Peace Pipe Smoke Shop
on the Poospatuck Reservation on Long Island, Aorchestrated the 2003 murder of an associate who
opened a competing store, robbed another rival of thousands of dollars, and set fire to the car of a
third competitor.@ (Caruso, 2008). In 2008 Morrison was convicted for racketeering and the illegal
possession of a firearm, but the racketeering conviction was vacated in April 2010 (Associated
Press, 2010).
19

B. Results
Column 5 of Table 2 presents estimates from an OLS specification that allows us to test the
prediction that the incidence of the tax break varies depending upon within-reservation market
structure. The specification includes two indicator variables for whether the respondent’s probable
reservation-of-choice for cigarette purchase was on one of the eight reservations with substantially
competitive markets or on the Onondaga reservation’s monopoly market.19 The estimated effect
of a purchase on one of the substantially competitive reservation markets is to reduce the price paid
by $1.78, consistent with the tax break being about fully shifted to consumer prices. Respondents
presumed to have made their purchase on the monopolized Onondaga reservation are estimated to
save only about $1.04 per pack, compared to off-reservation purchases.
Column 6 of Table 2 presents IV estimates of the column 5 specification. The IVs are the
consumer’s distance from a reservation (discussed in detail above in section IV) and its interaction
with the indicators for reservation-of-purchase. The estimated coefficients are somewhat larger
than the OLS estimates: a purchase on a substantially competitive reservation reduces the price
paid by $1.99, while a purchase on the monopolized reservation reduces the price paid by $1.40.
The results of a Hausman test fail to reject exogeneity. Although the IV results suggest slightly
greater than one-for-one shifting of the tax break on the competitive reservations, tax shifting on
the monopolized Onondaga reservation is estimated at less than one-for-one.
Above we noted two relevant facts about the Onondaga reservation. First, the Onondaga
reservation is located very near Syracuse, so it might not have to drop the price that much to attract

19

For example, the indicator for the Tonawanda reservation takes a value of one if the
respondent reports that he or she always purchases cigarettes on a reservation and the Tonawanda
reservation is the closest to the respondent=s county of residence.
20

a sufficient customer base. However, the western New York reservations of Allegany,
Cattaraugus, Tonawanda and Tuscarora are similarly located near large customer bases, and
additional results (not reported but available upon request) show roughly full shifting of the tax
break on these reservations.20 Second, in contrast to the other reservations with many competing
smoke shops, the Onondaga reservation has a single tribal-run smoke shop. Although we cannot
rule out other explanations, our estimate that between 60 percent (OLS) and 81 percent (IV) of the
$1.73 tax break is shifted to the consumer on the Onondaga reservation tends to suggest that their
tribal monopoly, perhaps together with their locational advantage, allow them to keep some of the
tax break as monopoly profits.
VI.

IMPACT OF THE TAX BREAK ON CONSUMER DEMAND FOR
CIGARETTE QUALITY

A. Empirical Model
In addition to providing a case study of tax (-break) incidence, we also empirically test the
substitution theorem=s prediction that by changing the relative price of quality the tax break shifts
demand to lower-quality cigarettes. To explore whether consumer demand for cigarette quality
changes in response to the tax break, we use the NYS-ATS data to estimate a consumer demand
function for cigarette brand quality Q:

20

The additional results are from an alternative specification that includes a set of nine
separate indicators for each reservation. The western New York reservations also face potential
competition from each other, which might explain why the prices are driven down despite their
proximity to large population bases. To explore this, we estimated a model that allowed for the
degree of tax shifting to depend on the number of nearby reservations. The results (available upon
request) did not support the prediction that prices are lower on reservations that face more
competition from nearby reservations. However, with only nine New York reservations we do not
have too much statistical power or degrees of freedom to explore why tax shifting rates vary across
reservations.
21

(2)

Qi = δ0 + δ1 (Indian reservation purchase)i + δ2 Xi + ζi

The indicator for an Indian reservation purchase captures the effect of the tax break on the relative
price of low- versus high-quality cigarettes.21 We test the prediction of the substitution theorem
that δ1 will be positive (negative) in the models where the dependent variable indicates a low(high-) quality brand choice. The other explanatory variables in equation (2) are the same as in
equation (1).
The prediction that the reservation tax break increases demand for low-quality cigarettes is
the converse of the well-known prediction that a per unit tax shifts consumption towards higher
quality goods (Barzel 1976). Barzel argues that a tax on quantity will tend to increase demand on
the untaxed product attribute, quality. This prediction can also be seen as an example of what has
been variously termed the AAlchian and Allen substitution theorem,@ the Ashipping the good apples
out theorem,@ or even the Athird law of demand@ (Borcherding and Silberberg 1978, .Bertonazzi,
Maloney and McCormick 1993). In the standard intuitive example, because per unit shipping costs
decrease the relative price of high-quality apples compared to low-quality apples, a
higher-proportion of high-quality apples is consumed in apple-importing areas than in
apple-exporting areas: the good apples are shipped out. Conversely, the tax break on reservation
sales reduces the relative price of low-quality cigarettes, so the substitution theorem predicts that
cheap cigarettes will be shipped out via reservation sales to non-Indians. Although the theorem is
usually traced back to Alchian and Allen=s 1964 textbook, almost three decades later Bertonazzi,
Maloney and McCormick (1993) observe that Athe empirical validity of the Alchian and Allen
21

The tax break increased from $1.50 per pack to $2.75 per pack on June 3, 2008.
Unfortunately, we can not exploit this additional variation. We only use data from 2003 - 2007 to
estimate the models based on equation (2), because the NYS-ATS did not include the questions
about brand choice in the 2008 and 2009 waves.
22

theorem rests primarily on a large volume of anecdotes and ad hoc evidence.@ Econometric studies
by Nesbit (2006) and Lawson and Raymer (2006) reach opposite conclusions about whether
consumer behavior in the gasoline market supports the substitution theorem’s prediction. Most
relevant to our study, Barzel (1976) and Sobel and Garrett (1997) find evidence that higher
cigarette taxes lead to a relative increase in demand for high-quality cigarettes compared to
discount cigarettes, although more recently Espinosa and Evans (2011) do not find evidence of
such a demand shift.22
In sharp contrast to the prediction of the substitution theorem, public health research on
Ahigh price avoidance strategies@ suggests that Amany price sensitive smokers switch to discount
cigarette brands when prices increase@ after tax hikes. The intuitive argument appears to be based
on the idea that consumers allocate a fixed budget towards the purchase of cigarettes and have an
inelastic demand for the quantity of cigarettes smoked. The empirical evidence supporting the
claim that higher taxes encourage smokers to shift to discount brands is very thin.23 However, this
claim in the public health research literature provides extra motivation for our empirical test of the
substitution theorem=s prediction that, absent unusual income effects, the effect of taxes should be
22

Bertonazzi, Maloney and McCormick (1993) contribute an empirical study of the market
for football tickets, and find, consistent with the substitution theorem, that the fans with high travel
costs bought the best tickets.
23

The most relevant evidence is from the study by Cummings et al (1997). They use a
sample of 7,081 continuing smokers who responded to surveys in 1988 and 1993. The surveys
were conducted in 10 matched pairs of communities that participated in the National Cancer
Institute=s Community Intervention Trial for Smoking Cessation (COMMIT). Each matched pair
was from the same state, so the data are from residents of 10 states. Cummings et al. estimate a
logit model of the probability of smoking a discount brand as a function of the state-average price
of cigarettes in 1993, adjusted for community cost of living differences. Limitations of the
analysis, including the failure to include state fixed effects and the failure to adjust standard errors
for clustering, raise serious doubts about this study=s estimate that higher prices increase the
probability of smoking a discount brand.
23

in the opposite direction.24
B. Data on Brand Quality
To measure brand quality, we rely on information about the brand of cigarette smoked.
The cigarette market consists of higher-price premium brands like Marlboro and Camel, versus
lower-price discount and deep-discount/ generic brands (Bulow and Klemperer 1998). Several
New York Indian tribes produce and sell their own brands at very low prices. The NYS-ATS asked
respondents about their usual brand of cigarettes; responses include about 25 specific brand names
as well as Agenerics@ and Aother.@ The 2008 and 2009 waves of the NYS-ATS did not include the
brand choice questions, so our sample size falls to 5,081. Based on the lists from Hyland et al.
(2005), we place the usual brand into one of three categories: premium brands; discount brands;
and generic/other brands. By these definitions of brand quality: about 71 percent of NYS-ATS
respondents usually smoke premium brands; about 14 percent usually smoke discount brands; and
about 15 percent usually smoke generic/other brands.
The self-reported data on brand choice might mean that our variables measures cigarette
quality with error, but the problem does not seem to be too severe. The market shares by quality
segment are broadly consistent with data from the Euromonitor’s (2003) on the U.S. cigarette
market. The average self-reported price paid varies as expected across the categories defined on
self-reported brand choice: about $4.70 per pack of premium brand; $3.50 per pack of discount
brand; and $2.60 per pack of generic/ other brand.25 In a separate question, respondents were

24

As Gould and Segall (1969) point out, with unusual income effects the standard theory of
the consumer behind the Alchian and Allen substitution theorem cannot rule out the possibility
that higher taxes shift demand towards the lower-quality good, consistent with the public health
researchers= argument.
25

The Euromonitor (2003) marketing report estimates that Astandard brands@ such as
24

asked to provide the number above the UPC bar code from their cigarette package. Examining
these responses confirms that the generic/other category includes the brands manufactured and
sold on Indian reservations.26
Ideally, to test the substitution theorem we would use data on the quality of the cigarette
brand purchased on a reservation. By contrast, our data allow us to match the quality of the brand
usually purchased to whether the consumer reports always making reservation purchases. If some
consumers’ reservation purchases are not their usual brand, the resulting mismatch means we have
measured the reservation purchase in error: the observed purchase quality (their usual brand) was
not actually made on a reservation.27 As long as the mismatches are random, this would create
attenuation bias towards zero in δ1, our estimate of the impact of a reservation purchase on the
demand for cigarette quality.
At prevailing taxes and prices, with full shifting to the consumer the reservation tax break
reduces the relative price of low-quality cigarettes from about 66 percent to about 50 percent of the

Marlboros account for 72 percent of the U.S. market and that discount brands account for the
remaining 28 percent. The reported sales data across market segments implies that 2003 prices
were about $4.00 per pack for standard brands and $3.00 per pack for discount brands (authors=
calculations from Euromonitor 2003). It should be kept in mind that the very low average price of
generic/other brands in our data partly reflects the tax break on reservation sales. However, it is
important that this segment is not defined to only include Indian-made brands that are only sold on
reservations. When we restrict the sample to respondents who report never making reservation
purchases, 9 percent still report a usual brand in the generic/other brand category.
26

We examined UPC codes after restricting the sample to those who report always making
a reservation purchase and a brand choice of Aother.@ For example, among the 12 digit UPC codes
reported by this sub-sample, 20 percent are for the manufacturer Grand River Enterprises Six
Nations Ltd., which makes the Seneca brand of cigarettes.
27

If survey responses are logically consistent, if a consumer always purchases cigarettes
on a reservation it must be their usual brand. Even if responses are not perfectly logical, it seems
reasonable that responses about purchases made “all the time” will mainly correspond to the
“usual brand.”
25

price of high-quality cigarettes.28 This large difference in relative prices is an attractive target for
an empirical study of its impact on the demand for quality; we study a much larger difference than
studied in previous empirical tests.29
C. Results
Table 3 reports our estimates of the demand for cigarette quality. In the first two columns,
the dependent variable indicates whether the usual brand of cigarettes is a low-quality generic/
other brand or not. In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable indicates whether the usual brand is
a high-quality premium brand or not. For the dependent variables used in columns 1 through 4, we
present estimated marginal effects from probit and IV probit models. In the IV models, reservation
purchase is treated as endogenous, using the same set of IVs used in section 4 above (based on the
consumer=s distance to the closest reservation). In column 5, we present estimates from an
exogenous ordered probit model, where outcomes are ordered from high- to low-quality: premium
brands are in the lowest category; then discount brands; then generic/other brands. The advantage
of the ordered probit model is that it captures the distinctions between all three categories of
cigarette brands. By contrast, to create the dichotomous dependent variables used in the probit
models in Table 5 we have to combine the discount category (the middle category of the ordered
28

One reservation=s website advertised a low-quality brand for $13.00 per carton and
Marlboros for $27.20 per carton. So with the tax break the on-reservation price of the low-quality
brand is 48 percent of the price of Marlboros. Adding the 2002 - 2008 New York tax of $15.00 per
carton to both prices, off-reservation the relative price of a carton of low-quality cigarettes
increases to 66 percent of the price of a carton of Marlboros ($28.00 compared to $42.20).
29

Cigarette taxes were on average much lower in the data used by Barzel (1976) and Sobel
and Garrett (1997) to test whether taxes changed the demand for cigarette quality. Using more
recent data from 2001 - 2006, Espinosa and Evans (2011, p 3) argue that the size of the tax hikes in
their data should help Amak[e] it easy to detect the price and quality impacts of this policy lever.@
The average tax hike in their data is $0.42 per pack, with the largest tax hike being $0.82 per pack.
By contrast, we study a tax reduction of $1.50 per pack due to the tax break.
26

probit model) with one of the other brand categories. The disadvantage is that we are unable to
estimate an IV version of ordered probit.
The results in Table 3 partly support the prediction that the tax break shifts demand towards
lower-quality cigarettes. The probit results in columns 1 and 3 imply that a reservation purchase is
associated with a 16 percentage point increase in the probability the consumer=s usual brand is a
low-quality generic/ other brand, and a 14 percentage point decrease in the probability of a
high-quality premium brand. These are very large effects, compared to the sample proportions of
15 percent of smokers choosing low-quality brands and 71 percent choosing high-quality brands.
The results of the ordered probit model reported in column 5 also suggest that the net impact of the
tax break is to shift demand towards lower-quality brands.
In contrast, in the IV models (columns 2 and 4) the estimated effects of a reservation
purchase on the demand for cigarette quality are not statistically significantly different than zero.
The IV results are fairly imprecise, but results of the Hausman tests reject the null hypothesis that
reservation purchase is exogenous at the 90 confidence level for column 2 and the 95 confidence
level for column 4. However, the untestable exclusion restriction behind the IV models (and the
Hausman tests) might be invalid because longer distances to a reservation are predicted to shift
demand towards higher-quality cigarettes. In the column 2 model, where the dependent variable
measures demand for low-quality, the distance IV might tend to be negatively correlated with the
error term ζ in equation (2); and conversely for the column 4 model where the dependent variable
measures demand for high quality. As a result, while the exogenous probit results might be biased
away from zero, the IV results might be biased towards zero.
To explore the potential bias in the OLS models in Table 3, we extend them to include
measures of sometimes and rarely making a reservation purchase. The potential bias in the OLS
27

models might stem from unobservable heterogeneity in brand preferences, for example if an
unobserved propensity for thriftiness means that smokers who make reservation purchases are
more likely to prefer low-quality cigarettes on- or off-reservation. If such heterogeneity is strongly
associated with always making a reservation purchase, it seems plausible that it will be moderately
associated with sometimes making a reservation purchase. However, in the results from the
re-specified Table 5 models (not reported but available upon request), the coefficients on
sometimes making a reservation purchase are small and not statistically significant. For example,
sometimes is associated with only a 2.5 percentage point increase in the probability of a
generic/other brand choice, compared to 16 percentage points for always. This pattern is
suggestive evidence against a strong role for unobserved heterogeneity. At the same time, the
pattern is consistent with a causal role of reservation purchases. We measure cigarette quality
using information on the brand the consumer usually smokes. It makes sense that occasional
purchases on reservations do not cause consumers to shift to lower-quality cigarettes as their usual
brand.
VII.

DISCUSSION

We use the unusual tax situation created by cigarette purchases on Indian reservations to
examine excise tax incidence and the impact of taxation on the demand for product quality. The
body of empirical research on these basic questions about taxation is not very large and contains
gaps that our results help fill. In general, and for cigarette taxes in particular, many previous
studies necessarily focus on tax hikes because they are far more common. Consistent with previous
estimates of the shifting of tax hikes, our empirical results suggest that on most Indian reservations
in New York, the economic incidence of the tax break for cigarettes is about fully shifted to
consumers. We continue to find full shifting in models that use distance as an IV to address the
28

potential endogeneity of reservation purchases. We cannot claim that full shifting generalizes to all
tax cuts, but we expect that the result generalizes to many of the tax breaks on reservations in states
other than New York. In data from the 2010 TUS-CPS, the prevalence of reservation purchases
nationally is about five percent, which is on par with the percentage of smokers who report
crossing state borders to avoid high cigarette taxes (DeCicca, et al 2013b). The prevalence of
reservation purchases is much higher in certain states: 35 percent of smokers in Oklahoma and 24
percent of smokers in New Mexico report their last purchase was from a reservation; and between
12 to 17 percent of smokers report such purchases in Arizona, Idaho, Nevada, New York, North
Dakota, South Dakota, and Washington. Moreover, our results tend to support the neoclassical
approach that treats tax hikes and tax cuts symmetrically.
Similarly, our results provide some support for the prediction that the tax break shifts
consumer demand towards lower-quality cigarettes, mirroring earlier estimates that cigarette tax
hikes shift demand towards higher-quality (Barzel 1976, Sobel and Garrett 1997). A behavioral
economic approach might suggest reasons for asymmetric impacts of tax hikes and tax cuts. For
example, Chetty et al (2009) provides evidence that some taxes are more salient to consumers.
Lack of salience does not seem likely to be an issue for the reservation tax break, at least for
consumers who have traveled to the reservation to obtain the tax break. Future research could
explore the implications if the tax break we study is more salient than the more commonly studied
tax hikes.
The different New York Indian reservations also provide a case study of the impact of
market conditions on tax incidence. Although we find approximate one-for-one shifting on most
reservations where cigarette markets are substantially competitive, we find evidence that less of
the tax break is shifted to consumers who purchase cigarettes on the Onondaga reservation, where
29

there is a tribal-run monopoly smoke shop. Our OLS estimate that about only about 60 percent of
the tax break is shifted to consumer prices is not that far from the textbook result that facing a
linear demand curve a monopolist shifts exactly half the tax. The fact that we observe markets for
the same good during the same time period in the same state provides a crisp test of the impact of
market structure on tax incidence. In contrast, for example, Besley and Rosen (1999) estimate the
degree of tax shifting in markets for a variety of commodities and draw broad conclusions about
whether the results are consistent with the competitive paradigm or not. However, while the
unusual situation we study helps us answer a basic question in tax incidence, it also makes it
difficult to generalize to other markets.
Our empirical evidence that the tax break is mainly shifted to consumers suggests that the
Indians= strong support for the tax break might be mainly based on the value of the reservation jobs
created by cigarette sales, not monopoly profits. Nationally, many Indian reservations have very
weak labor markets and high rates of unemployment and poverty (Gitter and Reagan 2002, Watson
2006). At the state level, despite further legal challenges by the Indian tribes, in June 2011 New
York began enforcing the collection of the state tax on cigarettes sold by Indian-operated
companies (Associated Press 2011). As noted above, in practice the New York tax is pre-paid by
cigarette wholesalers who purchase tax stamps and attach them to the cigarette packages. This
scheme is politically expedient because it means the tax collection can be enforced off-reservation.
The tribes have responded by cutting out the middle man, thus cutting out the tax collector.
Instead of purchasing name-brand cigarettes with tax stamps from wholesalers, they have
expanded the manufacture of their own brands of cigarettes, with at least a dozen Indian cigarette
manufacturers now in operation (Kaplan 2012). Although the state of New York asserts its right to
collect taxes on Indian-made cigarettes sold to non-tribal members, according to the state tax
30

commissioner at this point there are no plans to enforce tax collection on-reservation. The Indian
tribes plan to continue manufacturing cigarettes. As the Oneida=s leader Ray Halbritter puts it: AWe
tried poverty for 200 years. We decided to try something different.@ (Quoted in Kaplan, 2012).

31

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
VARIABLES
Price paid for a pack of cigarettes
Usual cigarette brand is premium
Usual cigarette brand is discount
Usual cigarette brand is generics
Distance to nearest reservation (units of 100 miles)
Purchase from Indian reservation all the time
Male (omitted category)
Female
Age 18-29 (omitted category)
Age 30-39
Age 40-49
Age 50-59
Age 60 +
White (omitted category)
Black
Hispanic
Other races
Less than high school (omitted category)
High school
Some college
College or higher
Family income < 20k (omitted category)

Mean
4.517 (2.07)
0.711
0.136
0.153
0.577 (0.349)
0.193
0.407
0.593
0.157
0.176
0.251
0.227
0.190
0.753
0.125
0.077
0.045
0.111
0.386
0.287
0.217
0.184

Family income 20k – 30k

0.181

Family income 30k – 50k

0.250

0.200
Family income 50k – 90k
Family income 90k +
0.096
Family income missing
0.089
Married (omitted category)
0.361
0.303
Divorced, widowed, or separated
Never married
0.336
Employed (omitted category)
0.570
Unemployed
0.100
Retired
0.139
Not in the labor force
0.191
Family owning a car
0.850
N = 6539. Data: New York State Adult Tobacco Survey 2003-2009.
For continuous variables, standard deviations are in ( ).

32

Table 2: Impact of reservation purchase on price paid for cigarettes
VARIABLES
Purchase from Indian
reservation
- All the time
Interaction of Indian
purchase and time
after July 2008
Usual brand of
cigarettes:
- discount brands
Usual brand of
cigarettes:
- generic/other brands
Purchase from
Onondaga Indian
reservation
Purchase from other
Indian reservations
F-statistic for IV
R-squared

1
OLS
-1.726***
(0.084)

2
OLS
-1.436***
(0.085)
-1.500***

4

3
2SLS
-1.845***

OLS
-1.230***

(0.429)

(0.079)

5
OLS

6
2SLS

-1.037***

-1.398***

(0.165)
-1.776***
(0.074)

(0.449)
-1.986***
(0.320)

0.510

0.508

(0.120)
-0.688***
(0.058)
-1.167***
(0.080)

0.509

0.521

17.12
0.508

0.512

N = 6539 (N = 5081 for Column 4 because brand choice questions are not available in 2008 and
2009.)
All models also include as explanatory control variables: the socio-demographic variables listed in
Table 1; a set of indicators for regions within New York; a set of indicators for county population
quintile; and year indicators.
Robust standard errors (clustered at county level) in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 for the null hypothesis that the estimated coefficient equals zero
For 2SLS, the Hausman test result suggests we cannot reject the null hypothesis that purchase from
Indian reservation is exogenous.

33

Table 3: Impact of reservation purchase on quality of cigarettes purchased
VARIABLES

Purchase from Indian
reservation - All the time

1

2

3

4

OLS

2SLS

OLS

2SLS

0.156***
(0.014)

-0.159
(0.450)

-0.137***
(0.017)

0.638
(0.482)

5
Ordered
probit
0.510***
(0.046)

N = 5081. Brand choice questions are not available in 2008 and 2009.
All models also include as explanatory variables: the socio-demographic variables listed in Table
1; a set of indicators for regions within New York; a set of indicators for county population
quintile; and year indicators.
Robust standard errors (clustered at county level) are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 for the null hypothesis that the estimated coefficient equals zero
For 2SLS, the Hausman test result suggests we can reject the null hypothesis that purchase from
Indian reservation is exogenous.
For ordered probit, the estimated cut-off values are 0.63 and 1.20.

34

This research was supported by # R21 CA131600-01A1 from the National Institutes of
Health. We thank Daniel Kenkel for excellent legal research assistance, and Christine Coyer and
Hua Wang for excellent econometric research assistance.

35

REFERENCES
Alm, James, Edward Sennoga, and Mark Skidmore, 2009. "Perfect Competition,
Urbanization, and Tax Incidence in the Retail Gasoline Market," Economic Inquiry 47 (1):
118 - 134.
Angrist, Joshua D. , 2001. AEstimations of Limited Dependent Variable Models with
Dummy Endgoneous Regressors: Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice.@ Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics 19: 2 - 16.
Angrist, Joshua D and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 1999. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist=s Companion. Princeton University Press: Princeton and Oxford.
Associated Press, 2010. AJudge Cites Error in Cigarette Case.@ April 18, 2010.
Associated Press, 2011. ANew York State Begins Collecting Taxes on Indian Cigarette
Sales.@ July 15, 2011.
Barzel, Yoram, 1976. “An Alternative Approach to the Analysis of Taxation.” Journal
of Political Economy 84 (6): 1177-1197.
Berry, Steven and Peter Reiss, 2007. “Empirical Models of Entry and Market Structure.”
Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume 3. Edited by M. Armstrong and R. Porter.
Elsevier B.V.
Bertonazzi, Eric P., Michael T. Maloney, and Robert E. McCormick, 1993. ASome
Evidence on the Alchian and Allen Theorem: The Third Law of Demand?@ Economic Inquiry
31(3): 383B93.
Besley, Timothy J., 1989. "Commodity Taxation and Imperfect Competition: A Note On
the Effects of Entry." Journal of Public Economics 40 (3): 359-367.
Besley, Timothy J and Harvey S. Rosen, 1999. ASales Taxes and Prices: An Empirical
36

Analysis.@ National Tax Journal 52 (2):: 157 - 178.
Borcherding, Thomas E., and Eugene Silberberg, 1978. AShipping the Good Apples Out:
The Alchian and Allen Theorem Reconsidered.@ Journal of Political Economy 86(1): 131B38.
Bresnahan, Timothy F, and Peter C Reiss, 1991. “Entry and competition in concentrated
markets”. Journal of Political Economy 99 (5): 977–1009.
Bulow, Jeremy and Paul Klemperer, 1998. AThe Tobacco Deal.@ Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity: Microeconomics. 323-394.
Card, David, 1995., "Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the
Return to Schooling", in: Louis N. Christofides, E. Kenneth Grant and Robert Swidinsky, eds.,
Aspects of labour market behaviour: essays in honour of John Vanderkamp (University of Toronto
Press, Toronto, Canada) pp. 201-222.
Caruso, David B., 2008. ANew Tobacco Taxes Put Spotlight on Smuggling, Indian
Tax-free Smokes.@ OneidaDisptach.com.

April 7, 2008, Associated Press.

Chaloupka, Frank J., John A. Tauras, Julia H. Strasser, Gordon Willis, James T. Gibson,
and Anne M. Hartman, 2013. “A Comparison of Alternative Methods for Measuring Cigarette
Prices.” Tobacco Control published online ahead of print, December 23, 2013.
Chernick, Howard and David Merriman, 2013. AUsing Littered Pack Data to Estimate
Cigarette Tax Avoidance in NYC.@ National Tax Journal 66 (3): 635-668.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
Evidence.” American Economic Review 99 (4): 1145 - 1177.
Chiou, Lesley and Erich Muehlegger, 2010. AConsumer Response to Cigarette Tax
Changes.@ Working Paper, Harvard University.
Cole, Alex, 2009. ATribes Trump Tobacco Tax B Cheaper Cigarettes Means More Profits
37

for Native Americans.@ Scholars & Rogues January 7, 2009, accessed April 27, 2010.
https://scholarsandrogues.com/2009/01/07/tribes-trump-tobacco-tax-cheaper-cigarettes-means-m
ore-profits-for-native-americans/
Cummins, K. Michael, Andrew Hyland, Eugene Lewit, and Don Shopland, 1997. AUse of
Discount Cigarettes by Smokers in 20 Communities in the United States, 1988 - 1993.@ Tobacco
Control 6 (Supplement 2): S25 - S30.
Davis, Kevin, Matthew Farrelly, Qiang Li, and Andrew Hyland, 2006. ACigarette
Purchasing Patterns among New York Smokers: Implications for Health, Price, and Revenue.@
Prepared for the New York State Department of Health, Tobacco Control Program, Albany NY.
DeCicca, Philip, Donald S. Kenkel, and Feng Liu, 2013a. AWho Pays Cigarette Taxes?
The Impact of Consumer Price Search.@ Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (2): 516-529.
DeCicca, Philip, Donald S. Kenkel, and Feng Liu, 2013b. AExcise Tax Avoidance: The Case
of State Cigarette Taxes.@ Journal of Health Economics 32: 1130 – 1141.
Delipalla, Sophia and Owen O'Donnell, 2001. "Estimating Tax Incidence, Market Power
and Market Conduct: The European Cigarette Industry," International Journal of Industrial
Organization 19: 885-908.
EchoHawk, Larry, 2003 - 2004. ABalancing State and Tribal Power to Tax in Indian
Country.@ Idaho Law Review 40(3): 623 - 56.
Espinosa, Javier and William Evans, 2011. AExcise Taxes, Tax Incidence, and the Flight to
Quality: Evidence from Scanner Data.@ Working Paper.

Department of Economics and

Econometrics, University of Notre Dame.
Euromonitor, 2003. The U.S. market for cigarettes.
Folster, Karen L., 1998. AJust Cheap Butts, or an Equal Protection Violation? New
38

York=s Failure to Tax Reservation Sales to Non-Indians.@

Albany Law Review 62: 697-735.

Fredericks, John, 1989. AState Regulation in Indian Country: The Supreme Court=s
Marketing Exemption Concept, a Judicial Sword Through the Heart of Tribal Self-Determination.@
Montana Law Review 50: 49 - 80.
Fullerton, Don and Gilbert E. Metcalf, 2002. ATax Incidence.@ Chapter 26 in Handbook
of Public Economics, Volume 4. Auerbach A, and M. Feldstein, eds., Amsterdam: Elsever,
1788-1872.
Gitter, Robert J and Patrician B Reagan, 2002. AReservation Wages: An Analysis of the
Effects of Reservations on Employment of American Indian Men.@ American Economic Review
92 (4): 1160 - 1168.
Goolsbee, Austin, Michael Lovenheim, and Joel Slemrod, 2010. APlaying with Fire:
Cigarettes, Taxes and Competition from the Internet.@ American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 2 (1):131 - 154.
Gould, John P., and Joel Segall, 1969. AThe Substitution Effects of Transportation Costs.@
Journal of Political Economy 77(1):130B37.
Hanson, Andrew and Ryan S. Sullivan, 2009. AThe Incidence of Tobacco Taxation:
Evidence from Geographic Micro-Level Data." National Tax Journal 62(4): 677-698.
Harding Matthew, Ephraim Leibtag, and Michael Lovenheim, 2012. AThe Heterogeneous
Geographic and Socioeconomic Incidence of Cigarette Taxes: Evidence from Nielsen Homescan
Data.@ American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Imbens, Guido W., 2014. “Instrumental Variables: An Econometrician’s Perspective.”
NBER Working Paper 19983. March 2014.
Kaplan, Thomas, 2012. AIn Tax Fight, Tribes Make, and Sell, Cigarettes.@ New York Times,
39

February 22, 2012.
Katz, Michael and Harvey S Rosen, 1985. "Tax Analysis in an Oligopoly Model," Public
Finance Quarterly 13 (1): 3-19.
Keeler, Theodore E, Teh-Wei Hu, Paul B Barnett, Willard G Manning, and Hai-Yen Sung,
1996. Do cigarette producers price-discriminate by State? An empirical analysis of local
cigarette pricing and taxation. Journal of Health Economics 15 (4): 499-512.
Kenkel, Donald S., 2005. "Are Alcohol Tax Hikes Fully Passed Through to Prices?
Evidence from Alaska." American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 95 (2): 273-277.
Lawson, Robert and Lauren Raymer, 2006. “Testing the Alchian-Allen Theorem: A Study
of Consumer Behavior in the Gasoline Market.” Economics Bulletin 4 (35): 1-6.
McClellan, Mark B, Barbara J McNeil and Joseph P Newhouse, 1994. “Does More
Intensive Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction Reduce Mortality?” Journal of the American
Medical Association 272: 859-66.
Nesbit, Todd, 2006. “The Effects of Excise Taxes on Product Quality: Evidence from the
Gasoline Market.” Working Paper.
New York - Visitors Network, 2010. ANew York State Regions.@
http://visitnewyorkstate.net/regions/ Accessed May 14, 2010.
Orzechowski and Walker, 2008. The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation.
Orzechowski and Walker, Arlington Virginia.
Pesko, Michael F., Judy Kruger, and Andrew Hyland, 2012. “Cigarette Price Minimization
Strategies Used by Adults.” American Journal of Public Health 102 (9): s19-s21.
Pesko, Michael F., Andrea S. Licht, and Judy M. Kruger, 2013. “Cigarette Price
Minimization Strategies in the United States: Price Reductions and Responsiveness to Excise
40

Taxes.” Nicotine & Tobacco Research 15 (11): 1858-1866.
Poterba, James M., 1996. ARetail Price Reactions to Changes in State and Local Sales
Taxes.@ National Tax Journal 49 (2): 165-176.
Saul, Stephanie, 2008. ASuits Claim Wide Reach of Cigarettes from Tribes.@ New York
Times, October 2, 2008.
Sobel, Russell S., and Thomas A. Garrett, 1997. ATaxation and Product Quality: New
Evidence from Generic Cigarettes.@ Journal of Political Economy 105(4): 880B87.
Stern, Nicholas, 1987. "The Effects of Taxation, Price Control and Government Contracts
in Oligopoly and Monopolistic Competition," Journal of Public Economics 32: 133-158.
Sumner, Michael T, and Robert Ward, 1981. “Tax Changes and Cigarette Prices.”
Journal of Political Economy 89 (6): 1261-1265.
Tucker, Clyde, Brian Kojetin, and Roderick Harrison, 1995. AA Statistical
Analysis of the CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnic Origin,@ Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Vijayaraghavan, Maya, Karen Messer, Martha M. White, and John P. Pierce, 2013. “The
Effectiveness of Cigarette Price and Smoke-Free Homes on Low-Income Smokers in the United
States.” American Journal of Public Health 103 (12): 2276 – 2283.
Watson, Tara, 2006. APublic Health Investments and the Infant Mortality Gap: Evidence
from Federal Sanitation Interventions on U.S. Indian Reservations.@ Journal of Public Economics
90: 1537 - 1560.

41

