NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONTRACTIONARY DEVALUATION,
AND DYNAMIC ADJUSTMENT
OF EXPORTS AND WAGES

Felipe Larrain
Jeffrey Sachs

Working Paper No. 2078

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1986

We would like to thank Andy Abel,
Barry Eichengreen and Andreu
Mas—Colell for very helpful suggestions. Financial support from
Univers-idad Catolica de Chile is gratefully acknowledged. The
research reported here -is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies, Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2078
November 1986

Contractionary Devaluation, and Dynamic Adjustment
of Exports and Wages

ABSTRACT

Recent macroeconomic models of developing Countries have emphasized the
possibility of contactionary devaluations, stressing that domestic aggregate

demand is likely to be reduced by the devaluations while aggregate
respond only slowly to the change in relative

supply may

prices brought about by the

devaluation. These results have been obtained in static models. In this
paper we add wage and export-sector dynamics to the models of contractionary
devaluation, and show that the effects which
devaluations in the short term can

produce contractionary

produce limit cycles in the long run. The

economy never returns to long-run equilibrium
rather moves with fixed periodicity

following a devaluation, but

through successive phases of boom and

bust.

Fèlipe Larrain
Thstituto de Ecxnania

Ekntifica tJniversjdad

Catolica de thile

274—V1 Correo 21
Santiago CHILE
Cas.

Jeffrey Saths
Deartnent of

Econcnics

Harvard University
Cal!bridge, M7. 02138

1. Introduction.

Exchange rate changes have important and multiple effects on economic

activity. When currency parities are fixed, as it happens in rmst developing
countries, devaluation becomes a key policy option for the authority. The cru-

cial task is then to assess the impact of a devaluation both on the external
payments position of the country, which is likely to improve, and on the level
of economic activity, a more controversial issue. International institutions
ty-

pically recommend exchange rate increases as a way of coping with "fundamental"
imbalances in the countries! external situation, while at the same time domestic
authorities are reluctant to devalue.

Early economic approaches to this problem were centered around the

well—kno Marshall-Lerner condition, initially stated in a partial equilibrium
framework in which the trade account was in balance and substantial unemployment

existed. In the early fifties this condition was extended to a general equilibrium, open—econonomy Keynesian multiplier scenario which did not sigiiifficantly

affect the previous result. Subsequent developments considered situations of
initial trade imbalance, as empirical evidence

overwhelmingly suggested. On the

other hand, the absorption approach stressed the trade balance as the result of
an aggregate income-expenditure relationship, an appropriate framework to study
the distribution effects coming from a devaluation.

Krugman and Taylor (1978) develop a general equilibrium ndel integrating income redistribution effects of a devaluation from an initial trade imbalance situation. Their key conclusion is that a devaluation has contractionary

2

effects on domestic income, while improving the trade balance.

This paper adds a dynamic structure to their model by allowing sluggish adjustment of wages through a traditional Phillips curve. Under these con-

ditions a devaluation is again contractionary, but this time the system is
unstable due to the interaction of a demand determined home goods sector, a f 1-

xecI supply of exports and the Phillips curve. After the exchange rate increase
there are no forces in the model to stop the downward trend.

Available empirical evidence suggests a more realistic scenario where

exports respond to price incentives in addition to wages. In this case the export response is not only expansionary, but also pushes the system towards sta-

bility. It is possible, however, that even with a large long run elasticity of
exports with respect to wages, the economy does not smoothly return to equili—
brium after a devaluation. If the export sector does not react fast enough to a

devaluation the economy is unstable around the steady state. Nonetheless, even

in this case it may be possible to show that a Poincare-Bendixson limit cycle
exists, thus stopping the downward trend of the economy. Under some circuntstan-

ces the existence of a Hopf bifurcation cycle may also occur. At least one of
these cycles is stable.

The paper starts with a brief review of devaluation theory and evi-

dence, placing Krugman and Taylor in its appropriate relation to it. The next
section introduces wage dynamics and studies the stability properties of the model, while section 4 considers both wage and export adjustment. Finally, section
5 states the main conclusions.

3

2. A brief review on devaluation

theory and evidence.

Early analyses of devaluation were centered around the well-knowii
Marshall—Lerner condition1 stating that a devaluation will improve the trade
balance as long as

+
where r is the home

1

country's Price—elasticity of demand for

imports and r j

the world's price-elasticity of demand for the country's exports.

This condition was derived starting from a scenario in which the home

Country specializes in the production of
terms of domestic currency is

an exportable good whose Supply in

infinitely elastic. As a corollary, the devalua-

tion brings about a one—to—one

deterioration in the terms of trade if the
country is a price taker for imports. The trade
account is assumed in equili—
brium at the moment of the devaluation.

Further theoretical developments
(1947)2 and Hirschman (1949),

who investigate the effects of a devaluation

starting from a trade imbalance. Under these

distinguish between the trade balance
counterpart in foreign currency, since

conditions it becomes necessary to

expressed in domestic currency and its
they will not necessarily move in the sa-

me threction. The practical relevance of

not all—countries devalue their

come with the work of Robinson

this analysis is immense Since most -if

currency in the face of a trade deficit. What

1Marshall (1923), Appendix J. Lerner (1944), Chapter 28,
P. 377—380.

(1947), Part III "The foreign exchanges", p. 142—143.

4

matters then to solve the payments problem is the foreign-currency balance,
which is more likely to improve. However, it is the trade balance expressed in
domestic currency which is relevant in terms of aggregate demand; this one is

more likely to deteriorate. Thus, a not uncommon outcome of a devaluation in
this scenario is a contractionary effect on domestic income coupled with an improvement in the foreign currency denominated trade balance.3

Intuition for this result may

be strengthened by thinking of a deva-

luation as having two types of effects: (i) a valuation effect on the initial
quantities of imports and exports at the higher exchange rate, and (ii) a quantity effect, given by the responsiveness (i.e. the elasticities) of imports and
exports to the price change, evaluated at the previous exchange rate. When trade

is initially balanced, the higher cost of imports exactly cancels out with the
additional export revenue (at the original quantities). The valuation effect is

nil in this case and only the quantity effect is left. But when the country
starts from a trade deficit the valuation effect operates towards a deteriora-

tion in the domestic currency denominated balance and thus contracts internal
demand for domestic goods (unless there is an offsetting effect coming from a
reduction in savings).

The elasticities approach was originally stated as a partial equilibriuxn

relationship involving only the markets of imports

and exports. Harberger

(1950) and Laurseri and Metzler (1950) adequately restate it by considering the

3mis point has been stressed, among others, by Cooper (1971a).

5

general equilibriwn effects coming from the Keynesian open-economy
multiplier.
The modified relationship,
however, presents the same qualitative result as

before: an improvement in the trade balance following a devaluation
requires
that the SUXT1 of the relevant

price elasticities exceeds one.

Sidney Alexander (1952) called attention to the fact that if a devaluation was to improve the current account it had to reduce in

ture relative to income. His

is the well known Keynesian
the potential terms of trade

some way expendi-

insight, coming from the national income

identity,

"absorption approach". Looked in this perspective,
deterioration arising from a devaluation was expec-

ted to reduce savings for a given level of income and thus to
deteriorate the
current account; this is better—known
as the Laursen-Metzler effect. Recent contributions by Obstfeld (1982), Sachs (1981, 1982a) and Svensson and Razin
(1983)
have pointed out that the direction of the effect on the current
account is am-

biguous, and depends on the terms of trade deterioration being
transitory or
permanent.

Dornbusch (1976) studies the conditions under which the absorption
approach can be properly integrated with the

earlier elasticities approach. He

also concludes that, starting from trade balance, if the terms of trade
remain
unchanged after the devaluation the
commercial balance can not deteriorate.

Distribution effects can also play a role on expenditure determina—
tion following exchange rate movements. In particular, Diaz-Alejandro
(1963) has
argued that a devaluation is likely to

talists. If the former

redistribute income from workers to capi-

group has a higher marginal propensity to consume than

6

the

latter one, expenditure will go down and so will output in a demand determi-

ned model. The classical example is the Argentinian devaluation of 1958 which,
according to Diaz-Alejandro (1965), importantly accounts for the 1959 recession
in that country through its redistribution effect from workers to landowners.
A

proach to

different line of argument has been stressed in

the

monetary ap-

the balance of payments,4 where a devaluation is analyzed through its

effects on the money market. More precisely, an exchange rate increase will provoke a stock excess demand for money; with passive monetary policy, the only way

to go back to equilibrium is by running balance of payments surpluses whose effects on the money stock are assumed not to be sterilized by the authority. This

type of models, based in a line of thought dating as far back as David Nurne
(1752), have almost always been carried out under full employment and with money

as the only asset.5 When nontradeable goods are introduced in this framework
the devaluation has real effects, but only in the short run. The link is for-

mally made by Dornbush (1974) using the ad-hoc expenditure function, later
grounded in optimizing behavior by Dornbusch and Mussa (1975). The initial excess demand for money provoked by the devaluation is translated into an excess
of income over expenthture which pushes downward the relative price of nontradeable goods, thereby causing consumption and production switches and a surplus
in the balance of payments. The effect lasts only while there is unsatisfied ex-

4For a survey on the monetary approach see Johnson (1977).
5An extension to more than one asset is found in Dornbusch (1975) in what
could be called a portfolio approach rather than a monetary approach.

7

cess demand for money, and so it

dissappears through time. The Only way in which

a devaluation can have long run effects (other than reserve

the presence of wage/prje stickiness, where it serves to

accumulation) is in

simultaneously achieve

internal and external balance.6

Kruginan and Taylor (1978), hereafter referred to as K—T, pursue
a
structuralist approach for an economy composed of three types of goods:
exporta—
bles, importables and nontradeables.
A Keynesian stand is taken in the home good
market, where output is demand deter-mined.
Imports are neither produced nor consuxned domestically but rather used as intermediate inputs in
the production of
the home good and exports are in fixed supply. In this
sense, the Keynesian and
structuralist approaches towards exports can be considered as two
extremes, with
neoclassic analysis (the one used in
the monetary approach, if any) standing so—
mewhere in the middle.

Two crucial features of K—T have been borrowed from the earlier

con-.

tributions discussed in this section: the existence of two
groups of agents with
different marginal propensities to consume and the starting
point of the economy
from a trade deficit.

An extension of K—? to
tion and in consumption is

provided by Hanson (1983). His results challenge tho-

se of K—T regarding the effect
balance of payments. Indeed,

6See Dorrthusch (1974).

account for substitutability both in produc-

of a devaluation on domestic income and the

K—T's conclusions come as no surprise in view of

8

their assumptions which close any possible channel through which a devaluation
could be expansionary.

Empirical work on the effects of devaluation does not abound. Cooper
(1971b), analyzing the short run effects (after one year) of 24 devaluations for

the period 1953—66, ...including most of the major devaluations by developing

countries in the early 1960..." finds that in nearly three-fourths of the
cases the trade balance improved. He also reports a negligible impact of the ex-

change rate change on the terms of trade and a response of domestic wages and
prices that falls short of the currency depreciation. Connolly and Taylor (1976)

study 18 devaluation episodes in 14 mostly developing countries for the period
1959-70. They conclude that exchange rate increases appear on average not to ha-

ve a significant effect on economic activity while at the same time generally
improving the balance of payments. Krueger (1978) analyzes 22 devaluations in 10

third world countries to conclude that only in three cases it was followed by a
signifficant recession.

More recently, Gylfasson and Schmid (1983) have developed and tested

a one sector model in which output is determined by the interaction of supply
and demand. A devaluation influences the former through the cost of intermediate
inputs and the latter through substitution, income and real balance effects. The

results for a group of 10 countries (5 industrialized and 5 developing) show a

contractionary effect of an exchange rate increase only in 2 cases (India and

7cooper (1971b), p. 20.

9

the U.K.). Larrain (1985) presents evidence indicating that medium to large de-

valuations tend to decrease the product wage, at least in the short run, except
in economies undergoing strong and steady depreciation of their currencies, arid
that employment in the tradeables sector is a decreasing function of the product
wage.

One of the reasons for the lack of empirical work on devaluations no
doubt arises from the difficulty of separating it from other parallel influences
in the economy. In particular, exchange rate changes in developing countries are
usually accompanied by liberalization and/or stabilization attempts, as stressed

by Cooper (197th) and thoroughly studied in the NBER project headed by Krueger
and Bhagwati.

3. Contractionary devaluation and Wage Adjustment.

The original K—T model, with its notation kept as much as possible
for comparative purposes, is stated below:

(1) h = (a1hw+apm)(1+z)
(2) P = (1_tx)px*e

m =

(1+tm)pm*e
(1)—(3) are the price formation equations, with tax—corrected purcha-

sing power parity for tradeables and mark-up pricing for the home good, where
=

price

of the home good, alh = amount of labor to produce a unit of the home

10

good,

a

= amount of the imported input to produce a unit of the home good, w =

nominal wage, z = fixed mark-up over costs, P = internal price of exports, t, =

ad-valorem tariff on exports, P, = world price of exports, e = nominal exchange
rate, m =

internal

price of the imported input, tm = ad-valorem tariff on the

imported input, and P

world

price of the imported input.

= (alhH+alXX)w

(U
()

=

r

=

z(alhw+aPm)H

w

+

and r define the incomes of workers and capitalists respectively,

H are the units of the home good and X stands for the volume of exports. r is

derived both from a fixed mark-up over cost in domestic goods production and
from profits in exports. With this latter sector in fixed supply output can only

vary through home goods which are demand determined, as specified below.

(6) H = Cw(Yw/Ph) +

Imports

Cr(Yr/Ph)

+

ICr) +

G

(M) are intermediate goods used exclusively in the production

of nontradeables, and thus

(7) P4 =

aH
Many empirical studies, as well as casual evidence, have shown the

existence of some stickiness in the behavior of nominal wages for different
countries and sample periods. But sticky wages are not the same as fixed wages,

11

as K-T assume, and once we depart from the very short run it is necessary to
provide a mechanism for wage adjustment.
Doing so will imply adding a dynamic structure to an otherwise static

model. In the new scenario wages will be sticky in the sense that they will not
react instantaneously to clear the labor market; rather, they will adjust downwards under conditions of excess supply in the labor market and upwards when ex-

cess demand prevails. This defines a Phillips curve type equation which is
specified below
.

(8) w =

$(L—L

*

= max[0,

if w > 0

)

$(L_L*) J

if

w = 0

with $'> 0, •''= 0, +(0) = 0
where w=dw/d(tjme)

L=current level of employment

L*=natura].1 or noninflationary employment level

Inflationary expectations are not included in (13) because the exchange rate and world prices are assumed to be fixed and thus there is no infla-

tion in the long run. We further assume no population growth and a totally
inelastic labor supply; with this L* becomes a constant.8
The model consists now of equations (1)-(8).

It is clear that in

this modified scenario the immediate effect of a devaluation can not be diff e—

8For the effects of labor Supply responsive to the wage rate in a static
version of this model see Hanson (1983).

12

rent than in K—T since nominal wages are fixed on impact. Rather, we will be in-

In particular,

terested in studying the dynamic properties of the system.

stability requires that dw/dw'(O, since the model has only one differential equa-

tion. We notice that

(9) dw/dw = (dw/dL)(dL/dw) = 4)'alh(dH/dW)
Our equation for output determination in the home good market is obtained by replacing (1)—(5) and (7) in (6). Using this, and after some computations, we can express (9) in terms of the underlying parameters of the model as

(10) dw =
dw

$'alh(l+z)

{(—Y)KO'+a1h )wMPm*e_YrXPx*e)

DOPh
+alh( IwtmMpm*e+ Yrtxx e) }

where K0 I=alXaP*e
D0 =

{alh

w[(1-Iw) +

z(11r) ] + aP*m

e(1+tm) [,+i_yr)

J}

)0

Expression (10) is clearly positive under the original K-T assumptions, rendering the model unambiguously unstable.

The intuition for this instability result goes as follows. The deva—
luation, by decreasing real wages, depresses demand for home goods and hence
output and employment. But the increase in unemployment, through the Phillips
curve, drives downward the nominal wage and with it the real wage. This further

decreases demand and there are no forces in the model to stop this downward
trend. Formally, we can notice that the sign of dw/dw is exactly the opposite as

13

that of dH/de; thus, whenever a devaluation

is contractioriary instability is

also present.

Graphically we can plot the equation of wage dynamics and the general

equilibrium relationship between employment and wages from the home good market
(NH) in (w,L) space, as presented in figure 1. The initial assumption about
mestic goods being demand determined

do-

implies that the economy will always lie in

some point of the HH schedule, with the long

run equilibrium also requiring wa-

ges to be at rest (point E). The preceding discussion
(e.g. a devaluation) moves the economy

tells us that if any shock

away from steady state, forces in the mo-

del will further nve us away from equilibrium. This explains the divergent
arrows being drawn through HH. We notice that the divergence of the economy is
discontinuous in the right direction. After a while wages will turn so high that

they will account for practically 100% of the costs of producing H. At this
point real wages become constant and emloyment and

home good output stabilize

while nominal wages continue their upward trend.
The Conclusion coming out from this analysis is twofold:
(a) The original K—T model is considerably weakened if we allow for some plausi-

ble response in wages, because by becoming unstable it can not be used for coin—
parative static purposes.

(b) The fundamental result of K-T remains true, in the sense that a devaluation

has perverse effects. But this time the

contraction persists through time dri-

ving downwards both output and employment.

Figure 1
WAGE DYNAMICS AND INSTABILITY
HH

w=o

t

L

14

4. Wage and export dynamics.

4.1. The new setup.

A most natural way to search for stabilizing forces would be to relax
the X—T assumption of a fixed supply of exports determined by existing capacity,

which has been carried on until now. Indeed, available international studies
such as Sachs (1982b, 1983) and Larrain (1985) show a significant, negative res-

ponse of employment (and thus of output) to real wages in the tradeable sector
for both industrialized and developing countries. The fact that the employment
response is contemporaneous suggests that a devaluation, operating through a re-

duction in real wages, has an effect in the supply of tradeable goods even in
the short run.

A straightforward extension of the X—T model to allow for export res-

ponse to prices in a static framework will simply introduce another source of
ambiguity in the devaluation effect on real income. Our attempt is, however, to
Study the dynamic adjustment of the economy after a shock. We will assume accor-

dingly that exports are neither in fixed supply, nor that they adjust
instantaneously; rather, they will respond through time to movements in the real

wage. An adjustment pattern such as this can be formally derived from an inter—
temporal profit-maximizing firm facing adjustment Costs in the hiring and firing

of labor.

This strategy has not been pursued to keep the model as simple as

possible, avoiding expectationa]. issues.

Let the long run supply of exportable goods (X*) respond to unit pro-

fits in the standard form

15

(11) X = 6(px*e_alxw)

0) 0

=0

for (Px*e_alxw) > 0
for

*

e-alxw) ( 0

The above equation is ad-hoc in one important respect. In principle,

output should respond not only to the current level of profits but also to the

entire path of future profits. This limitation becomes serious in an economy
where nominal wages quickly respond to price changes,9 but looses importance
the slower wages catch up with inflation. Available empirical evidence tends to
support this latter view. In a study of 24 devaluations for the period 1953-66,

and including most major exchange rate changes in developing countries, Cooper

(1971b) found that "...twelve months after devaluation..., general wholesale
prices will have risen less than this, consumer prices will have risen by about
the same as wholesale prices and, except where devaluations are small, manufac-

turing wages will have risen by less than consumer prices...Thus nonwage income
of employed factors —mostly profits and rents- show an increase in real terms a
year later and it is this increase that provides the incentive for the necessary

reallocation of resources..."'° Larrain (1985) has also presented evidence for
12 developing countries indicating that devaluations, except when small, tend to
reduce the product wage in the manufacturing and mining sectors.

In our

scenario

the level of X is fixed on impact; its response th-

rough time is given by

9For example, if short-lagged wage indexation is a widespread phenomena.
10Cooper (1971b), p. 27—28.

111t is immediate to se that a function like {(x*_x/x* I, which has the same conceptual interpretation as Fx*X),, satisfies the limit condition in (12).

(12) X = Y(X—X)
= max [o,

(*_)

]

if x > 0
jf X = 0
with i"> 0, 'f(O) = o

f''> 0 for X > X
1''( 0 for X < X
urn Y(X*_X) =

—

The parameter of export response (Y') has been specified as an increasing function of the difference between the current and desired level of ex-

ports in a similar way as the quantity response mechanisms used by Beckman and
Ryder (1969) and Mas—Colell (1985). Thus, the more a devaluation increases per—

unit profit, the faster will exports increase towards their long run equili-

brium. On the other hand, if profits are squeezed by wage increases so that
(x*_x) turns negative, exports will contract increasingly faster as this gap wi-

dens. When profits are down to zero or turn negative export production will tend
to stop altogether. This pattern of response is illustrated in figure 2.
Replacing (11) in (12) we get

(13) X =

V{8(px*e_alxw)_x}
From (13) we can start studying the Jacobian matrix of the dynamic

system
(14) X/X =

We have not used it for reasons of tractability.

Figure 2
EXPORT ADJUSTMENT
x

0

1fr (x'—x)

x

17

(15) ?X/a =

' ix

Wage dynamics are specified starting from equation (8); after some
computations we arrive to

=

(16)

•'alh(l+z)

{(yw_yr)KO+alx(y m*e_Yrxpx*e) }

where
D1 =

KQ=alxXapm*e
From (8) and the employment identity

+' {am((Yw_yr)alxw+yrpx*e)+alx}

(17)

Both expressions (16) and (17) are positive under the current working
assumptions.

4.2. Local stability.

We have thus two downward sloping schedules in (X,w) space (X=O and
w=O) whose relative slopes will presumably be related to the issue of stability.
Writing the dynamic system in matrix form around the steady state

(18)

X
.

V

=z

X—X

I

w-w*

Where z is the Jacobian or transition matrix whose elements are (14),

(15), (16) and (17). Local stability in this predeternüried-variables model re—

18

quires both trace(Z)<0 and deternunant(Z)>0 to guarantee that the real part of
the eigenvalues of Z will be negative.

(19) tr(Z)=-' + $'alh(l+z){(Yw_)'r)alxXambPm+alh(IwMPni_YrXPx)l

(20) det(Z)='"4' {1x{(a1h/D1)—1r)a1x1rPx)1x}
-alhM+z) {(1w_Yr)alxxaInhPm+alh(YwMPncYrXPx) }}
D1

h

where ' has been evaluated at steady state.
Even though both (19) and (20) have ambiguous signs, there are three
parameters which play a key role in the above expressions: (a) The speed of ad—
justnent of exports toward their long run

level

(); the higher this value, the

more likely that the trace condition will be satisfied, although it has no effect on the sign of the determinant.

(b) The parameter of wage adjustment (4)

influences

only the trace; the higher

it is, the more likely the unstable outcome occurs.

From (19) the exact relationship between these two coefficients and
the parameters of the model for a stable trace condition is:

(21) 1 >

+'alh(l+z)

{(

IW

Y)aXa Pm+alhwmYrXPx) }

D1Ph

(c) The long run response of exports to price incentives (0), even if it plays
no role in the trace, the higher its value the more likely that the determinant
will be positive. The exact relationship for this condition to be satisfied is:

19

(22) 0 >

{(

r)alxxamhPm+alh(YwMPm_yrXpx)

}

}

Therefore,

stability requires both a fast adjustment of exports and a

high long run response of them to price incentives. That the source of potential

instability arises from the interaction of a demand determined home good sector
and the Phillips curve is also clear. Indeed, if the contractionary effects from
a devaluation coming from the different marginal propensities to consume and the

initial trade deficit were not present, conditions (21) and (22) get immediately
satisfied.

We also notice that, as could be expected, the relative slopes of the
two loci and the stability issue are not

independent. From equations (16), (18)

and (22) it is apparent that the value of 0 required to make the determinant positive is exactly the same one needed for the w=O locus to be steeper than X=O.
In figure 3 the two possible cases are presented. From the transition
matrix 2 we can draw the corresponding arrows of motion and study the direction

of forces implied by the resulting vectors in each of the four regions.

This

confirms our earlier discussion; when X=O is steeper than w=O (case of a low 8)

a clearly divergent path when away of equilibrium arises. On the other hand,
when X=O is flatter than the

wage schedule the system presents a counterclockwi-

se Rvement.
What is the economics out of these stability conditions? We recall
that a devaluation, by cutting real wages, has both a contractionary effect in

Figure 3
WAGE AND EXPORT ADJUSTMENT
HIGH (A) AND LOW(B) LONG-RUN RESPONSE
OF EXPORTS
w

x-O

wO
(A)

x

w

wO
(B)

x

20

the demand for home goods and an expansionary influence on exports through time.

In figure 3B the long run export response is not big enough and the contractio—
nary effect dominates; in this case unemployment will increase putting downward
pressure on the wage rate and leading to the unstable outcome. However, 0 being
sufficiently high to guarantee that the relative slopes are correct as in figure

4A is not enough for a stable outcome. From now on we will concentrate in the

case in which stability depends on the relative speeds of adjustment of wages
and exports (the trace condition), assuming the determinant to be positive and
thus ruling out case 3B.
Since the trace is now the sole condition which determines

stability,

we can distinguish two possible cases from equation (21) which will be illustrated graphically and conceptually with the help of figure 4.
(1) If exports adjust slowly relative to wages condition (21) will not be satisfied and we can expect the unstable outcome. This situation may be visualized by
starting at a point like A in figure 4, where the wage is low enough to encourage the export sector and unemployment prevails. The economy begins moving south-

east through the dotted line with the wage declining due to unemployment and
exports nving slowly upwards. At B the wage stops moving (the natural level of
unemployment is reached), but there still remain incentives to expand exports;
this leads to overemployment and w starts rising. At C exports stop growing but

overemployment keeps increasing wages. Now, if exports would respond fast we
will soon move in the horizontal direction; but this is not the case and the adjustment is more upwards than to the left. Continuing the analysis it is easy to

Figure 4

DLFFERENT SPEEDS OF ADJUSTMENT
IN EXPORTS RELATIVE TO WAGES

w
.4%

B'

I

y:Q
X

21

see that the system diverges. (ii) Conversely, if exports are fast to react relative to wages condition (21) will be satisfied and local stability is guaranteed. Let us start again from point A; this time the low wage makes exports

expand rapidly and the economy moves from A to B' through the solid line. Once
w crosses the X=O level (above C') exports take

a small period of time to con-

tract. We quickly converge to equilibrium through the solid path AB'C'E.

Notice that in the adjustment process the home good sector is also
reacting. In region I while wages fall employment is

expanding because exports

increase; the net effect on labor income and thus on the home good sector is am-

biguous. Region II, with exports, wages and employment growing is a boom period

for the whole economy. On the contrary, area IV is a period of generalized de—
pression. The situation in the four regions is summarized in Table 1.
TABLE 1

!gion
Sector
Home goods
Exports

I

expand

II

expand
expand

III

IV
contract

contract contract

4.3. Towards global stability.

So far, we have just analyzed local stability around the steady state
and concluded that only if exports adjust fast enough relative to wages the eco-

nomy will go back to equilibrium when a shock disrupts it. In this section we

will show that even if this condition is not satisfied the system has forces
that will drive it to a stable cycle at some distance of the equilibrium. Thus,

22

the fact that the economy is not locally stable around steady state does not
mean that it will explode through time.

It is clear that if the model were totally linear, local and global
stability conclusions will necessarily coincide. Indeed, local dynamic analysis

is done by linearizing around steady state which is obviously unnecessary when
the system is already linear. Our model, however, has two sources of nonlinearity as defined: on the one hand it is defined only for positive values of w and
X, and on the other, the speed of adjustment of exports ('F') increases the fart-

her away is the current level with respect to the desired one. The idea behind
this formulation is that if we start from equilibrium, as wages fall (increase)

the export sector becomes increasingly profitable (unprofitable) for given exchange rate and world price, and thus exports would react faster.

We are then interested in studying the case where local instability

occurs (tr(Z)>O, det(Z)>O), but in which export responsiveness grows with the
distance from equilibrium. Suppose for a moment that the value of 'F' relative to

the other parameters of the sdel is such that the trace at equilibrium is very

close to zero (i.e. the system is borderline stable or unstable). Then we can

appeal to Hopf bifurcation theory (see Mas—Colell (1985))12 and obtain the
existence of a Hopf bifurcation cycle as the economy goes from stable to unsta-

ble (or viceversa). Technically, it is necessary that the trace has some nonli-

12For an advanced mathematical
Kazarinoff and Wan (1981).

treatment on Hopf bifurcation see Hassard,

23

nearity nbedded, which is guaranteed in our model by the shape of the export
adjustment function. It should be kept in mind, as Mas—Colell (1985) remarks,
that Hopf bifurcation is still a local analysis of dynamics in the neighborhood

of the steady state, since the trace condition looses its meaning when going
away of equilibrium. A plausible form of the Hopf cycle is shown in figure 5.

The appropriate study of the stability properties of the Hopf cycle
involves examining third, fourth and even higher order derivatives of the func-

tions. This task may be perfectly justified for a mathematics study, but lacks
any significant economic meaning and will not be attempted. Getting the correct

stability conditions by ill—grounded assumptions about the 'I and $

functions

will not improve our understanding about how the economy works.

Rather than going in that direction we will go in another, less res-

trictive way. An attempt will be made to show that the system has at least one
stable cycle by using the Foincare-Bendixson theorem, valid for global dynamic
analysis and with no restrictions in the size of the trace.13

Following Beck-

man. and Ryder (1969), Benassy (1984) and Mas—Colell (1985) the conditions for
the existence of this type of cycle are:
(i) The long run equilibrium is unstable.
(ii) There exists a bounded, invariant arid simply connected region.

Definitions:
(D.1) Invariant region is one which is absorbing in itself, that is, every point

3The analysis of Poincare—Beridjxson is carried through for the case in
which the equilibrium is unique. If the global extension of condition (22) is
met, uniqueness unambiguously holds. However, (22) is sufficient but not necessary for a unique equilibrium, and thus stronger than we need.

Figure 5
HOPE BIFURCATION CYCLE
w

xO
wO
x

24

starting inside the region will remain inside it.
(D.2) Globally absorbing is a region where every point will enter in finite time
(either starting inside or outside it).

(D.3) Informally, the simply conriectedness condition means that the region has
no holes inside it.

Theorem: The dynamic system defined in equations (8) and (12), under the conditions in (8), (11), and (12) contains at least one stable cycle.

Proof: To demonstrate the theorem we must show that the requirements (i) and
(ii) for a Poincare-Bendixson cycle are met. This is done below.

Condition (i) is immediately met when the trace is negative around
the steady state, which is the case we are analyzing.

To show condition (ii) we need to construct a region with the desired

characteristics, which will be done with the help of figure 6. We first notice
that the two axes are natural boundaries since the system is only defined for

positive w and x. Let us start in a point like A, to the right of the intersection between the X=O locus and the horizontal axis, where the level of X is higher than its equilibrium. The dynamics of the model start moving the economy
north—west, with wages rising and exports contracting. As wages rise the export
sector moves farther away from equilibrium, speeding up its own reaction; becau-

se export contraction finally dominates over the upward trend in wages the economy moves in a path like AB, collapsing in the vertical axis. By the conditions

in (8) and (12) the point of intersection of this trajectory and the wage axis

can be -at the most-at C. Exports are there at equilibrium but forces still

Figure 6
POt NCARE-BENDIXSON CYCLE

w

C

0

A

X

25

exist in the economy to decrease wages. Once point C is crossed exports are
again profitable and, with wages falling, the movement is south-east. it becomes
then clear that OABCO is a bounded, invariant

of which there exists at least

and simply connected region inside

one stable limit cycle as figure 6 shows. This

completes the proof of the theorem.
The region OABCO is not globally absorbing since, for example, points
starting above w1 will not collapse into it within a finite time. Rather, those

trajectories will touch the vertical axis above w1 and will remain at the level
of X=0 with nominal wages steadily

increasing. Real wages, though, will converge

to a constant value as labor approaches 100% of the costs of producing the home
good. At that point all real variables in the model will have reached stationary
values.

Combining the Hopf bifurcation (NB) and the Poincare-Bendjxson (PB)
analyses we have three possible cases:

(i) If the NB cycle exists and is stable, then there exists at least one stable
cycle in the system, since it may happen that PB and NB coincide.

(ii) If the NB cycle exists and is unstable, there exists at least one other
stable cycle, since PB is always stable. The minimwn number of cycles in this
situation is two: one stable and one unstable.

(iii) If the KB cycle does not exist, there is at least one stable cycle in the
system (PB).

Notice that a large value of '

(fast

export adjustment) is not

enough to generate cycles. If in addition 'V"=O the system will be globally sta-

26

ble, provided condition (2) is met, but no cycles will occur.

The theoretical results analyzed are an adequate representation of
the situation lived by many third world nations. In particular, Latin—American

countries typically undergo cycles in which periods of slow overall growth,
booms and recessions alternate. This is in the spirit of the predictions of our

model, as illustrated in the four regions of figure 6. If we start at point D,
the economy is beginning a boom period (region II) with both exports and wages
expanding. The boom runs out of steam because real wages get too high, squeezing

exports (III) and a recession is ad—portas. The farther away from equilibrium
with wages rising, the faster exports contract; at some point wages can no longer keep rising and unemployment starts developing. A deep recession then develops with wages and exports falling (IV). After a while wages have fallen enough

and exports are again profitable (region I); wages will continue falling until
the export sector has expanded enough. When the economy reaches point D a full
cycle has been completed and the process is about to start again.
It is important to notice that the existence of cycles with large am-

plitudes can only be accounted for by Poincare-BendiXSOfl type analysis. Hopf
theory is only a local phenomenon occurring in the vicinity of the steady state
which can not explain wide fluctuations.

This analysis suggests that for a good number of developing countries
neither neo—classical nor structuralist models may be applicable. If the supply—

response forces in the economy are weak enough around the steady state the long
run equilibrium will never be reached. This does not imply that the economy will

27

diverge towards zero output and employment, which would happen if wages keep fa—

lung and supply does not react. The outcome is likely to be somewhere in the
middle, with the economy undergoing a stable cycle at some distance from the
equilibrium.

5. Conclusion.

This paper has been focused on the potential contractionary effects
of a devaluation and the subsequent dynamic

adjustment of the economy after it.

The starting point is Kruginan and Taylor (1978) (K-T) who emphasize the redis-

tribution effects of a devaluation from an initial trade deficit, drawing on
earlier contributions by Diaz-Alejandro (1963, 1965), Robinson (1947), Hirschman

(1949) and Cooper (1971a). Their main conclusion is that a devaluation is unarn—

biguously contractionary, a hardly surprising result given that exports are in
fixed supply and there is neither substitution in production nor in consumption
in their model.

Dynamics are introduced in the model by letting wages sluggishly adjust through time. In this scenario the devaluation continues being contractio—

nary, but in addition the equilibrium is shown to be unstable because the
initial reduction in real wages decreases demand for home goods which in turn
reduce employment, bringing the real wage further down; there are no forces in
the model to stop this downward trend.

A nre realistic scenario is then set with exports adjusting through
time in addition to wages. This extension is suggested by empirical studies such

28

as Sachs (1982b, 1983) and Larrain (1985) which show a contemporaneous response

of employment (and thus of output) to real wages in the tradeable sector for a
group of industrialized and developing countries. In this framework, local stability around steady state is achieved both with a high long run response of ex-

ports to price incentives and with a higher speed of adjustment in exports than
wages. Because the model has some nonlinearities embedded, the existence of lo-

cal instability does not imply global instability. Indeed, when exports adjust
slowly in relation to wages around the steady state, the economy is locally uns-

table, while at the same time it undergoes at least one stable cycle. In parti-

cular, conditions are thscussed under which a Hopf bifurcation cycle and a
Poincare-Bendixson limit cycle exist.

The key element explaining the existence of a Poincare-Bendixson cy-

cle, the one more relevant to explain wide fluctuations, is the pattern of export response, whose velocity increases (relative to wages) when going away from

equilibrium. Thus, if we consider a devaluation which is contractionary on impact, at some thstarice of steady state the expansionary forces coming from ex-

port reaction to increased profitability will be strong enough to offset the
negative influences arising from income redistribution and the initial trade deficit. This stops the divergent path of the economy.
This analysis seems an appropriate representation of the reality in a

number of developing countries where neither neoclassical nor structuralist mo-

dels seem fully appliccab].e. The supply-response forces may be weak enough
around steady state so that long run equilibrium will never be reached. This

29

does not imply that the

economy will diverge through time towards lower levels
of output and employment, which would happen if
wages keep falling and Supply
does not react. Rather, third
world countries typically
undergo periods of slow

growth interrupted by booms and
depressions, the characteristics of the cycle
described in this paper.

30

REFERENCES

Alexander, S. (1952) "The effects of devaluation on a trade balance." International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, p. 263—278.
Beckman, M. and H. Ryder (1969) "SimultaneouS price and quantity adjustment in a
single market". EconometriCa, p. 470—484.
Benassy, J.P. (1984) "A non-Walrasi&fl model of the business cycle." Journal of
Economic Behavior and organization, p. 77-89.

Connolly, M. and D. Taylor (1976) "Testing the monetary approach to devaluation
in developping countries." Journal of political Economy, p. 849—859.

Cooper, R.

(1971a) "Devaluation and aggregate demand

in aid-receiving

countries." In 3. Bhagwati et al. (eds.) "Trade, balance of payments
and growth."

Cooper, R. (1971b) "Currency devaluation in developing countries." Essays in In
ternational Finance #86, Princeton University.
:iaz-Alejandro, C. (1963) "A note on the impact of devaluation and the redistri—
butive effect." Journal of political Economy, p. 577-580.

Ciaz-Alejandro, C. (1965) "Exchange rate devaluation in a semi-industrialized
country." M.I.T. Press.

Dornbusch, R. (1974) "Real and monetary aspects of the effects of exchange rate
changes." In R. Aliber (ed.) "National monetary policies and the international financial system." University of Chicago Press.

Dornbusch, R. (1975) "A portfolio balance model of the open economy." Journal
of Monetary Economics, p. 1—20.
Dorrxbusch, R. (1976) "Exchange rates and fiscal policy in a popular model of international trade." American Economic Review, p. 859-871.

ornbusch, R. and M. Mussa (1975) "ConSumption, real balances and the hoarding
function." International Economic Review, p. 415-421.
ylfasson, I. and P4. Schrnid (1983) "Do devaluations cause stagflation?" Canadian
Journal of Economics, p. 641—654.

hanson, 3. (1983) "Contractionary devaluation, substitution in production and
consumption and the role of the labor market." Journal of International Economics, p. 179-189.
Harberger, A. (1950) "Currency depreciation, income and the balance of trade."
Journal of political Economy, p. 47—60.
-:assard, B., N. Kazarinoff arid Y. Wan (1981) "Theory and applications of Hopf
bifurcation." London Mathematical Society Lecture Notes Series, 41,
Cambridge University Press.

31

Hirschman, A. (1949) "Devaluation arid the trade balance: a note." Review of Economics arid
p. 50—53.

Statistics,

Hume, D. (1752) "On the balance

of trade." Reprinted in R. Cooper (ed.)

"International Finance." (1969), Penguin.

Johnson, H. (1977) "The monetary approach to the balance of payments." Journal
of International Economics, p. 251—268.
Krueger, A. (1978) "Liberalization attempts and consequences." Ballinger.

Krugman, P. and L. Taylor (1978) "Contractionary effects of devaluation." Journal of International Economics, p. 445—456.
Larrain, F. (1985) "Essays on the exchange rate and economic activity in developing countries". Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University.

Laursen, S. and L. Metzler (1950) "Flexible exchange rates and the theory of
employment." Review of Economics and Statistics, p. 251-299.

Lerner, A. (1944) "The economics of control." Macmillan, New York.

Mas—Colell, A. (1985) "Notes on price and quantity tatonnement dynaln H. Sonnerischejri and H. Weinberger (eds.)

"Price—quantity dynamics." Springer Berlack Lecture Notes.

Marshall, A. (1923) "Money, credit and commerce." Macmillan, London.

Obstfeld,

M. (1982) "Aggregate spending and the terms of trade: is there a
Laursen-Metzler effect?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, p. 251—270.

Robinson, .1. (1947)
ford.

"Essays in the theory of employment." Basil

Blackwel].,

Ox-

Sachs, J. (1981) "The current account arid macroeconomic adjustment in the
l970s." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 1, p. 201—268.

Sachs, J. (1982a) "The current account in the macroeconomic
adjustment process."
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, p. 147—159.
Sachs, J. (1982b) "Comment on the employment-real
wage relationship: an international study." Mimeo, Harvard University.

Sachs, 3. (1983) "Real wages and unemployment in the OECD countries." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity: 1, p. 255—289.

Svensson, L. and A. Razin (1983) "The terms of trade and the current account:
the Harberger-Laursen-etl effect." Journal of Political Economy,
p. 97—125.

