NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTER-TEMPORAL R&D AND CAPITAL INVESTMENT PORTFOLIOS FOR THE
ELECTRICITY INDUSTRY’S LOW CARBON FUTURE
Nidhi R. Santen
Mort D. Webster
David Popp
Ignacio Pérez-Arriaga
Working Paper 20783
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20783
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

We wish to thank Jake Whitcomb for his excellent research assistance in helping prepare the manuscript
for publication. We also thank Andres Ramos, Javier Garcia, and Joseph Sussman for valuable discussions
on electricity generation expansion planning and energy innovation, and two anonymous reviewers.
Finally, we gratefully acknowledge financial support from U.S. National Science Foundation Grant
Nos. 0825915 and 0835414, and the MIT Science and Technology Initiatives Spain Program, Martin
Family Sustainability Fellows Program, and Office of the Graduate Dean for Education John S. Hennessy
Fellowship Program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Nidhi R. Santen, Mort D. Webster, David Popp, and Ignacio Pérez-Arriaga. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Inter-temporal R&D and Capital Investment Portfolios for the Electricity Industry’s Low Carbon
Future
Nidhi R. Santen, Mort D. Webster, David Popp, and Ignacio Pérez-Arriaga
NBER Working Paper No. 20783
December 2014
JEL No. Q40,Q42,Q55
ABSTRACT
This paper explores cost-effective low-carbon R&D and capital investment portfolios for the electricity
generation sector through 2060. We present a novel method for long-term planning by combining
an economic model of endogenous non-linear technical change and a generation capacity planning
model with key features of the electricity system. The model captures the complementary nature of
technologies in the power sector; physical integration constraints; and the opportunity to build new
knowledge capital as a non-linear function of R&D and accumulated knowledge, which reflects the
diminishing marginal returns to research characteristic of the energy innovation process. We show
portfolios for future scenarios with and without carbon emission limits, and demonstrate the importance
of including various features by comparing results from a reference version of the model to results
from alternative versions that omit these features. Our results caution that using economic frameworks
that do not incorporate critical electricity and innovation system features may over- or under-estimate
the value of emerging technologies, and therefore the cost-effectiveness of R&D opportunities.
Nidhi R. Santen
Belfer Center for Science
and International Affair
Harvard Kennedy School
79 John F Kennedy Street
Mailbox 53
Cambridge, MA 02138
nidhi_santen@hks.harvard.edu
Mort D. Webster
Department of Energy
and Mineral Engineering
Pennsylvania State University
123 Hosler
State College, PA 16802
mort@psu.edu

David Popp
Department of Public Administration
and International Affairs
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
Ignacio Pérez-Arriaga
Instituto de Investigacion Tecnologica (IIT)
Universidad Pontificia Comillas, Alberto Aguilera,
28015 Madrid, Spain
ignacio.perez@iit.upcomillas.es

1.

Introduction
Effectively managing carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from fossil-based electric

power generation is critical for executing a comprehensive global climate change
mitigation and sustainable energy plan. In the United States, for example, the electric
power generation sector is responsible for approximately forty percent of the country’s
annual emissions (EIA 2012).

Unfortunately, many technologies for significantly

reducing CO2 emissions from the electricity sector are either in early conceptual stages or
are only available at relatively high costs or small scales, requiring additional research
and development (R&D).

Meanwhile, the industry continues to meet increasing

electricity demands with carbon-emitting technologies that are both commercially
available and economically viable. To address the dilemma of resolving increasing
electricity demands with emission reduction goals, it would be useful to find costeffective investment portfolios for R&D on emerging electricity technologies and new
generation capacity at the utility or power producer level (DOE 2011). On one hand,
incentivizing existing low-carbon technology adoption can play an important role in nearterm carbon reductions. On the other hand, supporting R&D can benefit long-term
carbon reductions by commercializing new, less expensive low-carbon technologies for
the future. What is the right balance between, and timing for, these two efforts?
Previous studies of optimal low-carbon R&D and capital investment portfolios for
the electric power generation sector have neglected one of two critical aspects of the
electricity industry and the energy R&D process needed to provide useful insight. First,
existing research in this area lacks resolution of the critical structure of, and engineering
constraints within, the electric power system. The necessary cooperation between highly

2

complex, time-dependent technical operations and the infrastructure itself sets electricity
apart from other large-scale, commodity-delivering infrastructure systems.

This

characteristic requires a diverse portfolio of generating technologies during any given
period of time in the system complementing each other to deliver reliable electricity.
Research is underway to integrate detailed system-level features into economic modeling
frameworks (e.g., Tapia-Ahumada, Octaviano, Rausch, & Pérez-Arriaga 2014; Shawhan
et al. 2014), but the typical approach for studying the joint energy R&D and capacity
planning problem thus far still uses a “top-down” economic perspective. This approach
lacks explicit disaggregated capital, variable, and other fixed costs; real operational
constraints (e.g., solar and wind intermittency, nuclear plant cycling); and adequate
temporal resolution in the demand-supply power balance over the course of a year (e.g.,
Goulder & Schneider 1999; Goulder & Mathai 2000; van der Zwaan, Gerlagh, Klaassen,
& Schrattenholzer 2002; Buonanno, Carraro, & Galeotti 2003; Popp 2004; Popp 2006;
Baker & Solak 2013; Pugh et al. 2011).
Second, the studies that do represent the power system in detail typically omit an
explicit endogenous representation of the energy R&D process. Due to data limitations,
most existing studies for electricity investment portfolio planning rely on exogenous
discrete time trends or experience curves to represent the change in costs of different
technologies over time, neglecting the role of R&D (e.g., Short et al. 2011; Ross 2008;
Grubb, Kohler, and Anderson 2002; Messner 1997; Mattheson & Wene 1997; Loulou,
Goldstein, & Noble 2004; EIA 2009; Seebregts et al. 1999; Morris 2002; Berglund &
Soderholm 2006; Kypreos & Barreto 2000). A few studies have included R&D, but
assume linear (or one-to-one) relationships between R&D investments and new technical

3

knowledge creation (e.g., Kouvaritakis, Soria, & Isoard 2000; Turton & Barreto 2004;
Barreto & Kypreos 2004; Miketa & Schrattenhozler 2004). The linear approach does not
capture diminishing marginal returns to research, for which there is considerable
empirical evidence and theoretical support. The functional form of the returns to R&D is
a critical assumption, because empirical studies suggest that the state of scientific
knowledge significantly affects the overall outcome of the R&D investment at a given
point in time (Popp, Newell, & Jaffe 2010; Popp 2002). There have been a few studies
that represent both rich technological details of the power system alongside key features
of the innovation process using a “hybrid” perspective (e.g., Mann, Mendelsohn, &
Richels 1995; Bosetti, Carraro, Galeotti, Massetti, & Tavoni 2006). For example, Bosetti
et al. (2006) assume a non-linear functional form for returns to R&D that exhibits
diminishing returns. However, this study and other similar hybrid modeling efforts still
use a relatively coarse resolution of the power sector. Although hybrid modeling efforts
offer the promise of improved models in the future, many current economic models omit
the detailed engineering cost structures of the different generation technologies, the
temporal variability of electricity demand, and the interaction between different
technologies with demand to determine optimal operations.
In this paper, we explore socially optimal low-carbon R&D and capital
investment portfolios for the electric power generation sector, using a model with
endogenous non-linear R&D and a relatively detailed representation of the power
systemi. We present a novel modeling approach that considers the complementary roles
that generation technologies play within the power system, the physical integration
i

We refer to the “optimal” investment strategy here, and throughout the remainder of the paper, in
reference to our numerical implementation of the investment problem rather than to an “absolute”
optimum.

4

constraints they face, and the economics at play in electric utilities’ least-cost investment
decisions. Our approach also considers specific characteristics of the innovation process,
including the opportunity to build knowledge capital as a non-linear function of R&D
investments and the current state of technical knowledge, and explicitly represents
diminishing marginal returns to research inherent in the energy innovation process. Note
that in each respective area—electric power generation capacity investment planning and
energy R&D investment planning—research and modeling capability has steadily
progressed. For example, state-of-the-art “bottom-up” electricity generation capacity
planning models integrate hourly, or even more frequent, temporal demand; unit-level
features such as start-ups and shut-downs; geographic heterogeneity with respect to
technology base and demand; and/or very sophisticated representations of intermittent
renewables such as wind and solar (e.g., Blanford et al. 2014; Palmintier 2013; Short et
al. 2011). Our goal is to demonstrate the value for energy planning of combining an
engineering cost-based structure with an economic model of the innovation process.
Doing so requires bringing together some of the most salient features of power system
operations and the energy innovation process into a single modeling framework.
However, we intentionally keep the approach stylized, and avoid integrating many
additional state-of-the-art modeling capabilities, to keep the results as straightforward and
interpretable as possible.
Overall, the model indicates that the optimal R&D strategy should focus on
renewable energy technologies in the near- and medium-term, with gradual and
increasing R&D investment in nuclear power in the longer-term to meet carbon limits.
The optimal capital investment strategy follows a similar pattern, with the exception that

5

under carbon limits, investment in nuclear power is deferred until costs are sufficiently
reduced from R&D. We demonstrate that when realistic details of the power system are
represented, the optimal strategy is qualitatively different from the resulting strategies
from current state-of-the-art methods. Specifically, the improved model shows that large
R&D and capital investments in baseload technologies such as coal with carbon capture
and sequestration (CCS) may not be optimal, given the impracticality for nuclear plants
to cycle (i.e., frequent startups and shutdowns), and the respective cost structures and
innovation potentials of these technologies.

It also shows that existing modeling

approaches may underestimate the contribution of variable renewable technologies, such
as solar, to the power system, and thus the cost-effectiveness of their R&D opportunities.
Finally, the explicit introduction of diminishing marginal returns to R&D cautions against
underinvesting in emerging technologies such as renewable energy and nuclear, for
which it is necessary to support on-going technological change and associated costreductions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section formulates
the specific investment problem we seek to solve, and provides details about the new
modeling approach, describing its structure and calibration. In Section 3, we use the new
modeling approach to study optimal R&D and capital investment portfolios with and
without carbon limits.

We also solve for the optimal investment strategy for two

additional cases—one without critical power system details and another without
diminishing returns to R&D—in order to demonstrate the value of explicitly representing
these components of the problem.

Finally, we show the sensitivity of the optimal

investment strategy to key innovation process characteristics.

6

The new modeling

approach allows explicit study of the effects of different components of the knowledge
building process on optimal R&D and capital investments, which we find valuable given
recent empirical evidence showing notable variation between technology groups in the
contribution of their knowledge stocks on successful innovation (Popp, Santen, FisherVanden, & Webster 2013). Section 4 provides a discussion of the results and suggests
future research directions.

2.

Modeling framework
We begin with a traditional engineering cost-based electricity generation capacity

expansion optimization model (e.g., Turvey & Andersen 1997; Hobbs 1995) with ten
technology categories, and modify it to simultaneously choose R&D investments for four
emerging low-carbon technologies: coal with carbon capture and sequestration, nuclear,
wind, and solar. The cost-based structure of the model includes technology specific
costs; temporal load variability; and engineering constraints governing the power
balance, supply reliability, intermittent wind and solar power, and constraints on cycling
nuclear generators.

We build upon previous modeling work that incorporates both

endogenous experience curves and endogenous R&D dynamics to allow overnight capital
costs to evolve as a function of capital investments and technological innovation (e.g.,
Barreto & Kypreos 2004; Fischer & Newell 2008).

However, the model of the

innovation process exhibits diminishing returns with increasing research effort (e.g.,
Popp 2004; Popp 2006; Bosetti et al. 2006). The planning horizon is sixty years, with
capital investment and R&D investment decisions made every five years. A centralized
planning approach is used, which assumes that a central decision maker simultaneously

7

makes national investment and generation decisions.

This centralized approach is

appropriate for the long-range strategic policy and technology-planning objective of the
current question, and the large structural uncertainties inherent in short-term market
behaviors of individual firms over such long time scales (Pérez-Arriaga & Meseguer
1997). Below, we present the key features of the model, data, calibration, and solution
approach below. Full model details are provided in the appendix.

2.1 Objective
Every five years, the decision maker chooses new power plant capacities, NCg,t,
for each technology g, and R&D investments, RDg*,t, for the subset of emerging
technology categories g*, to minimize the net present value of total system costs,

min!"!,! ,!"!∗,! !"!,! + ! !"!,! + ! !"!∗ ,!

1−!

!!

(1)

where g* ∈ g, FCg,t represents the total fixed costs (overnight capital and fixed O&M
costs) of technology category g in period t, VCg,t, represents the total variable costs (fuel
and variable O&M costs) of technology g in period t, and r is the discount rate.
In addition to the constraints that define the design and operation of the
underlying electric power system, summarized below, the key constraint driving the
optimal investment strategy is a cumulative carbon emissions cap, ecap, applied to the
power sector,

8

!
! !!

≤ !"#$

(2)

where Et represents total carbon emissions from the electricity sector during each period.
The existence of a cumulative cap forces a choice between reducing emissions now
versus later, given current technology costs and future R&D-based cost-reduction
potential.

2.2

Electricity system operations
We parameterize the power system model to be qualitatively representative of the

U.S. generation portfolio and electricity demand (EIA 2011; Short et al. 2011). Table 1
lists the technology categories and associated values used for key parameters in the
generation expansion problem. Electricity demand is characterized using an annual load
duration curve with seventeen time slices representing four seasons, four daily segments,
and a “super peak” representing the highest forty (non-consecutive) hours of demand.
Figure 1 shows the duration and power level associated with each segment of the load
duration curve.
Key constraints of the traditional power generation expansion planning and
optimal dispatch problem are retained, including those dictating energy demand balance,
reliability of supply, and energy resource availabilities. To this, we introduce several
additional details. First, we model to first order the effects of intermittent renewable
resources and the dominant operational constraints of nuclear power plants. Using a netload approach, both solar power and nuclear power are defined as “non-dispatchable,”
and all other technologies compete on cost in order to meet demand. Wind is modeled as

9

“dispatchable” in order to allow its curtailment. Solar power is also represented as
operating only during demand slices that correspond to the daytime.ii Second, a high
retirement rate is used for old coal and old oil/gas steam plants, as a very large capacity
of these technologies is expected to retire in the U.S. over the next one to two decades. A
high retirement rate for nuclear power is also included, given the aging stock of the U.S.
nuclear fleet. Conversely, new investments in old coal technology, old oil/gas steam, and
hydropower are not allowed in the model because these technologies are outdated or near
their energy resource limits in the U.S. Third, we represent the inability to scale up
emerging technologies rapidly and without limit by assuming a constraint on the rate of
change of installed capacities between periods.

Table 3 shows values assumed for

additional parameters associated with the problem as defined.

2.3

Technical change dynamics
The process of innovation enters the model through two distinct complementary

pathways. Building on the recent empirical and numerical modeling literature, we use a
two-factor learning curve (2FLC) to simultaneously represent learning-by-doing (LBD)
and learning-by-searching (LBS) (Klaassen, Miketa, Larsen, & Sundqvist 2005;
Soderholm & Klaassen 2007; Miketa & Schrattenholzer 2004; Barreto & Kypreos 2004).
Through the 2FLCs, the overnight capital cost of a technology is decreasing in the
technical knowledge stock for the technology, and decreasing in the cumulative capacity
installed. While the 2FLC formulation applies to the emerging technology groups (coal

ii

Representing each of these constraints can be approached in many ways, with varying degrees of
sophistication. Our stylized model includes the minimum degree of realism we believe is necessary to
study whether results change after integrating power system operation and innovation process details.

10

with CCS, nuclear, wind, and solar), all technologies for which new capacity can be
added continue to learn via LBD via a traditional one-factor learning curveiii.
The technical change dynamics in the model are summarized with the following
three equations:

!

!

!"#$!,! = ! !! !"!,! !"!,!

!!,! ! = !

!!,!

!!!
!"!,!

(3)

(4)

!!!

!"!,!

!"!,!!! ! = ! !"#$!,! + ! !! !"!,!

(5)

Equation (3) represents the production of new knowledge, NEWKg,t, for
technology g in time period t, defining it as a function of R&D investment, RDg,t, and the
cumulative technical knowledge stock, KSg,t, for technology g in time period t. The
parameter βg represents the contribution of R&D dollars invested in the creation of new
knowledge, ϕg represents the contribution of the current knowledge stock in the creation
of new knowledge, and αg is a technology-specific scalar used to calibrate the behavior of
the new innovation possibilities frontier to the current learning literature. Diminishing

iii

There are many other pathways for technical change, including but not limited to spillovers, learning-byassociation, and exogenous technical change (progress of the overall economy). Additionally, there are
many outstanding theoretical and empirical issues with respect to definition and measurement (e.g., Clarke,
Weyent, Birky 2006; Nordhaus 2013). Integrating the full range of these is beyond the scope of this paper.
Instead, we keep the model stylized including learning-by-doing and learning-by-researching as the
pathways most directly connected to decisions about new capacity and R&D.

11

returns to research are incorporated in this “innovation possibilities frontier (IPF),” by
constraining the sum of βg, and ϕg to less than 1.0.
Equation (4) represents the two-factor learning curve that combines LBD and
LBS. Cg,t is the capital cost of technology g in time period t, C0,g is the initial capital cost
at unit capacity and knowledge stock, ICg,t is the cumulative installed capacity in GW of
technology g in time period t, KSg,t is once again the cumulative human knowledge stock
for technology g in time period t, and η1g and η2g are the learning-by-doing and learningby-research output elasticities for technology g, respectively.

As indicated by the

subscript g, the parameters η1g and η2g are technology specific; their interpretation
follows directly from traditional experience curve “progress-ratio” calculations where 1 2ηi describes the cost reduction that occurs from a doubling of capital stock (η1) or
knowledge stock (η2) (e.g., Ibenholt 2002). For the non-emerging technology groups,
η2g is set to zero, resulting in one factor LBD curves being applied to the evolving
overnight capital costsiv. Technology specific parameters of the IPF and 2FLC, listed in
Table 4, are calibrated to estimates in the published literaturev. Specifically, the scaling
parameter, αg, minimizes the sum of squared differences between capital cost reductions
as formulated here, and capital cost reductions based on published two-factor LBD and
LBS rates, and R&D and knowledge stock output elasticities (Barreto & Kypreos 2004;
Popp 2006).

iv

For consistency, one-factor LBD parameter values were re-constructed from the 2FLC values employed
by Barreto & Kypreos (2004), based on achieving the same cost-reduction over capital stocks.
v
There is a wide range of estimates in the published literature on learning rates, as well as considerable
debate about the appropriateness of using historical data to estimate future costs for emerging technologies.
Addressing these issues is beyond the scope of this paper, which aims to present a new framework, but it is
important for the reader to note that these differences exist and could impact the specific numerical results
presented here.

12

Equation (5) represents the knowledge building process, capturing the stock
nature of the technical knowledge capital dimension in this problem. The parameter kgt
represents the new knowledge gained for technology g during period t through the
innovation possibilities frontier, and

g

represents a technology-specific decay rate for

the knowledge stock from one period to the next.

2.4

Numerical Implementation
We solve the electricity generation capital and R&D investment planning problem

numerically, as a non-linear program. We use the GAMS modeling environment, and a
standard non-linear programming (NLP) solver, CONOPT. A 20-point seeding algorithm
is also used to set initial values widely distributed over the solution space. The optimum
is the solution to the NLP that minimizes total system costs across all twenty seeds. We
address terminal conditions for this multi-period decision problem by running the 60-year
planning problem for an additional 40 years. Results from only the first 12 (5-year)
periods are used in each of the analyses to ensure that decisions being made at or near the
end of the planning horizon are not “end-of-world” artifacts or a result of artificially
imposed terminal conditions.

13

3.

Results
In this section, we present the results of four numerical modeling experiments.vi

We first present the optimal investment strategy resulting from solving the reference
model with no carbon limit and then with a moderately stringent carbon limit equivalent
to reducing business-as-usual carbon emissions from the power generation sector by fifty
percent annually. Next, we show the impact of modeling critical power system details
and diminishing returns to R&D on the resulting optimal strategy. Our focus is to
explicitly show how the optimal investment strategy changes when these features are
considered, and to demonstrate the value for energy planning of combining an
engineering cost-based structure with an economic model of the innovation process.
Finally, we present results from a sensitivity analysis of the optimal investment strategy
on the efficiency of R&D, and on the strength of the technology knowledge stocks. An
additional advantage of the modeling framework we present is the capability to directly
study component drivers of new technology knowledge creation. The sensitivity analysis
results illustrate the behavior of the model with respect to these components.

3.1

Reference optimal investment strategy
When carbon emissions from the power generation sector are allowed to grow

unconstrained, the new modeling framework with endogenous R&D-based technical
change and diminishing returns shows that it is optimal in the near-term to invest
aggressively in wind power R&D, and to a lesser extent in solar PV R&D, and then to

vi

Note that throughout this paper we refer to investment strategies using the names of the technologies we
have included in our model, but in reality the results are driven by the underlying engineering and cost
characteristics of the technologies themselves. Therefore, the reader should feel free to consider the
strategies more generically, using the technology characteristics we have included as a benchmark.

14

decrease investments of both to negligible amounts after two to four decades (Figure 2).
The temporal pattern of optimal capital investments (deployment) for the reference model
(Figure 3) helps to explain this behavior. Several gigawatts of wind are installed in the
second and third periods in order to make up a sizeable share of the total installed
capacity by the fourth period.

R&D investments reflect this deployment pattern.

Investments occur early and aggressively to reduce costs as much as possible before
massive deployments. Solar PV deployments in the fifth through the ninth periods occur
on a much smaller scale, but solar R&D investments similarly reflect the capacity
increases over time. Investments begin early in order to reduce capital costs as much as
possible, but to a lesser extent than for wind, and they occur over a longer interval of time
because deployments occur further in the future.
Note that wind and solar PV technology R&D and deployments appear even in
the absence of a carbon emissions limit; this is due to their specific cost structures and the
presence of learning in the model. Wind technology is already close to being costcompetitive with the other technologies’ capital costs (See Table 1). Because of the
competitive cost and relatively rapid learning rates, near-term R&D investments and
deployment in wind technology yields significant cost savings during future installations,
which in turn encourages further deployment vii , viii .

vii

Solar PV technology, despite

When engineering details of power system operations and merit-order effects are considered in
combination with endogenous learning opportunities, as in the current modeling framework, it is common
to witness significant wind technology deployment; fuel costs are zero, other variable costs are among the
lowest in the technology suite, and overnight capital costs become quite low due to cumulative LBD, LBS,
and other effects). In our results, the amount of wind (or any other technology) R&D and deployment can
also be attributed to previous technology support policies such as a production tax credit or state RPS since
implicit in the learning rates and thus costs is the effect of past installations motivated by these policies.
Note, however, that technology capital costs do not directly reflect the impact of such support policies.
viii
While capital and other engineering costs for wind power decrease to the point of being costcompetitive with some conventional technologies, note that other constraints continue to exist (e.g.,
transmission capacity) that can prevent actual wind deployment and are not represented in our model.

15

significantly higher capital costs compared with other technologies, is also developed and
deployed due to its high learning potential (both through experience and R&D) (See
Table 3).

In contrast, low-carbon coal with CCS and zero-carbon nuclear, both

technologies with high relative overnight capital costs but lower learning potentials, do
not have sufficient incentive for either R&D or deployment in the absence of a carbon
constraint. Figure 2 also shows the relative allocation of the R&D amount for the optimal
investment strategy in each period, and indicates the substantial early R&D investment in
wind technology, followed by a delayed, but prolonged investment in solar PV. For the
remainder of the paper, we will present the optimal R&D investment strategy in terms of
the ratio of R&D by technology to the total R&D, and emphasize insights into the relative
investment allocation, rather than the absolute magnitudes from our stylized model.
Under a moderately stringent carbon limit, one that is equivalent to constraining
annual carbon emissions from the power generation sector to fifty percent of 2010
“business-as-usual” emissions, the optimal strategy involves R&D and capital
investments in nuclear technology, in addition to the same absolute wind and solar
development and deployment plan as with no carbon limit. Nuclear technology R&D
investments occur more gradually than wind and solar, peaking after 35 years, just before
new nuclear capital investments occur (Figures 2 and 3). Because nuclear generation is
baseload (operating for most hours of the year), emits no carbon emissions, and has lower
capital and operating costs than coal with CCS—the alternative baseload low carbon
technology—it plays an important role in reducing cumulative carbon emissions. Note
the significant amount of electricity generated by nuclear in Figure 3 under a carbon
limit.

However, the deployment of nuclear is deferred until later periods to take

16

advantage of the capital cost reductions from early R&D investments. Under the carbon
limit, nuclear technology has the largest share of R&D (Figure 2). We note that neither
development nor deployment of coal with CCS occurs in the optimal strategy for the
reference model. This is a result of its higher overnight capital costs and fuel costs
relative to alternative low-carbon technologies (Table 1), combined with its relatively
lower learning rates (Table 3).ix

3.2

The effect of power system details
The results described above have been obtained using an engineering cost-based

structure for the electric power R&D and capital investment planning model instead of a
typical economic modeling structure, to ensure that critical physical and technological
characteristics of the power system are represented in sufficient detail. In this section, we
present results obtained with an alternative formulation of the model (hereafter referred to
as the “simplified power system model”) with several important engineering constraints
omitted to show that the optimal investment strategy is indeed different than that in the
reference model. Specifically, we neglect the explicit representations of temporal load
variability, time-of-day output constraints for solar PV panels, and the inability of nuclear
plants to cost-effectively manage repeated start-up and shut-downs. Instead, we assume
an average annual demand value, a solar PV panel output that assumes a specific average
capacity factor (30%), and neglect the baseload “must-run” constraint we place on
nuclear power generation. These assumptions are consistent with the vast majority of
ix

The numerical model considers the possibility that coal with CCS and nuclear power technologies can
incur an upper bound in deployment for political or physical reasons (e.g., concerns about nuclear waste
disposal or public safety, physical limitation of carbon sequestration sites) by including a maximum
installed capacity of 30% (for each) of total system capacity. However, neither constraint is active in the
solution, indicating that the results are robust to these types of concerns within this limit.

17

economic energy models that focus on the rest of the economy but use a simplified
electricity sector with an annual demand representation.
Figures 4 and 5 present the optimal R&D and capacity investments, respectively,
resulting from the simplified power system model. Without a carbon limit, the optimal
R&D investment strategy focuses solely on wind technology; R&D investments in solar
PV are not part of the investment strategy, which differs significantly from the results
obtained with the reference model.

Solar PV technology is also dropped from the

deployment plan, with wind making up the balance. Furthermore, under a carbon limit,
R&D and capital investments in solar are effectively zero. In contrast to the reference
model, under the carbon limit wind R&D investments continue throughout the sixty-year
planning horizon (albeit at smaller share of total R&D relative to nuclear technology).
Another significant difference in this version is that the optimal investment strategy
includes both baseload low-carbon technologies, nuclear and coal with CCS. Investment
in nuclear R&D is still optimal under the alternate model, and remains at a relatively high
share throughout the planning horizon (rather than starting out small and gradually
increasing over time). Coal with CCS generation changes most dramatically under this
simplified power system formulation, and exhibits positive optimal R&D and capital
investments throughout the planning horizon, in contrast to zero investment in the
reference model. In fact, investment is so high for coal with CCS that by the seventh
period it makes up the largest share of R&D expenditures across the four emerging
technologies.
Why are R&D investments into coal with CCS justified under a carbon limit in
the alternate model? A main reason is the absence of the must-run constraint on nuclear

18

generation. Without that constraint, both coal with CCS and nuclear technology can
contribute to meet electricity demand. Nuclear generation, initially with lower overnight
capital cost, is deployed sooner in this version than in the reference model, and therefore
also has high R&D investment shares in early periods. Coal with CCS is initially higher
cost, and is consequently deployed in later periods, after R&D investments have had
sufficient time to reduce capital costs and increase its competitiveness.

The R&D

investment share in coal with CCS starts off small in the early periods, and then rises
swiftly over the next few periods. The optimal deployment strategy under the simplified
power system formulation also includes less wind and more natural gas plants.
The reason why the optimal R&D investment plan from the simplified power
system model does not include solar PV is that the model does not differentiate between
the times when solar generation is and is not available. Solar generation is effectively
assumed to be available at any time of day or in any season regardless of solar incidence,
but only and always at 30% output, as opposed to the much higher levels for some
seasons and times of day. A maximum capacity factor of 30% combined with its high
initial capital cost, makes this technology not cost-effective. In general, we caution that
using economic modeling frameworks that do not resolve temporal variation may
underestimate the value of variable generation technologies such as solar PV, and
therefore may also underestimate cost-effective R&D opportunities.

Similarly, for

baseload technologies with specific engineering constraints such as nuclear, such
frameworks may overestimate the opportunity for competing baseload technologies (e.g.,
coal with CCS, gas) and the corresponding value of R&D investment into these
technologies.

19

3.3

The effect of diminishing returns to research
An important contribution of this work is the incorporation of diminishing returns

to research into an R&D and capital investment planning model for the power sector.
Here, we demonstrate the value of taking this realistic approach, relative to the common
approach that assumes linear R&D-knowledge building relationships without diminishing
returns. We formulate a third version of the model, which replicates the reference
version from Section 3.1 with the important exception of the mechanism through which
knowledge increases about emerging technologies.

Specifically, in this version, we

replace Equation (3) in the reference model with:

!!,! = ! !"!,! ,

(5)

where new knowledge, k, for technology, g, in time, t, is a one-to-one function of the
dollars invested in technology, g, and time, t. This formulation closely matches the
dominant assumption in many energy models, which equates R&D dollars with new
knowledge. We refer to this version as the “linear R&D” model version.
Figure 6 shows the optimal R&D investment strategies with and without a carbon
limit when the linear knowledge production function is assumed, omitting diminishing
returns. In the absence of a carbon limit, the relative shares of R&D investments into
wind and solar technologies in the early periods is approximately the same, but R&D into
solar ceases after the fifth period. The same pattern holds for wind and solar R&D
investment under a carbon limit. In the linear R&D model, R&D into nuclear technology

20

under the carbon limit has a higher optimal share in the first two periods, after which
investment stops abruptly. In contrast, when diminishing returns are considered (Figure
2), nuclear R&D begins gradually, and becomes dominant for most of the planning
horizon.
In general, the impact of ignoring the decreasing returns from research effort as a
function of cumulative effort is to overestimate the effect of R&D into technologies. The
linear R&D model also results in a different temporal path of optimal R&D investments,
leading to a “boom-and-bust” pattern of investing a lot in early periods, after which R&D
ceases. This is particularly true for technologies such as solar PV and nuclear, which
have delayed deployment and thus investment in the reference model spread out over
many periods.

For technologies with low learning-by-searching rates but large

deployments in the reference model (e.g., nuclear under a carbon limit), the linear R&D
model chooses a disproportionate level of R&D effort in the early periods. The shift in
the timing of R&D, in turn, changes the optimal capital investment pattern, resulting in
earlier deployment of nuclear generation (Figure 7), displacing combined cycle natural
gas plants during those periods. A similar pattern is seen for nuclear technology R&D
investments under a carbon constraint in the engineering cost model of Barreto &
Kypreos (2004), which assumes linear R&D-based knowledge building and the same low
learning rate. In their model, technologies with higher learning rates witness continued
R&D investment over their planning horizon.

21

3.4

Optimal investment strategies v. knowledge building components
An additional benefit of representing endogenous learning-by-searching with an

innovation possibilities frontier (IPF), such as Equation (3) of the reference model, is the
ability to explicitly study the impact of assumptions about R&D efficiency (parameter )
and about the effect of the knowledge stock level in generating new knowledge
(parameter ϕ) on the inter-temporal knowledge building process, and consequently on
the optimal investment strategy.

This is particularly salient given evidence in the

technical change literature showing variation across energy technologies in the
contribution of their knowledge stocks to successful innovation (Popp et al., 2013). In
the reference model (Section 3.1), we assume values of

and ϕ from the literature,

assigning all emerging technologies the same valuesx. Here we summarize results from
sensitivity analyses of the optimal strategy to both of these characteristics of the
innovation process. We focus on the impact on R&D investments, because capacity
investments are less sensitive to changes in the IPF parameters in our model.
Figure 8 shows the share of R&D investments, defined by the peak investment
over time, in each of the four emerging technology groups for a range of R&D
investment efficiency (parameter β) values under a carbon limit (reference value for

is

0.1). With increasing R&D efficiency, the shares of wind and solar power (technologies
with high learning rates and early R&D) investments display only mild sensitivity; the
R&D investment shares for these technologies only decrease slightly as R&D efficiency
x

Although parameters
and ϕ of the innovation possibilities frontier are the same across the four
emerging technologies, a scaling parameter
is used to calibrate each technology to technology specific
learning values in the literature allowing each technology to follow its own cost-reductions over R&D
investment (See Section 3 and supplemental information for more details).

22

increases. In contrast, nuclear power, which has a much lower learning rate and an
optimal path of R&D that peaks in later periods, experiences increasing investment
shares with increasing R&D efficiency. The general trend is robust to R&D investment
efficiencies, however; it is optimal to invest the largest share into nuclear, the next largest
share into wind, the least into solar, and none into coal with CCS.
The optimal investment pattern is more sensitive to assumptions about ϕ, the
elasticity of new knowledge to current knowledge stock levels (Figure 9). As the impact
of knowledge stock on new knowledge increases, the relative share of wind R&D
investments increase and the relative share of nuclear R&D investments decrease.
Specifically, for values of ϕ below approximately 0.4 (reference value is 0.54), it is
optimal to invest the majority of R&D into wind over nuclear, but for values greater than
0.4, it is optimal to invest the majority of R&D into nuclear power. The effect on optimal
R&D share into solar and coal with CCS is more robust to the knowledge stock effect. It
is optimal to spend approximately one-tenth of total R&D expenditures on solar PV
technology for any value of knowledge stock strength. The optimal strategy continues to
exclude R&D or capital investments into coal with CCS across all values of

and ϕ

studied here.
We conclude that for technologies for which early R&D investments are optimal
and learning rates are high (e.g., wind), more favorable innovation processes shift the
optimal strategy away from R&D investment. The intuition is that if the same amount of
R&D expenditures yields greater returns, there is no need to spend extra money.
Additionally, because expenditures take place in the first few years for these

23

technologies, there is less time to benefit from accumulating knowledge. However, for
technologies with low learning rates and deferred R&D investments (e.g., nuclear),
increasing the strength with which the knowledge stock contributes to new knowledge
(and ultimately cost reductions) incentivizes increasing R&D investments.

In these

cases, there is more time for benefits from additional R&D to accrue. Discounting of
future period R&D investments also makes an increase in R&D not as costly a decision.
Overall, when compared side-by-side, the sensitivity of the optimal investment
strategy in terms of relative shares of R&D investment on both R&D efficiency and
knowledge stock strength is similar in that for the technologies with high learning rates
and early period R&D investments, R&D investment tends to decrease (or stay constant)
with increasing values for both innovation process components. On the other hand, for
technologies with low learning rates (e.g., nuclear) and deferred R&D investments, R&D
investment tends to increase with increasing values of the innovation components. One
noteworthy difference in the sensitivities however, as Figure 9 below shows, is that the
impact of knowledge stock strength is large enough to change the priority ordering of
R&D investments under a carbon limit. At low levels, the model shows us that it is
optimal to invest the majority of the R&D expenditures on wind, whereas at high levels
on nuclear. Given the limited empirical data on these parameters, and the inherent
uncertain nature of the innovation process, we leave the exploration of the impact of
uncertainty in these parameters as future work.

24

4.

Discussion
In this paper, we present a novel modeling framework for informing investment

decisions about R&D and generation capital infrastructure in the electric power sector.
Specifically, the new framework improves upon state-of-the-art modeling in this area by
using an explicit engineering-cost structure for representing important power system
details such as temporal load variability, technology-specific operational constraints,
intermittent renewable generation, and technology-specific engineering and fuel costs.
We also utilize a non-linear innovation possibilities frontier function for representing a
process of technology knowledge building that captures diminishing returns to R&D.
Results from the model inform decision makers about the relative balance of low-carbon
R&D investments and new capital investments that is cost-effective at transforming the
currently high-carbon emitting power generation sector.
In particular, for capital investments, the most competitive emerging technologies
(e.g., wind power) are deployed early with and without carbon limits, to meet increasing
demand. Without any limits on carbon, the remaining deployment of new capacity is
made up of natural gas plants, whereas with a carbon limit, solar PV deployment
increases and nuclear power is also deployed. The deployment of nuclear in the presence
of a carbon limit is critical—the baseload nature of the technology affords deep emission
cuts. R&D investments generally track the deployment patterns. R&D investments in
early periods are optimal for technologies with high learning rates and do less overall to
contribute to emission cuts (e.g., both wind and solar are intermittent generating
technologies). However, a greater share of R&D investment is dedicated to wind than
solar, because solar is more resource constrained in the model. Lower initial levels of

25

R&D that increase gradually over the planning horizon are optimal for technologies with
lower learning rates and deferred deployment (e.g., nuclear).
The results above demonstrate the value of incorporating critical power sector
details and diminishing returns to energy R&D into the state of the art modeling
frameworks. If key characteristics of the electricity sector such as load variability,
intermittent generation, and operational constraints such as cycling are omitted, the
optimal solutions of the models differ significantly—observable at even the minimumlevel of detail we integrate. Specifically, under a carbon limit, the optimal strategy
involves R&D and capital investments in coal with CCS (whereas in the reference model
such investments are not optimal), and the relative share of R&D investment allocated to
coal with CCS grows over time to dominate all other emerging technologies. Likewise,
the optimal strategy excludes any investments in solar PV technology. We conclude that
the engineering cost structure of the model we use is critical to representing features of
the power system such as the ineffectiveness for nuclear plants to cycle and the temporal
variability of solar PV generation. If diminishing returns to research effort are not
explicitly represented in the model of the innovation process, there is a tendency for the
optimal strategy to exhibit underinvestment in future periods. This results from the fact
that the average return rate from R&D investments appears to be much higher in a model
without diminishing returns, thus reducing the benefit of continued investments.
A number of questions are raised for future research. First, given the sensitivity
of the share of optimal R&D investments to the components of the knowledge building
process such as knowledge stock strength, and the paucity of data available about the
actual value of these innovation process components, it would be valuable to study the

26

optimal R&D investment strategy under uncertainty in the return rate of R&D programs
(R&D efficiency) and knowledge stock strengths. We present one such a study in a
forthcoming paper that uses a stochastic R&D model for the power generation sector, but
in general this is an open area of research that would benefit from multiple perspectives.
Second, we have developed the current model using an engineering cost structure with
the intention of presenting a framework that could be used as the “bottom-up” component
of a more integrated hybrid modeling effort. There are many feedbacks between the
electricity sector and the rest of the economy, as well as between the energy innovation
that occurs in electricity and the rest of the economy, that would be beneficial to include
in a modeling framework used to inform investment decisions and related policies. The
integration of a modeling framework such as the one presented here into a hybrid model
with macroeconomic interactions would be a valuable line of research. Finally, due to
our research objective, we have used a stylized model that relies on a single, aggregated
entity that engages in innovative activity and chooses R&D investments only in response
to opportunities for minimizing system-wide costs.

However, in reality, innovation

occurs via several different institutions, through both public and private entities that
respond to different incentives. Representing public and private innovation separately in
a model like the one we present here could help inform the allocation of R&D funds
across different actors, as would characterizing and representing other key features of the
innovation process such as R&D feedbacks upstream at the technology suppliers from
downstream deployment at the utilities and power producers.

27

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Jake Whitcomb for his excellent research assistance in helping
prepare the manuscript for publication. We also thank Andres Ramos, Javier Garcia, and
Joseph Sussman for valuable discussions on electricity generation expansion planning
and energy innovation, and two anonymous reviewers. Finally, we gratefully
acknowledge financial support from U.S. National Science Foundation Grant Nos.
0825915 and 0835414, and the MIT Science and Technology Initiatives Spain Program,
Martin Family Sustainability Fellows Program, and Office of the Graduate Dean for
Education John S. Hennessy Fellowship Program.

References
Berglund, C. and P. Soderholm (2006). “Modeling technical change in energy system
analysis: analyzing the introduction of learning-by-doing in bottom-up energy models.”
Energy Policy, 34: 1344-1356.
Blanford, G., Merrick, J., and D. Young (2014). “A Clean Energy Standard analysis with
the US-REGEN model.” The Energy Journal 35(Special Issue 2): 137-164.
Bosetti, V., Carraro, C., Galeotti, M., Massetti, E., and M. Tavoni (2006). “WITCH A
world induced technical change hybrid model.” The Energy Journal, Special Issue on
Hybrid Modeling of Energy-Environment Policies: Reconciling Bottom-up and Topdown.
Buonanno, P., Carraro, C., and M. Galeotti (2003). “Endogenous induced technical
change and the costs of Kyoto.” Resource and Energy Economics, 25: 11-34.
Clarke, L., Weyent, J., and A. Birky (2006). “On the sources of technological change:
assessing the evidence.” Energy Economics 28: 579-595.
DOE (2011). Report on the First Quadrennial Technology Review. DOE. Washington,
D.C.
EIA (2012). U.S. Energy-Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions, 2011. DOE/EIA.
Washington, D.C.
EIA (2011). Annual Energy Review. DOE/EIA. Washington, D.C.
EIA (2010a). Electric Power Annual 2010. DOE/EIA. Washington, D.C.
EIA (2010b). Updated Capital Cost Estimates for Electricity Generation Plants.
DOE/EIA. Washington, D.C.

28

EIA (2009). The National Energy Modeling System: An Overview 2009. DOE/EIA.
Washington, D.C.
EPA (2010). Documentation for EPA Base Case v.4.10 Using the Integrated Planning
Model. EPA Report #430R10010. USEPA/Office of Air and Radiation. Washington,
D.C.
Fischer, C. and R. G. Newell (2008). “Environmental and technology policies for climate
mitigation.” Energy Economics, 55: 142-162.
Goulder, L., and K. Mathai (2000). “Optimal CO2 abatement in the presence of induced
technological change.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 39 (1):
1-38.
Goulder, L., and S. Schneider (1999). “Induced technological change and the
attractiveness of CO2 abatement policies.” Resource and Energy Economics, 21: 211253.
Grubb, M., Kohler, J., and D. Anderson (2002). “Induced technical change in energy and
environmental modeling; analytic approaches and policy implications.” Annu. Rev.
Energy Environ, 27: 271-308.
Hobbs, B.F. (1995). “Optimization methods for electric utility resource planning,”
European Journal of Operational Research, 83: 1-20.
Ibenholt, K. (2002). “Explaining learning curves for wind power.” Energy Policy, 30:
1181-1189.
Jones, C. (1995). “R&D based models of economic growth.” The Journal of Political
Economy, 103 (4): 759-784.
Klaassen, G., Miketa, A., Larsen, K., and T. Sundqvist (2005). “The impact of R&D on
innovation for wind energy in Demark, Germany and the United Kingdom.” Ecological
Economics, 54: 227-240.
Kouvaritakis, N., Soria, A., and S. Isoard (2000). “Modelling energy technology
dynamics: methodology for adaptive expectations modeling with learning by doing and
learning by searching.” Int. J. Global Energy Issues, 14 (1-4): 104: 115.
Kypreos, S., and L. Barreto (2000). “ERIS: a model prototype with endogenous
technological change.” Int. J. Global Energy Issues, 14 (1-4): 374-396.
Loulou, R., Goldstein, G., and K. Noble (2004). Documentation for the MARKAL
family of models. IEA/Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme. Paris.

29

Manne, A.S., Mendelsohn, R., and R.G. Richels (1995). “A model for evaluating regional
and global effects of GHG reduction policies.” Energy Policy, 23: 17-34.
Mattsson, N., and C.O. Wene (1997). “Assessing new energy technologies using an
energy system model with endogenized experience curves.” International Journal of
Energy Research, 21 (4): 385-393.
Messner, S. (1997). “Endogenized technological learning in an energy systems model.” J
Evol Econ, 7: 291-313.
Miketa, A., and L. Schrattenholzer (2004). “Experiments with a methodology to model
the role of R&D expenditures in energy technology learning processes; first results.”
Energy Policy, 32: 1679-1692.
Morris, S.C., Goldstein, G.A., and V.M. Fthenakis (2002). “NEMS and MARKALMACRO models for energy-environmental-economic analysis: a comparison of the
electricity and carbon reduction projections.” Environmental Modeling and Assessment,
7: 207-216.
Nordhaus, W. (2014). “The perils of the learning model for modeling endogenous
technological change.” The Energy Journal 25(1): 1-14.
Nordhaus, W.D. (2010). “Economic aspects of global warming in a post-Copenhagen
environment.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107 (26): 11721-11726.
Nordhaus, W.D. (1994). Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of the
Greenhouse Effect. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Tapia-Ahumada, K., Octaviano, C., Rausch, S., and I. Pérez-Arriaga (2014). Modeling
intermittent renewable energy: can we trust top-down equilibrium approaches? CEEPR
Working Paper. MIT. Cambridge.
Palmintier, B. (2013). Incorporating Operational Flexibility into Electric Generation
Planning: Impacts and Methods for System Design and Policy Analysis. MIT
Engineering Systems Division PhD Dissertation.
Paltsev, S., Reilly, J.M., Jacoby, H.D., Eckaus, R.S., McFarland, J., Sarofim, M.,
Asadoorian, M., and M. Babiker (2005). The MIT Emissions Prediction and Policy
Analysis (EPPA) Model: Version 4, MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of
Global Change Report Series Report No. 125. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Cambridge.
Pérez-Arriaga, I.J., and C. Meseguer (1997). "Wholesale marginal prices in competitive
generation markets." IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 12 (2): 710-717.

30

Popp, D. (2002). “Induced innovation and energy prices.” American Economic Review,
92 (1): 160-180.
Popp, D. (2004). “ENTICE: endogenous technological change in the DICE model of
global warming.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 48: 742-768.
Popp, D. (2006). “ENTICE-BR: Backstop technology in the ENTICE model of climate
change.” Energy Economics, 28(2): 188-222.
Popp, D., Newell, R.G., and A.B. Jaffe (2010). “Energy, the environment, and
technological change,” Handbook of the Economics of Innovation: vol. 2, Bronwyn Hall
and Nathan Rosenberg, eds., Academic Press/Elsevier, 2010, 873-937.
Popp, D., Santen, N., Fisher-Vanden, K., and M. Webster (2013). “Technology Variation
vs. R&D Uncertainty: What Matters Most for Energy Patent Success?” Resource and
Energy Economics, 35: 505-533.
Graham P., Clarke, L., Marlay, R., Kyle, P., Wise, M., McJeon, H., and G. Chan (2011).
“Energy R&D portfolio analysis based on climate change mitigation.” Energy
Economics, 33 (4): 634-643.
Ross, M. (2008). Documentation of the applied dynamic analysis of the global economy
(ADAGE) model. Research Triangle Institute Working Paper 08_01. RTI. Research
Triangle Park.
Rubin, E.S., Taylor, M.R., Yeh, S., and D.A. Hounshell (2004). “Learning curves for
environmental technology and their importance for climate policy analysis.” Energy, 29:
1551-1559.
Seebregts. A.J., Kram, T., Schaeffer, G.J., Stoffer, A., Kypreos, S., Barreto, L., Messner,
S., and L. Schrattenholzer (1999). Endogenous technological change in energy system
models, synthesis of experience with ERIS, MARKAL, and MESSAGE. Report ECNC—99-025 of the Paul Scherrer Institute and the International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis. PSI/IIASA. Switzerland/Austria.
Shawhan, D.L., Taber, J.T., Shi, D., Zimmerman, R.D., Yan, J., Marquet, C.M., Qi, Y.,
Mao, B., Schuler, R.E., Schulze, W.D., and D. Tylavsky (2014). “Does a detailed model
of the electricity grid matter? Estimating the impacts of the Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative.” Resource and Energy Economics 36: 191-207.
Short, W., Sullivan, P., Mai, T., Mowers, M., Uriate, C., Blair, N., Heimiller, D., and A.
Martinez (2011). Regional Energy Deployment System (ReEDS). Technical Report
NREL/TP-6A20-46534. NREL. Golden.
Short, W., Blair, N., Sullivan, P., T. Mai (2009). ReEDS model documentation: base case
data and model description. NREL. Golden.

31

Soderholm, P. and G. Klaassen (2007). “Wind power in Europe: a simultaneous
innovation-diffusion model.” Environmental and Resource Economics, 36: 163-190.
Turton, H., and L. Barreto (2004). The extended energy-systems ERIS model: an
overview. International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Interim Report IR-04101. IIASA. Vienna.
Turvey, R., and D. Anderson (1977). Electricity Economics: Essays and Case Studies.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
van der Zwaan, B., Gerlagh, R., Klaassen, G., and L. Schrattenholzer (2002).
“Endogenous technological change in climate change modeling.” Energy Economics, 24:
1-19.

32

Table 1. Electricity Generator Data
Fixed
O&M
Cost
[$/kWyear]

Initial
Fuel Cost
[$/MMBtu]

Other
Variable
Cost
[$/MWh]

Emissions
Rate
[lbs/MMbtu]

1204

23.410

2.28

4.14

205

85

8.80

3167

35.970

2.28

4.25

205

85

-

12.00

5099

76.620

2.28

9.05

20.5

80

100

20

9.46

390

25.256

5.16

3.85

137

80

200

-

6.43

1003

14.620

5.16

3.11

119

90

100

-

9.75

665

6.700

5.16

9.87

119

90

Hydro

100

-

10.34

1320

12.700

-

3.20

-

90

Nuclear

100

10

10.40

5355

85.663

0.62

0.48

-

90

Wind

50

-

-

2438

28.070

-

-

-

30

1

-

-

4755

16.700

-

-

-

95**

Technology

Initial
Capacity
[GW]

5-year
Retirement
Rate [%]

Heat Rate
[MMbtu/MWh]

Initial Capital
Cost [$/kWknowledgeunit]

Old Coal

300

15

10.00

New Coal

1

-

1

Coal with
CCS
Old Steam
Gas
Gas
Combined
Cycle
Gas
Combustion
Turbine

Solar

Annual
Availability
Rate [%]

Notes:
** The availability rate for solar is high due to the technology only operating during peak solar demand slices.
References: Short et al., 2011; EIA, 2010a; EIA, 2010b

Table 2. Other Used Parameters

Parameter

Cumulative Emissions Cap No Policy/Policy, ecap

Value

140,000/60,000 Million Metric Tons

Electricity Supply Reliability Reserve Margin, m

10%

Annual Electricity Demand Growth Rate, k

0.5%

Annual Discount Rate, r

5%

Coal Price Annual Growth Rate, fuel_growthc

4%

Gas Price Annual Growth Rate, fuel_growthng

1%

33

Table 3 Reference Model Technical Change Parameters
Technology

Learning-byDoing Elasticity η1

Learning-bySearching
Elasticity η2

IPF a

IPF β

IPF φ

Coal with CCS xi

0.05889

0.02915

0.1853

0.1

0.54

Nuclear

0.05889

0.02915

0.1853

0.1

0.54

Wind

0.25154

0.10470

0.1856

0.1

0.54

0.41504

0.15200

0.1760

0.1

0.54

Solar

Original Sources: Barreto & Kypreos 2004; Popp 2006

Figure 1. Load Duration Curve Used (Original Source: Short et al. 2009)

xi

The lack of experience with carbon capture and sequestration technology in the electric power sector
makes it difficult to find reliable learning data for use in numerical models of technological change. Thus,
other authors have used learning rates for coal SO2 scrubbing technology or NOx reduction technologies
and applied them to coal with CCS technology in numerical decision support models (Rubin, Taylor, Yeh,
& Hounshell 2004). This paper uses the history of nuclear fission technology and its learning rates as a
proxy for coal with CCS (both are capital-intensive, large baseload technologies with significant challenges
of space, scale up, public acceptance, permitting, waste, etc.).

34

100%"

500"

80%"

solar"

60%"

coal_ccs"

Ra;o"of"Total"R&D"

Million"USD"

600"

400"
300"
200"
100"

nuclear"

40%"
20%"
0%"

0"
1"

2"

3"

4"

5"

6" 7"
Period"

8"

9"

10" 11" 12"

700"

1"

2"

3"

4"

5"

6" 7"
Period"

8"

9"

10" 11" 12"

1"

2"

3"

4"

5"

6" 7"
Period"

8"

9"

10" 11" 12"

100%"

600"

Ra#o%of%Total%R&D%

Million"USD"

wind"

500"
400"
300"
200"
100"

80%"
60%"
40%"
20%"
0%"

0"
1"

2"

3"

4"

5"

6" 7"
Period"

8"

9"

10" 11" 12"

Figure 2. Left: Reference model optimal R&D investments under no carbon limit (top) and a carbon limit (bottom). Right: Ratio of optimal R&D investments
to total R&D investments per period, for the reference model under no carbon limit (top) and a carbon limit (bottom).

1400"

12000

1200"

10000
8000

800"

GWh

GW"

1000"
600"

6000

400"

4000

200"

2000

0"

0
1"

2"

3"

4"

5"

6" 7"
Period"

8"

9"

10" 11" 12"

1400"

12000

1200"

10000

1000"

8000

800"

GWh

GW"

solar
wind
nuclear
hydro
gas_ct
gas_ccgt
gas_ogs
coal_ccs
coal_new
coal_old

600"

4000

200"

2000

0"
2"

3"

4"

5"

6" 7"
Period"

8"

9"

2

3

4

5

6 7
Period

8

9

10 11 12

1

2

3

4

5

6 7
Period

8

9

10 11 12

6000

400"

1"

1

0

10" 11" 12"

Figure 3. Left: Reference model optimal installed generation capacity under no carbon limit (top) and a carbon limit (bottom). Right: Reference model optimal
electricity production under no carbon limit (top) and a carbon limit (bottom).

36

Ra/o#of#Total#R&D#
Ra/o#of#Total#R&D#

100%#
90%#
80%#
70%#
60%#
50%#
40%#
30%#
20%#
10%#
0%#

wind#
solar#
coal_ccs#
nuclear#

1#

2#

3#

4#

5#

6# 7#
Period#

8#

9#

10# 11# 12#

1#

2#

3#

4#

5#

6#

8#

9#

10# 11# 12#

100%#
90%#
80%#
70%#
60%#
50%#
40%#
30%#
20%#
10%#
0%#
7#

Period#

Figure 4. Ratio of optimal R&D investments to total R&D investments per period, without power system
details modeled, under no carbon limit (top) and a carbon limit (bottom).

37

1400#
1200#
1000#
GW#

800#
600#
400#
200#
0#
1#

2#

3#

4#

5#

6#

7#

8#

9# 10# 11# 12#

8#

9# 10# 11# 12#

solar#
wind#
nuclear#
hydro#
gas_ct#
gas_ccgt#
gas_old#
coal_ccs#
coal_new#
coal_old#

Period#

1400#
1200#
1000#
GW#

800#
600#
400#
200#
0#
1#

2#

3#

4#

5#

6#

7#

Period#

Figure 5. Optimal installed capacities without power system details modeled, under no carbon limit (top)
and a carbon limit (bottom).

38

Ratio of Total R&D

100%

wind

80%

Solar
coal_ccs

60%

nuclear
40%
20%
0%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12

Period

Ra/o#of#Total#R&D#

100%#
80%#
60%#
40%#
20%#
0%#
1#

2#

3#

4#

5#

6# 7# 8#
Period#

9# 10# 11# 12#

Figure 6. Optimal R&D investments without diminishing returns to research, under no carbon limit (top)
and under a carbon limit (bottom).

1400#

solar#
wind#
nuclear#
hydro#
gas_ct#
gas_ccgt#
gas_old#
coal_ccs#
coal_new#
coal_old#

1200#
1000#
GW#

800#
600#
400#
200#
0#
1#

2#

3#

4#

5#

6#

7#

8#

9# 10# 11# 12#

Period#

Figure 7. Optimal installed capacities without diminishing returns to research, under a carbon limit.

39

60%#

wind#

Ra/o#of#Total#R&D#

50%#

solar#

40%#

coal_ccs#

30%#

nuclear#

20%#
10%#
0%#
0.05#

0.15#

0.25#

0.35#

0.45#

R&D#investment#Eﬃciency#(b)#

Figure 8. Peak optimal R&D investments for various R&D efficiencies (value for
Possibilities Frontier) under a carbon limit.

in the Innovation

60%#
wind#

Ra/o#of#Total#R&D#

50%#

solar#

40%#

coal_ccs#

30%#

nuclear#

20%#
10%#
0%#
0.1#

0.2#

0.3#

0.4#

0.5#

0.6#

0.7#

0.8#

Knowledge#Stock#Strength#(phi)#

Figure 9. Peak optimal R&D investments for various knowledge stock strengths (ϕ values in the
“Innovation Possibilities Frontier”) under a carbon limit.

40

