                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          EDUCATION, HIV, AND EARLY FERTILITY:
                          EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM KENYA

                                             Esther Duflo
                                            Pascaline Dupas
                                            Michael Kremer

                                         Working Paper 20784
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20784


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2014


We are extremely grateful to Abhijit Banerjee for his essential inputs on the model, and to Prof. Samuel
Sinei and Dr. Vandana Sharma for their medical expertise and invaluable support. We thank the Kenya
Ministry of Education, the Kenya Institute of Education, ICS Africa, and IPA Kenya for their collaboration,
and Carolyne Nekesa, Grace Makana, and their field team for their dedication and scrupulous care
collecting the data. We thank the editor, two anonymous referees, Frank Schilbach, Rachael Meager,
and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments; and to Abdulla Al-Sabah, Jeff Guo, Rachael
Meager, Santiago Saavedra and Zhaoning Wang for outstanding research assistance. We are also grateful
to a long list of outstanding field research assistants. We list them in chronological order: Jessica Leino,
Jessica Morgan, Owen Ozier, Ian Tomb, Paul Wang, Willa Friedman, Anuja Singh, Jinu Koola, Jessica
Leight, Bastien Michel, Sara Hernandez, and Thomas Ginn. The funding for this study was provided
by (in alphabetical order): the Hewlett Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, the NIH, the Nike Foundation,
the Partnership for Child Development, and the World Bank. We thank them, without implicating
them, for making this study possible. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Education, HIV, and Early Fertility: Experimental Evidence from Kenya
Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer
NBER Working Paper No. 20784
December 2014
JEL No. I12,I25,I38,O12

                                           ABSTRACT

A seven-year randomized evaluation suggests education subsidies reduce adolescent girls' dropout,
pregnancy, and marriage but not sexually transmitted infection (STI). The government's HIV curriculum,
which stresses abstinence until marriage, does not reduce pregnancy or STI. Both programs combined
reduce STI more, but cut dropout and pregnancy less, than education subsidies alone. These results
are inconsistent with a model of schooling and sexual behavior in which both pregnancy and STI are
determined by one factor (unprotected sex), but consistent with a two-factor model in which choices
between committed and casual relationships also affect these outcomes.


Esther Duflo                                      Michael Kremer
Department of Economics, E17-201B                 Harvard University
MIT                                               Department of Economics
77 Massachusetts Avenue                           Littauer Center M20
Cambridge, MA 02139                               Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                          and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu                                    mkremer@fas.harvard.edu

Pascaline Dupas
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pdupas@stanford.edu
1       Introduction
Early fertility and sexually transmitted infections (STIs), chief among them HIV, are ar-
guably the two biggest health risks facing teenage girls in sub-Saharan Africa.1 Since un-
protected sex can lead to both early pregnancy and STIs, a natural assumption is that any
policy that reduces unprotected sex will be effective at fighting both. However, policies which
affect the choice between having a committed relationship with a single partner and having
multiple casual partners may differentially affect teen pregnancy and STIs. Pregnancy may
be relatively more likely in committed relationships while STIs may be relatively more likely
in casual relationships. We argue that taking this distinction into account is essential to
understanding the impact of different policies on teen pregnancy and STIs.
    This paper provides evidence on how STI prevalence and teen pregnancy are affected by
two leading policy instruments (and their interaction): education subsidies and HIV pre-
vention education focused on abstinence until marriage. In conjunction with the Kenya
Ministry of Education, the Kenya National AIDS Control Council, and the non-profit ICS
Africa, we conducted a large randomized evaluation involving 328 schools in Western Kenya
to compare the effectiveness of two programs conducted stand-alone or jointly: 1) the Ed-
ucation Subsidy program, which subsidized the cost of education for upper primary school
students by providing two free school uniforms over the last three years of primary school;
and 2) the HIV Education program in which three teachers in each primary school received
government-provided training to help them deliver Kenya’s national HIV/AIDS curriculum,
which, like many other curricula in Africa and some U.S. states, emphasizes abstinence until
marriage as the way to prevent infection. We also estimate the impact of the HIV education
program augmented with a small add-on component explicitly stressing condoms within the
boundaries of the curiculum. We assess the short-, medium- and long-term impacts of these
two programs, implemented alone or jointly, on sexual behavior, fertility, and infection with
HIV and another STI, Herpes Simplex Virus type 2 (HSV2), using a panel dataset that
covers a cohort of around 9,500 girls and 9,800 boys over 7 years. For both HIV and HSV2,
a positive test result at a point in time reflects having ever been infected with the disease.
    The study involved 328 schools in Kenya’s Western Province. All students enrolled in
grade 6 in 2003 were sampled for the study and followed for seven years, from age 13.5 to
20.5 on average. Follow-up rates were very high. After 7 years, 54% of the sample could
be interviewed and almost all of them agreed to be tested for HIV and HSV2. A random

    1
      Pregnancy in adolescence is associated with greater risks for the mother as well as the child, including
premature delivery (Trussell and Pebley, 1984). While part of this association reflects the greater prevalence
of teenage pregnancy among the socially and economically disadvantaged, there is a clear direct causal impact
of biologic immaturity (Fraser et al., 1995).


                                                      2
subsample of 29% of the remainder was then selected for intensive tracking, and 81% of them
could be found and surveyed, for an effective follow-up rate at endline of 91%. The resulting
data set is unique due to the combination of its size, the length of the panel, the successful
tracking rate, the availability of biomarkers for HSV2 and HIV, and the randomized two-by-
two design. HIV prevalence was extremely low in the sample, so we focus on HSV2 as our
measure of exposure to STIs. Fertility is much less easily observable for boys, so we focus
on girls for the fertility results.
    We find a nuanced set of results:

  1. When implemented alone, the education subsidy program significantly reduced pri-
     mary school dropouts for both boys and girls and delayed the onset of girls’ fertility.
     Specifically, the program reduced the dropout rate after three years from 19% to 16%
     for girls and from 13% to 10% for boys, and the girls’ teen pregnancy rate fell from
     16% to 13% within that time period. This reduction came entirely through a reduc-
     tion in the number of pregnancies within marriage, and there was no change in the
     out-of-wedlock pregnancy rate. By year 7, there was still a 7% gap in the childbearing
     rate between girls exposed to the education subsidy program and those in the control
     group (46% vs. 49%). However, the education subsidy alone did not reduce the HSV2
     infection rate among either girls or boys.

  2. The HIV education program implemented alone did not significantly reduce teenage
     pregnancy, the risk of HSV2 infection, or schooling attainment among either boys or
     girls. For girls, the program led to more early pregnancies within marriage and fewer
     early pregnancies outside of wedlock, however.

  3. When the two programs were implemented jointly, fertility fell less than when the
     education subsidy was provided alone, but HSV2 infections fell more (and significantly).
     Girls who received the combined program were 20% less likely to be infected with HSV2
     after 7 years (a drop from 11.8% to 9.5%). There was no significant impact on the
     HSV2 infection rate among boys.

  4. Finally, the add-on component to the education program that specifically introduced
     a discussion on condoms led to greater knowledge of condoms but no more reported
     use, and did not significantly change results (2) and (3) above.

The results for girls are surprising because the STI and teenage pregnancy results are not
aligned. The only program that reduced STI prevalence (the joint program) is not the
program that had the largest impact on pregnancy (the stand-alone education subsidy).
The joint program had a smaller effect on girls’ teenage pregnancies than the stand-alone


                                              3
education subsidy, but a larger effect on HSV2 prevalence. We argue that this result is
not compatible with a simple one-factor model in which the level of unprotected sex jointly
determines both pregnancy and STI rates.
    These results are, however, consistent with a richer model of sexual behavior with three
features which are realistic in our context. First, teenage girls choose not only a level of
unprotected sex, but also choose between “committed” partnerships (in which girls have
a single partner who they believe is also committed to them, and will marry them in the
event of a pregnancy), and casual sex, in which there is no expectation of marriage. The
costs of pregnancy are perceived to be lower in committed than in casual relationships.
Second, schooling and pregnancy are incompatible. This is a reasonable feature since, in
many settings, including ours, pregnant girls historically have been expelled from school
and the practice continues de facto if not de jure.2 This makes the opportunity cost of
pregnancy higher for girls who want to and are financially able to go to school than for
girls who (or whose parents) have already chosen not to invest in schooling. The third
feature is that girls perceive STI risk to be higher in casual than committed relationships,
and the government’s HIV/AIDS education program focused on abstinence until marriage
strengthens this perception. Since the cost of pregnancy and the risk of STIs are lower
in committed relationships, in the model girls have more unprotected sex in committed
relationships than in casual relationships.
    While we do not present a formal test of the model, we show that it generates a series
of comparative statics consistent with the data. First, education subsidies lead girls to
have less unprotected sex (to avoid pregnancy), conditional on choosing either committed
or casual relationships, but can also lead some girls to switch to casual relationships, since
committed relationships entail a higher risk of becoming pregnant and having to leave school.
Thus, education subsidies reduce teenage pregnancy, but they may not reduce STIs if casual
relationships indeed carry greater STI risk and if unprotected sex is relatively inelastic to
STI risk for a substantial fraction of girls. This seems plausible in our context, since just
over one third of sexually active unmarried 15-19 year old girls in Kenya had ever used a
male condom as of 2008-2009 (KNBS and ICF Macro, 2010).
    Second, when the perceived STI risk from casual relationships increases, as with the ab-
stinence until marriage message of Kenya’s national HIV prevention curriculum, unprotected
sex within casual relationships decreases. But a change in perceived STI risk from casual
sex also causes some girls to shift from casual to committed relationships. Since unprotected
sex is more frequent within committed relationships than casual ones, the overall effect on

   2
     See Baird, McIntosh and Ozler (2011) for evidence that marriage/fertility and schooling are mutually
exclusive in Malawi, and Ozier (2011) for additional evidence from Kenya.


                                                   4
teenage pregnancies and STIs is ambiguous, but the share of teenage pregnancies that are
out-of-wedlock unambiguously decreases (and this is indeed the only significant impact we
observe for the stand-alone HIV education program).
    Finally, when both programs are implemented jointly, girls have greater incentive to avoid
pregnancy so they can take advantage of cheaper education, but they also think that casual
relationships carry higher STI risk. As a result, the joint program may have qualitatively
different effects than would be suggested by a reduced form analysis of the two programs
considered individually. In particular, for appropriate parameter values, the joint program
will reduce unprotected sex within each type of relationship, but without causing the switches
between relationship types generated by either program in isolation. A joint program may
thus reduce STI risk, even if neither program does so in isolation. However it will lead to
a smaller drop in pregnancy and a smaller increase in education than an education subsidy
program alone. While the quantitative predictions depend on specific parameters, we show
that the set of results we observe can indeed be obtained. This does not rule out other
multi-factor models and we discuss alternative interpretations as we discuss the model. The
main take-away, though, is that we are able to rule out a single-factor model.
    The model suggests that certain institutions and features common in much of Africa
may influence the results. In particular, results might differ if pregnant girls did not have to
leave school, or if the elasticity of unprotected sex to perceived risk was higher, for example
due to more widespread acceptance of condoms. HIV curricula in African schools typically
emphasize abstinence until marriage, but one could imagine alternative programs designed
to increase condom acceptability.
    The paper contributes to three distinct strands of literature. First, we contribute to
the literature on the link between education and fertility. In developing countries, studies
have generally found a strong causal relationship between increases in education and reduced
fertility (see for example Breierova and Duflo (2004) in Indonesia, Osilii and Long (2008)
in Nigeria, Ozier (2011) in Kenya, Keats (2014) in Uganda, and Lavy and Zablotsky (2011)
on Israeli-Arab women).3 Our finding that girls at the margin of dropping out of school in
Kenya are able to delay pregnancy when the cost of education is reduced suggests that, for
that age group, fertility and schooling decisions are often jointly made. This is consistent
with recent evidence from India presented in Jensen (2012), who finds that an increase in

   3
     In developed countries the evidence is more mixed. Currie and Moretti (2003), Black et al. (2008),
Monstad et al. (2008) all find strong impacts, while McCrary and Royer (2011), using cutoff for age at school
entry, do not. But as Conti et al. (2012) show, the difference may come from the fact that different studies
estimate different parameters and for different subpopulations: McCrary and Royer (2011) exploit an extra
year of education that takes place in early childhood, while the other studies, like ours, estimate the effect
of being in school as a teenager or young woman.


                                                      5
young women’s perceived returns to education increased educational attainment and reduced
marriage and fertility.
    Second, we contribute to the literature on prevention of sexually transmitted infections
among African girls. It is sometimes feared that involuntary sex is so common that edu-
cation or incentive programs focusing on girls will have no impact on STIs. Yet, there are
surprisingly few rigorous studies with objective biomarker outcome data on this issue (see
McCoy et al., 2010, for a review). An important exception is in Malawi, in which monthly
cash transfers to the families of out-of-school girls significantly reduced HIV infection rates
after 18 months (Baird et al., 2012). Another exception is a community trial in rural Tanza-
nia, which found that a comprehensive adolescent sexual health program (which combined
in-school sexual health education with community-based condom promotion and distribu-
tion) significantly affected HIV knowledge and attitudes, but did not consistently reduce
STIs (including HIV) in either the short- or the long-run (Ross et al., 2007; Doyle et al.
2010). With 20 communities, the study may have lacked power, however. Dupas (2011),
in the same setting as ours, shows that informing girls that cross-generational relationships
are particularly risky is more effective in reducing early pregnancies than Kenya’s official
abstinence-until-marriage message curriculum, but she does not have STI data.
    Third, we contribute to the literature on the link between education and STI risk. Evi-
dence from both developed countries (see Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2010, for a review) and
developing countries (Thomas, Strauss and Henriques, 1991) suggest that greater educa-
tional attainment reduces unprotected sex. Existing evidence on the relationship between
educational attainment and HIV status in Sub-Saharan Africa is mixed, however.4 In the
Kenyan context, we find that for girls at the margin of dropping out of school, the increase in
educational attainment brought about by the education subsidy was not sufficient, by itself,
to reduce exposure to STIs – at least over the first seven years.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides some background on
the context and the study design. Section 3 describes the data. We discuss the short- and
medium-run results in Section 4, and the long-run results in Section 5. Section 6 presents a
model of sexual behavior and schooling decisions that can account for the findings.

   4
      Using nationally representative DHS surveys, Fortson (2008) finds evidence that education is positively
correlated with HIV infection. De Walque (2007) finds that, in Uganda, the more educated were more
likely to change their behavior in response to the national HIV risk information campaign than those with
less education. Iorio and Santaeulalia-Llopis (2011) use DHS data from 18 countries to test whether the
relationship between education and HIV status varies as the HIV epidemic progresses, and find evidence of
nonstationarity, with the relationship being positive at both the early and very late stages of the epidemic,
and negative at intermediate stages. Outside of the HIV literature, Jensen and Lleras-Muney (2012) finds
that a randomized intervention that increased schooling among men in the Dominican Republic reduced
risky behavior (such as heavy drinking and smoking), mainly by changing subjects’ resources and peers.


                                                     6
2     Background: Context and Study Design
2.1    Background
    Education Though Kenya abolished school fees in 2003, primary education still entails
other expenditures. All children in Kenyan schools wear uniforms, and at around $6 (or
1.6% of per-capita GDP) in 2003, uniforms constitute by far the largest out-of-pocket cost of
education in government primary schools. Historically, headmasters often sent children home
telling them that they could only return when they had a uniform. With the introduction
of free primary education, the Ministry of Education announced that this practice should
not continue, but de facto, students face strong social pressure to wear a uniform and most
do. The provision of free uniforms has been shown to reduce absenteeism in younger grades
(Evans, Kremer and Ngatia, 2009).
    Since grade repetition and late school entry are common, many students are 15, 16, or
even older, by the time they reach the end of primary school in eighth grade, and many pupils
in upper grades are sexually active. While enrollment in the early grades of primary school
is nearly universal, many students leave school before completing eighth grade, especially
girls. In the comparison schools in our sample, about 30% of girls and 21% of boys who
reach sixth grade drop out before completing eighth grade.

    Sexual Norms Primary school children in Kenya are not supposed to be sexually
active. Girls who become pregnant typically have to leave school. Conversely, once a girl
leaves school, sex and marriage are expected. Traditional marriage involves a brideprice, but
most couples in our sample “elope” without a brideprice payment and without a marriage
ceremony. Indeed for teenage girls who are not in school there is little stigma to pre-marital
sex and pregnancy that quickly leads to marriage, and marriage is potentially more attractive
than staying at the parental home, where teenage girls bear a large share of household chores.
Couples are considered married if they are living together, and we use that definition in this
paper.
    Some scholars argue that condoms are seen as something one uses with casual partners,
not committed partners, and therefore part of the meaning of not using a condom is that
one is in a trusted, committed relationship (Mash, Mash and De Villiers, 2010). Condom use
within marriage remains limited, with only 1.8% of married women reporting using condoms
in the latest nationally representative Kenya Demographic and Health Survey (KNBS and
ICF Macro, 2010). Condom use among sexually active unmarried women was 18%.




                                              7
    School-Based HIV education The Kenyan government established a national HIV/AIDS
curriculum for primary school with the assistance of UNICEF. Following the UNICEF-backed
model, the planning process was based on extensive consultation within Kenyan civil society.
Kenya is a religious society, and the Catholic church, various protestant denominations, in-
cluding very active evangelical groups, and Muslim organizations are the most organized and
politically influential civil-society stakeholders on this issue. These religious groups favored
prevention messages focusing on abstinence until marriage. The resulting curriculum teaches
the biology of AIDS and HIV transmission, care for people living with AIDS, and preven-
tion. The prevention component stresses abstinence until marriage, followed by faithfulness
in marriage as the most effective way to prevent sexually transmitted infections, and teaches
skills such as saying no and resisting peer pressure. The official textbook does not mention
condoms or contraception. Condoms can be discussed in class at the teacher’s discretion or
in response to questions, but the teachers’ handbook only mentions condoms as a prevention
strategy for married individuals. This type of curriculum is far from unique to Kenya: the
UNICEF model Kenya followed is a standard one, and the underlying strength of religious
organizations is also common. Curricula stressing abstinence until marriage are the norm in
many African countries, and in much of the U.S. as well.
    In our detailed review of the teaching-learning material, we identified a single (narrow)
window of opportunity to discuss condoms, however: the teachers’ handbook proposes to
organize a debate on whether condoms should be discussed in class. As discussed below we
took advantage of this opportunity to explicitely control the degree to which condoms were
mentioned in some schools.


2.2    Study Design
We study two programs implemented through a partnership between the NGO ICS Africa,
the Kenyan Ministry of Education, the Kenya Institute of Education, and the Kenya Na-
tional AIDS Control Council. The first program reduced the cost of education by providing
free school uniforms. The second program trained teachers on how to deliver the national
HIV/AIDS prevention curriculum to upper primary school students. We also evaluate a small
add-on component to the government-run teacher training designed to foster the discussion
of condoms, in order to check whether an explicit discussion of condoms in a curriculum
otherwise focused on abstinence and fidelity could affect behavior.




                                             8
Sample and Randomization The study took place in all 328 public primary schools
in seven divisions of two districts of Western Kenya: Butere-Mumias and Bungoma.5 None
of these schools had participated in any prior randomized evaluation that we know of. All
schools agreed to participate. Schools were stratified and assigned to one of four arms
using a random number generator: (1) Control (82 schools); (2) Stand-Alone Education
Subsidy program (83 schools); (3) Stand-Alone HIV Education program (83 schools); (4)
Joint Program (80 schools).6
    Table 1 presents school-level summary statistics by treatment group. Differences across
treatment groups are small in magnitude, and only four of 65 p-values estimated are smaller
than 0.10, suggesting that the randomization was effective at creating balance between the
groups.

Education Subsidy Between february and July 2003, ICS distributed free school uni-
forms to boys and girls enrolled in grade 6 at the onset of the school year (January).7 In
fall 2004, ICS distributed a second uniform to the same students, if they were still enrolled
in the same school (regardless of their grade). It was announced at the onset of the pro-
gram that students still enrolled in the same school would be eligible for a second uniform
after 18 months.8 The total education subsidy, delivered over two years, amounted to just
around $12 per student, or 2.5% of average annual household income in the study area at
the time.9 Given these magnitudes the income effect created by the education subsidy was
likely negligible, and we expect the subsidy to mostly affect the demand for education and
fertility through a price effect.

HIV education In 2002 the Kenya government started a large-scale effort to train teach-
ers on HIV education, based in part on data suggesting that in the absence of training, many
teachers were uncomfortable teaching the official HIV/AIDS curriculum. In 2003, ICS Africa
   5
      We use the 2003 district names and boundaries, although redistricting has taken place since then.
   6
      Block randomization (stratification) was used. The following variables were used to create the strata:
administrative zone, the quartile in which the school performance fell in the 2002 national examination,
and whether the school’s gender ratio among upper primary pupils was above or below the median in 2002.
76 of the 82 strata had exactly 4 schools in them, and in those strata schools were randomly assigned to
experimental arms using a random number generator. In the three strata with three schools, the experimental
arm that was dropped was randomized. Likewise, in the three strata with five schools, the experimental arm
that was included twice was randomized.
    7
      Baseline enrollment was collected from all schools before announcing the education subsidy program,
and only those on the original baseline enrollment list were eligible for free uniforms. Transfers across
treatment groups were negligible.
    8
      It was not logistically feasible to find students who transferred schools and provide them with a uniform.
    9
      Duflo, Kremer and Robinson (2011) estimate that households in the study area produce around $100
per year on their farm (net of costs) and earn $31 monthly from other sources, bringing average annual
income to just below $500.


                                                       9
helped implement the national training program for 184 primary schools by providing logis-
tical and financial support. The 184 schools selected for the HIV Education program were
asked to send three upper primary teachers to participate in a five-day training program.10
    The training sessions were conducted jointly by one facilitator from the AIDS Control
Unit of the Ministry of Education (MoE), two facilitators from the Kenya Institute of Edu-
cation (KIE), and one trained staff member from ICS Africa. Teacher training included basic
facts on HIV/AIDS, a condom demonstration, information on voluntary counseling and test-
ing, and HIV/AIDS education methodology. Because training was primarily done by MoE
and KIE staff and was based on the officially approved curriculum, the content should be
similar to that delivered in other parts of Kenya. At the same time, since the sessions were
facilitated and observed by ICS Africa and members of the research team, we do know they
were well run and teacher attendance was good. In addition to receiving training on how
to deliver HIV information in the classroom, teachers were advised to set up health clubs
to deliver HIV information outside of the classroom. A year after the training, 86% of the
schools in the program had established health clubs.11

    Since the curriculum leaves almost no space for teachers to provide information about
condoms, we were interested in testing whether exploiting the existing window to the maxi-
mum extent possible would affect the impact of teacher training on student knowledge and
behavior. This is important for policy, since only an intervention taking place within the
existing curriculumn could be potentially scaled up (if effective) without major rethinking.
From the perspective of understanding adolescent behavior, it was also important to try to
generate exogenous variation in awareness of condoms (a potential way to protect oneself
against both STI and pregnancy) without affecting access to condoms. Thus, during the
school year 2005, two years after the implementation of the education subsidy and HIV ed-
ucation teacher training, a random subset of schools that had participated in the teacher
training were sampled for an additional intervention called “Critical Thinking” (CT). This
add-on was targeted at students in grades 7 and 8 in 2005 (many of whom, given the high
repetition rate, were in grade 6 in 2003, i.e. in our study cohort). Schools sampled for
CT were encouraged to organize a debate on the motion: “School children should be taught
how to use condoms”, a motion suggested in the official Facilitators’ Handbook (p. 66, KIE

  10
      Since schools have 14 teachers on average, the training program covered around 21% of teachers in
program schools. Schools were encouraged to send at least one female teacher to the training; headmasters
were encouraged to attend themselves or to send their deputy. Compliance with the training was high, with
93% of training slots filled.
   11
      Other study area schools did not receive training during the time sample students were in school, and
as far as we know, have still not received training, since government efforts to train teachers stalled in the
mid 2000s.


                                                     10
1999). The debate was followed by an essay competition on the theme: “Discuss ways in
which you can protect yourself from HIV infection now and at later ages in your life”.12 Both
debates and essay writing are established practices in Kenyan schools, and teachers agreed
to organize these activities in 95% of sampled schools. At the time, none of these schools
had previously organized a debate or essay competition on these specific topics, which sug-
gests that these topics were most likely never discussed in non-CT schools, and thus the CT
encouragement appears to have created the intended exogenous gap in students exposure.


3        Data and Estimation Strategy
3.1      The Data
The sample consists of 19,289 students (9,487 girls and 9,802 boys) enrolled in grade 6 at the
onset of the study (2003). Short- and medium-run data on school enrollment, attendance,
marital status and childbearing status was collected through regular school visits between
2003 and 2007. A rich array of longer-run data was collected through a follow-up survey
with study participants in 2009-2010.

3.1.1     Short- and Medium-Run Outcomes: “Roll Call” Data

Seven unannounced school visits were conducted over five years. At each visit, the list of all
those in our baseline sample was read aloud to upper-grade students present at the time of
the visit, and for each name on the list, attendance was recorded, and for absent students,
the following questions were asked: Is X still in school? If yes, in what grade? If no, does
she still live in the area? Is she married? Does she have any children? If so, how many?
How old is her first born? Is she currently pregnant? We use this roll call data to create
dummy variables for “dropout”, “ever married”, “ever pregnant”, etc.
    To check whether this roll call method generates accurate data on childbearing and
marital outcomes, a random subsample of 1,420 girls were visited at home in 2006 for a
quality control exercise. Girls reported as having started childbearing were oversampled.
Information was collected from the subject in 44% of cases and in other cases it was collected
from a relative, typically the mother. Appendix Table A1 presents the rates of consistency
between the roll call data and the data collected through the quality control exercise, as
well as how these rates vary across treatment groups. Since there was up to a four-month

    12
     The essays were graded by staff members of ICS Africa. In each school, a school bag was given as a
prize for the best essays by a boy and by a girl in each of grades 7 and 8. Prizes were handed out in public,
and the best essay from across all CT schools was read aloud during each school’s prize-giving ceremony.


                                                     11
gap between the roll call and the home visit data, the home visit data is itself not 100%
accurate, and therefore the consistency between the two would not be 100% even if the roll
call data were perfect. Given this, the level of consistency appears high. 83% of those who
were reported as not having started childbearing had indeed not started, and 79% of those
who were reported as having started childbearing by their former schoolmates had indeed
started childbearing. The longer the time between the roll call and the home visit, the
lower the consistency rate, unsurprisingly. The consistency level is greater when we look
at the “ever had a child” outcome (rather than ever started childbearing, which includes
current pregnancies). Overall, the roll call method appears to provide remarkably accurate
information (if we take the information obtained through home visits as “true”). Importantly,
the level of consistency between the two sources does not appear to vary across groups.

3.1.2   Long-Run Outcomes: The Long-run Biomarkers Follow-Up Survey

In 2009-2010, on average seven years after the two programs had taken place, a long-run
follow-up was conducted, including measurement of two biomarkers: HIV and Herpes Sim-
plex Virus Type 2 (HSV2). Herpes is almost exclusively sexually transmitted and is a serious
disease in its own right. What’s more, herpes can create lesions which can facilitate HIV
transmission (Grosskurth et al., 1995; Corey et al., 2004). Oster (2005) estimates that high
prevalence of STIs such as herpes is a major contributor to the HIV/AIDS epidemic in sub-
Saharan Africa. Herpes leads to the lifelong presence in the blood of antibodies against
HSV2, thereby providing a permanent marker of having ever been infected with HSV2, and
thus an objective proxy for relatively risky sexual behavior in the past (Obasi, 1999). HSV2
was selected as the primary biomarker because a preliminary study we conducted with a
similarly aged cohort found HSV2 prevalence to be greater than 10%, but prevalence of
other sexually transmitted infections was much lower (Chlamydia, Gonorrhea, Trichomonas
Vaginalis and HIV were all less than 5%.)
    The long-run follow-up survey was administered either at a local meeting location to
which the respondent had been invited, or at the respondent’s home if she had not come
to the meeting point. The survey included questions on sexual behavior, past and current
sexual partners, marriage, and fertility, as well as educational attainment. Half of the study
participants had been pre-selected randomly to be offered voluntary counseling and HIV
testing (VCT). VCT was done at the end of the survey by the surveyors, who were all
government-certified VCT counselors. Finally, at the end of the follow-up survey, all respon-
dents were directed to a mobile clinic for HSV2 testing. (Those surveyed at home were given
a voucher for a free HSV2 test to be performed at the mobile clinic).
    Conditional on being successfully tracked for the follow-up survey, compliance with HSV2


                                             12
testing was remarkably high, at 96% on average, and comparable across groups. Compliance
with VCT was also very high: 87% of girls and 88% of boys surveyed agreed to receive VCT,
and this was not differential across groups.
    The long-run follow-up survey started in March 2009. By August 2010, 10,651 youths
(55% of the study cohort) had been tracked. This is a relatively high rate given the challenges
in locating members of a mobile population of school-leavers, many of whom had married
outside their initial villages. Of these, 97.5% had been interviewed, 2% had been identified
as dead, and less than 1% had refused to be interviewed or were deemed mentally unfit for
the interview.13
    In August 2010, 29% of the 8,638 respondents who had not been tracked yet were ran-
domly sampled for intensive tracking.14 Between September 2010 and March 2011, teams of
field officers and lab technicians traveled to various locations in Kenya and Uganda to inter-
view selected respondents at their current homes. 77.5% of girls and 84% of boys sampled
for intensive tracking were successfully surveyed. This brings the effective tracking rate (in
the terminology of Orr et al., 2003 and Baird et al., 2011) to 0.51 + 0.49 × 0.775 = 89% for
girls, and 0.59 + (0.41) × (0.84) = 93% for boys.15


3.2     Attrition
Appendix Table A2 shows attrition in the roll-call data on school participation, marriage
and fertility after three and five years. There is no evidence of differential attrition for any
outcome, except for dropout information after five years.
   Appendix Table A3 shows attrition in the long-term (7-year) follow-up data. Survey
rates during the first phase of tracking (the regular tracking, or RT, phase) were significantly
higher in the treatment groups than in the control group, especially among girls (column 2).
Column 3 presents estimates of the survey rates, showing that intensive tracking (IT) rates

   13
       The follow-up rate was higher among boys (59%) than girls (51%), due to a combination of factors.
First, because the society is patrilocal, boys were more likely to still live at home with their parents, and thus
easier to find. Second, conditional on having moved to another location within the study area, boys were
easier to find than girls. This is because girls are less likely to stay in touch with their parents or guardians
once they have moved, especially if they have moved to marry.
    14
       We randomly sampled 1/3 of those still in their district of origin and 1/5 of those outside their home
district.
    15
       While not as succesful as the 95% household re-contact rate achieved in Indonesia by IFLS3 (Thomas et
al., 2012), our effective individual tracking rate of 91% after 7 years compares favorably with already highly
successful panel data collection efforts conducted in the same area of Western Kenya with youths. Following
up on 7,500 children sampled in 1998, Baird et al. (2011) achieved an effective tracking rate of 85% after 6
years, and 83% after ten years. Following up on around 3,000 adolescent girls sampled in 2001, Friedman
et al. (2011) achieved an effective tracking rate of 80% after four years. Another important panel data set
is the Cape Area Panel Study, a 5-wave longitudinal study with 4800 urban youths from South Africa aged
11-22 in 2002. The recontact rate in that panel was 81% after three years (Lam et al., 2011).


                                                       13
were insignificantly greater among those exposed to either program than among the control
group, and significantly greater under the joint program than in the control group. All in
all, the sample that could be followed up after 7 years over-represents those that received
the education subsidy only or the joint program (column 4). Incorporating sampling weights
(column 5) does not solve this problem fully for girls in the joint program arm, since the
intensive tracking rate was higher in that arm.16 Finally, there is a 25 to 30 day difference
between the average survey date for the control group and the average survey date for the
three treatment groups, but no difference across treatment groups (column 9). Given that
the daily incidence of HSV2, pregnancy and other outcomes is very low, this difference, while
significant statistically, is negligible in magnitude.
    To test whether attrition in the long-run follow-up survey was differential in terms of
underlying, unobserved characteristics, we check whether the treatment effects observed in
the roll call data are changed when we estimate them on the follow-up subsample rather
than the full sample. The idea is that, if attrition in the long-run follow-up biased the
comparability of our groups in any way, then short-run treatment effects estimated using
that subsample would differ from the “true” short-run treatment effects estimated on the
full sample. We perform this analysis in Table A4 for one outcome (having ever started
childbearing – results for other outcomes are similar and available upon request). We find
that the estimates of the short- and medium-run treatment effects on childbearing measured
through the roll call method are very much comparable when estimated on the full sample
for which roll call data is available (columns 1 and 4 – those are the “true” effects), or on
the subsample for which long-run data could be collected after 7 years (columns 2 and 5
– again, these would be biased estimates of the true effects if attrition were differential).
Not surprisingly since the estimates are virtually identical in the full sample and the sample
with attrition, the sampling weights correction, while decreasing precision, does not affect
the estimates much (columns 3 and 6). All in all, the estimated short-run treatment effects
using only the long-run follow-up sample are virtually identical to those using the full sample,
even without using the sampling weights. This provides some confidence that differences in
other long-run outcomes (in particular STI, the one variable for which we do not have roll
call data) can be interpreted as causal treatment effects.


3.3       Estimation Strategy
The impact of the two stand-alone programs and the joint program can be evaluated by
comparing outcomes across groups in a simple regression framework. For each individual-

  16
       This is not due to refusals to be tested, which were rare and not related to treatment status.


                                                       14
level outcome, the estimation equation is:

                                                         0
                      Yis = α + βSs + γHs + δSHs + Xs µ + ηAgei + εis                        (1)

where Yis is the outcome for student i enrolled in school s at baseline; Ss is a dummy variable
equal to 1 for schools in the stand-alone education subsidy arm; Hs is a dummy variable
equal to 1 for schools in the stand-alone HIV education arm; SHs is a dummy variable equal
to 1 for schools in the joint program arm; Xs is a vector of school level controls (timing of the
data collection, school size, and randomization stratum); and Agei is student i’s age. Error
terms are assumed to be independent across schools, but are allowed to be correlated across
observations in the same school (i.e. the standards errors are clustered at the school level).
We present results with sampling weights, which ensure that our final follow-up database is
representative of (almost) the entire initial study population, but as mentioned above results
are very similar when the estimation is done without sampling weights.
    In equation 1, β measures the effect of the stand-alone education subsidy; γ measures
the effect of the stand-alone HIV education program; and δ measures the effect of the joint
program.
    In all tables that follow, we present estimates of equation 1 for a series of outcomes. In
each table, Panel A presents the estimates for girls and Panel B presents the estimates for
boys. At the bottom of each panel, we show the mean of the dependent variable for the
control group, and we present the p-values for tests of the hypotheses that the effect of the
joint program is equal to that of either of the two stand-alone programs, or equal to the
sum of the two stand-alone programs (i.e., we test for β = δ, γ = δ and γ = β + δ). We
report OLS linear probability model regressions. The results are qualitatively unchanged
with probit or logit specifications for binary outcomes (results available upon request). The
results are unchanged when we add school-level controls (such as teacher-pupil ratio, school
performance on national exams, whether the school is rural or semi-urban, etc.).
    For brevity, we ignore the randomized critical thinking (CT) intervention among H and
SH schools in the main analysis (Tables 2, 3 and 4). We show the CT results in Table 5,
using the following specification:

                                                                           0
 Yis = α + βSs + γHnoCTs + δSHnoCTs + δct HCTs + γct SHCT + Xs µ + ηAgei + εis (2)

    where HnoCTs is equal to 1 for the subset of stand-alone HIV Education schools that
were not selected for the add-on critical thinking intervention (CT) in 2005, SHnoCTs is
equal to 1 for the subset of joint program schools not selected for the CT intervention, HCTs
is equal to 1 for the subset of stand-alone HIV Education schools randomly selected for the


                                               15
CT intervention, and SHCTs is equal to 1 for the subset of joint program schools randomly
selected for the CT intervention.


4         Short- and Medium Run Results: Roll Call Data
Table 2 presents estimated effects within three to five academic years after the onset of the
study, obtained from the roll call data. We report the results first for girls, and then for
boys. Note that fertility is much better observed for girls, which makes the results for girls
more interesting. As discussed above, we pool the schools with and without the add-on
CT intervention when estimating the impact of the HIV education program and the joint
programs. We will break those down by CT treatment status in section 5.3.


4.1         Impact of the stand-alone education subsidy on girls
The stand-alone education subsidy led some girls to remain in school (Table 2, column
1). While 18.8% of girls in control schools had dropped out after three years, those in the
education subsidy program were 3.1 percentage points less likely to do so, a 16.5% decrease
significant at the 5 percent level. Note that this is a suprisingly large effect for a small
transfer that had presumably little or no income effect. Also note that “marginal” girls were
not less likely to regularly attend school: The program did not affect attendance conditional
on enrollment (column 2).
    The stand-alone education subsidy also substantially reduced teenage pregnancy. After
three years, 16% of girls in the control group had ever been pregnant. This share was 2.7
percentage points (17%) lower in schools with the stand-alone subsidy (Table 2, column 4).
After five years, there was still a gap of 4.4 percentage points in the likelihood of having
ever been pregnant between the stand-alone subsidy group and the control group (Table 2,
column 9). This gap is larger in absolute terms than after three years, but corresponds to a
smaller treatment effect in percentage terms, since the childbearing rate in the control group
rose from 16% in year 3 to 33% in year 5 for the control group. Nonetheless, it suggests that
fertility among girls in the subsidy group did not catch up as soon as the subsidy ended.
Indeed, we can reject not only the hypothesis that demand for fertility was simply bottled
up during the program years when girls were in school and released afterwards, but also the
hypothesis that the hazard rate of starting childbearing was the same in the stand-alone
education subsidy group and the comparison group after year 3, when girls who did not
repeat grades would have left school.17 This suggests that at least part of the effect of

    17
         Among girls who had not yet started childbearing by year 3, 15.7% got pregnant between years 3 and


                                                      16
education on fertility goes beyond what Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2004) refer to as the
“incarceration effect” of schooling on teen fertility.
    Column 5 of Table 2 shows that the stand-alone education subsidy did not decrease
unwed (i.e., single-parenthood, given our definition of marriage) pregnancy, suggesting that
it exclusively reduced within-marriage pregnancy. Column 6 shows that the incidence of
marriage with no child did not increase. Together these results suggest that the pregnancies
averted were primarily among girls who, had it not been for the education subsidy, would
have dropped out of school and settled in a committed relationship. Indeed, girls in the
subsidy program were 2.6 percentage points (20%) less likely to be married (column 3).
    Overall, the reduction in the number of girls who started childbearing was almost as large
as the reduction in the number who dropped out of school. It would seem tempting to use
columns 1 and 4 of Table 2 (or columns 7 and 9) as, respectively, the first stage and the
reduced form of an instrumental variable strategy of the effect of education on early fertility.
However, this would not be legitimate: this instrumental strategy would be valid only under
the assumption that the education subsidy had no direct effect on the pregnancy status of
girls. Under the model we develop in section 6, this identification restriction will not hold
because sexual activity and the propensity to drop out are jointly determined. The model
implies that reducing the cost of education will induce some girls to reduce unprotected
sexual activity to avoid becoming pregnant and to stay in school longer, invalidating the use
of the education subsidy as an instrument for education. But it remains that for each girl
who stayed in school thanks to the program, there was one early pregnancy averted. This
is a large effect and suggests that investing in ways to keep girls in school could have large
returns in terms of preventing early fertility.18


5 in the comparison group. This proportion was 2.5 percentage points lower (the difference being significant
at the 5 percent level) in the stand-alone education subsidy group.
    18
       Respondents may have under-reported pregnancies that ended through abortion. To the extent that
the education subsidy increased the cost of pregnancy, it could have increased the incidence of abortion. We
did not directly ask about abortions during the roll-call data collection at school, though students did report
some abortions or miscarriages. It is quite possible that students did not know of abortions that girls had.
The long-run follow-up survey directly asked respondents: “Have you ever had a pregnancy that miscarried,
was aborted, or ended in a stillbirth?”, and if they said yes, we asked how many of those they had. 2.88%
said yes, and of those, 90% had only one such pregnancy. Below, we include those pregnancies in the “ever
pregnant” dummy variable based on the long-run follow-up data presented in Table 3. So conceptually, the
long-run follow-up data is measured correctly and the similarity we will find between Tables 2 and 3 results
is reassuring. That said, it is possible that abortions are underreported in our data, to the extent abortion
is illegal in Kenya. For the same reason, they also are likely rare, especially among adolescents. One indirect
way to look at it is via death, as illegal abortions are extremely dangerous. The death rate we observe
at the 7-yr follow-up is shown in column 1 of Table A2. It is lower, not higher, among girls (1.3%) than
boys (1.6%). In fact the relative female death rate in our sample is lower than the relative average female
death rate in sub-Saharan Africa for age group 15-19 (Anderson and Ray, 2010, Table 2). We also find no
differential death rates across treatment arms.


                                                      17
4.2     Impact of the stand-alone HIV education program on girls
Several pieces of evidence suggest that the teacher training affected teacher behavior in the
classroom. Focus group discussions (not shown) confirmed that the training increased the
likelihood that teachers talked about HIV in class. In particular, students in schools where
teachers had been trained were 50% more likely to report that at least one teacher had
mentioned HIV/AIDS in the previous week.19 A self-administered survey, distributed among
students enrolled in grades 7 and 8 in 2005, suggests the HIV education program increased
the likelihood that students report that teachers mentioned HIV in class and moderately
increased students’ knowledge about HIV (see Table A5).
    While the HIV education program changed the content of education, it did not affect
educational attainment. Coefficient estimates of the impact of the stand-alone HIV education
program on schooling attainment are very small in magnitudes and insignificant (Table 2,
columns 1 and 7, row 2). The teenage pregnancy rate also did not fall significantly in
response to the stand-alone HIV education program. The point estimate of program impact
on pregnancy is close to zero after 3 years, and almost exactly zero after 5 years (Table
2, columns 4 and 9). We can reject equality with the effects of the stand-alone education
subsidy on pregnancy and on dropout at a level below 1% in all cases.
    Although the HIV education program did not reduce overall teen fertility, it changed
the type of pregnancies (in or out of wedlock). Unwed pregnancy is 1.4 percentage points
lower among teenage girls exposed to the HIV education curriculum (Table 2, columns 5 and
10). This corresponds to a drop of 30% over the first three years and 18% over the first five
years.20 The point estimates for the effect on marriage are positive but insignificant (Table
2, columns 3 and 8), but the likelihood of marriage without pregnancy was significantly
increased by the HIV education program, however: such early, non-shotgun marriages are
rare (only 1.2% of girls had engaged in such a marriage after 5 years), but almost doubled
in the stand-alone HIV education group (+0.9%, column 11).
    Taken together, these results suggest that the stand-alone HIV education program may
have switched unprotected sexual activity from outside to within marriage. Consistent with
   19
      Focus group discussions were held with students enrolled in grades 6 and 7 in early 2004, about one
year after teachers had been trained. The focus group discussions were conducted separately with 5 boys
and 5 girls randomly chosen among students present in class during an unannounced visit.
   20
      It is unclear what the consequences will be, either for mothers or for their children, of the decline in
unwed / single-parenthood teen births in the stand-alone HIV education group. There is a strong negative
association between being raised by a single mother and outcomes in the U.S. (Harper and McLanahan, 2004;
Ellis et al., 2009), but it is unclear how much of this effect is causal. In any case the impact could potentially
be different in a rural African setting, in which care within the extended family setting (in particular by
grandparents) is common, especially if the mother is a teenager. Case and Ardington (2006) and Evans and
Miguel (2007) find negative effects of paternal orphanhood on children in a similar setting, but being born
to a single-mom may be different from becoming a paternal orphan after birth.


                                                       18
this, the HIV education program also increased the likelihood that students mention faith-
fulness as a means to prevent HIV, consistent with the idea that it moved pupils toward
committed relationships (Table A5 column 9).


4.3    Impact of the joint program on girls
Arguably the most surprising result in the roll call data is that the HIV education program,
which is ineffective on its own, seems to reduce the impact of the education subsidy, both
on schooling and on fertility. Indeed, the effect of the joint program (Table 2, row 3) on
dropout is only half that of the stand-alone subsidy, and not significant at conventional levels
(the t-statistic for the effect on education is 1.33 after 3 years (column 1) and 1.5 after 5
years (column 7)). After 3 years, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the effect of the joint
program is the sum of the effects of the two stand-alone programs, but after 5 years, we can
reject additivity (the effect of the joint program is lower than the sum of the two stand-alone
programs).
    When it comes to pregnancy risk, the estimated effect of the joint program is less than
half that of the stand-alone education subsidy. Again, that effect is not significant after
three years (column 4). Two years later, the effect of the joint program on pregnancy had
diminished even further compared to that of the stand-alone education subsidy (column 9).
    Finally, the point estimate suggests that girls who received the joint program were exactly
as likely to be married as girls who received neither program (column 3). For pregnancy and
marriage, we can reject the null hypothesis that the effects are the same for the joint program
and for the stand-alone education subsidy. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that the
joint program has the same effect as the stand-alone HIV education program, however.


4.4    Impacts on boys
The impacts of the programs on boys’ education are similar to those observed for girls:
the stand-alone education subsidy program reduced the dropout rate after 3 years by 2.5
percentage points, corresponding to a 19% reduction compared to the control group. After
5 years, the dropout rate was still 3.9 percentage points lower. The point estimate of the
impact of the joint program on educational attainment is somewhat smaller (1.5 percentage
points after 3 years, with a t-stat of 1.5). There is also a small but significant drop in
marriage within three years (similar across the stand-alone education program and the joint
program) and even a reduction in observed paternity after three years, significant only for
the joint program (0.6 percentage point, out of a mean of 1.1 percentage points). The stand-
alone HIV education program had no impact whatsoever except for a negligible impact (in


                                              19
terms of magnitude) on attendance while enrolled.
    The effects on boys could be direct program effects or the equilibrium consequences
of changed incentives for their female classmates. We favor the first explanation for two
reasons. First, because we see similar impacts of the stand-alone education subsidy and
joint program on education, marriage and fertility, which suggests a simple direct causal link
from the desire to stay in school to reduction in early marriage and acknowledged paternity
(our understanding is that only those children who are supported by their father show up
boys’ reports of paternity). Second, the effect on marriage and fertility for boys appear
too big to be an equilibrium consequence of the changed incentives for the girls in their
class. Teenage girls typically marry men who are about six years older on average, not their
classmates. Our follow-up data suggests that in the comparison group, only 4% of the 12.8%
of girls who had married by year 3 (so overall 0.5% of girls) had married a boy their age
or up to one year older. Even under the extremely conservative assumptions that (1) these
are all within-school marriages (which is itself unlikely since marriage among even distant
relatives is not culturally allowed and students in a given school are often related to each
other), and (2) this proportion falls to zero in the stand-alone education subsidy group, the
GE effect would explain only about half of the fall in marriage we observe among boys.


5     Long-Run Effects: The Biomarkers and Survey Data
5.1    Education, Marriage, and Fertility
The estimations of equation (1) on the long-run outcomes measured through the follow-up
survey are presented in Tables 3 and 4.
    Reassuringly, the estimated program effects on schooling, marriage and fertility after
seven years are consistent with the estimated effects based on the roll call data. Namely,
the stand-alone education subsidy increased educational attainment and decreased the risk
of teenage pregnancy and marriage. The probability of being pregnant by age 16 falls by
2.2 percentage points in the stand-alone education subsidy group (Table 3, column 7), a
magnitude similar to the 2.7 percent reduction in teen pregnancy found in the roll call data
after three years. The fertility effect, which persisted from the three-year to the five-year
follow-up, continues through the seven-year follow-up, although estimates are noisy. The
point estimate of the impact of the stand-alone education subsidy on the probability of
having ever started childbearing in the long-run follow-up is 3.4 percentage points (Table
3, column 4). The p-value is just 0.12 however. As in the roll call data, the stand-alone
HIV education program had no significant impact on schooling and overall fertility; its



                                             20
effect on being unmarried while having ever been pregnant is still negative but it is not
significant anymore after seven years. This is not too surprising since it is common for single
teenage mothers to marry someone else later. Finally, the joint program had the previously
discussed muting effect on the ability of the education subsidy to improve schooling and
decrease pregnancy for girls.


5.2    Long-Run Impacts on Sexually Transmitted Infections
Besides confirming the roll call results, the key new piece of evidence provided by the long-
run follow-up data is STI exposure. These results are presented in Table 4. Column 1 shows
the estimated program effects on infection with HIV, and column 2 shows those for infection
with HSV2. The first interesting result is that HIV infection in our cohort is remarkably low
– at less than 1% among both boys and girls in the control group. While it implies that this
particular study, despite its very large sample size, is not powered to estimate the impact
of the programs on HIV transmission, this low infection rate is extremely good news, and
an important result in its own right. The overall STI risk level is not negligible, however,
as evidenced by the relatively high rate of infection with HSV2, at 11.8% among girls and
7.4% among boys in the control group (column 2).
    Despite reducing teen pregnancy, the stand-alone education subsidy program did not
decrease HSV2 infection. This is not a statistical power issue: the estimated coefficient is
positive, though not statistically significant, and we can reject any reduction of 1.8 percentage
points (15%) or more in girls’ risk of being infected with HSV2 at the 5% level. At best, any
reduction in STI is therefore very modest. Likewise, the stand-alone HIV education program
also did not have any significant impact on HSV2 infection for either gender, and once again
the point estimate is positive.
    The joint program, in contrast, reduced HSV2 prevalence by 2.3 percentage points (sig-
nificant at the 10% level) among girls, a 19% decrease compared to the control group.
Furthermore, we can reject equality of the effect of the joint program and either of the
stand-alone programs at the 5% level. The effect of the joint program relative to the stand-
alone subsidy on STI infection is opposite of that observed for pregnancy: HSV2 prevalence
is 3.2 percentage points lower under the joint program group than under the stand-alone
education subsidy (p-value: 0.013), while in Table 2 (column 9) we saw that teen pregnancy
was 3.3 percentage points higher under the joint program than under the stand-alone edu-
cation subsidy (p-value: 0.058). These differences in means are not driven by outliers or a
number of specific schools. Figure 1 shows the distribution of pregnancy (Panel A) and HSV2
(Panel B) rates across schools by treatment groups – the distributions for the stand-alone



                                               21
education subsidy group and the joint program group are markedly different throughout,
and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests reject equality between these distributions at the 5% level.
    For boys, however, the joint program had no significant effect on HSV2 infection rates,
and we cannot reject that all three programs had the same effect.
    Note that these results do not tell us the effect of the various programs on lifetime STI
risk. We cannot, for example, rule out the possibility that girls who marry later will be
exposed to the same risk of infection within marriage but have a greater chance of infection
prior to marriage. Alternatively, girls who marry later may have more power within the
relationship and therefore a lower risk of infection within marriage.


5.3    Impact of the Critical Thinking (CT) Intervention
Table 5 presents estimates of equation 2, in which the joint program and stand-alone HIV
education groups are subdivided into two subgroups, with and without the CT intervention.
We present results on all the main outcomes discussed so far (in the short-, medium- and
long-run).
    Column 1 of Table 5 shows that the CT intervention was successful in reaching its prox-
imate objective: students in schools sampled for CT are more likely to mention condoms as
a way to protect themselves in schools where it was conducted. This is the case in no other
subgroup, which is consistent with our understanding of the curriculum and the way it was
taught in schools. However, there is no report of greater use of condoms among either girls
or boys in response to the CT intervention (column 11). This is not because condoms are
never used: 49% of boys and 28% of girls report using a condom last time they had sex.
For the other outcomes, the group with CT seems to behave similarly to the groups without
CT. For example, the reduction in drop out rate after 3 years is 1.8 percentage points in
the joint program without CT and 1.5 percentage points with CT (column 4) (compared to
3.1 percentage points for the education subsidy program alone), and the reduction in the
rate of HSV2 is 3.1 percentage points in the joint program without CT and 1.4 percentage
points in the joint program with CT (this is a smaller reduction than without CT and is
not significant, but this is the second highest point estimate after the joint without CT).
We interpret this evidence as suggesting that information about condoms is not, by itself,
sufficient to significantly affect behavior. Indeed, even in the CT schools, there was no strong
endorsement or effort to shift norm: condoms were mentioned only as something that should
(or should not) be talked about, and both positions were argued in the debates.




                                              22
5.4    Summary of Results
The stand-alone education subsidy program reduced dropout rates, pregnancy, and marriage,
but did not reduce HSV2 infection. The stand-alone HIV education program had no effect
on HSV2 infection or pregnancies, although it reduced the fraction of out-of-wedlock teen
pregnancies. An add-on critical thinking intervention introducing a debate on condoms in
schools where teachers were trained does not change this result.
    Each of these sets of effects make sense on its own. Yet the combination of these effects
and those of the joint program poses a puzzle: Why did the joint program have a smaller
effect on girls’ teenage pregnancies than the stand-alone education subsidy, but a larger effect
on HSV2 prevalence? In the next section, we propose a model which captures important
aspects of sexual behavior among adolescents in our context and which, under reasonable
assumptions, can yield such a pattern of results.


6     Model
Understanding the education subsidy results clearly calls for a model in which education and
levels of unprotected sex are jointly determined. We now propose such a model. We will
argue that understanding the full pattern of results requires moving beyond a model in which
both STI risk and pregnancy are determined by a single factor, the level of unprotected sex,
to a two-factor model with at least one factor differentially affecting pregnancy and STI
probabilities. We introduce relationship type (committed vs casual) as such a second factor
and show that the resulting two-factor model can match all our empirical results.
    In the model, girls choose whether to invest in education, whether to have sex within
casual or committed relationship(s) (or conceivably both), and how often to have unprotected
sex. When choosing how much unprotected sex to have and in which type of relationship,
girls take into account the risks and costs of sexually transmitted infection and pregnancy.
Committed relationships may have lower pregnancy costs and lower perceived and actual
risks of STI per unprotected sex act. We model Kenya’s HIV prevention curriculum as
affecting the perceived relative risk of casual relationships.
    The model nests a simpler model with no distinction between committed and casual
relationships, and thus only one relationship type, as a special case. We show that our
empirical results are inconsistent with the predictions of this simpler one-factor model but
can be generated by the two-factor model.
    Note that the decision of how much unprotected sex to have encompasses both how much
sex to have and whether to use condoms. This is done for concision. One could instead



                                              23
separate the two decisions: how much sex to have, and how much protection to use (with
a convex cost of protection). We had done this in a previous version of the model, but this
does not yield useful insights: the two margins respond similarly to the variations in the
environment that we consider, and have the same impact in terms of observable objective
outcomes, namely HSV2 and pregnancies.21


6.1     Setup
Suppose that girls can have sex in two types of relationships: committed (that is, a faithful
relationship with a fixed partner, with the view of future marriage, particularly in case of
pregnancy), indexed by m (as in marriage), or casual, indexed by c. Denote the level of
engagement in these types of unprotected sexual relationships as sm and sc respectively, and
let the total amount of unprotected sex be s = sm + sc . In theory, agents may participate in
both kinds of relationships simultaneously such that sm > 0 and sc > 0, but for simplicity of
the analysis we assume in what follows that such “mixing”, as we refer to it, is not optimal.
In the appendix, we discuss conditions under which it is not optimal to mix, and we carry
out the analysis below assuming these conditions hold.
    It is useful to begin by separately analyzing the benefits and costs of unprotected sex
by relationship type. Denote the benefit of having unprotected sex s in the absence of
pregnancy or STI risk as u(s). Note that u(s) includes any possible inducements from
partners, including gifts and payments. We assume that in the absence of STI and pregnancy
risks, there is some utility-maximizing level of unprotected sex s, so u0 (·) > 0 for all s less
than s, and u0 (·) < 0 above s. The idea that the optimal level of sex is bounded above in
the absence of any risk will be helpful to rule out such high level of sex that individuals
become fatalistic. It also matters for the conditions needed to avoid mixing different types
of sex (given the functional forms below). We also assume u00 (·) < 0. We do not rule out the
possibility that u0 (0) < 0, so some girls prefer abstinence. Note that we use the same utility
function u(s) for both types of sex, which means that we abstract from the fact that girls
may prefer either committed or casual relationships, depending on their own preference for
relationship type, the inducements offered for each type of relationship, and any idiosyncratic
preferences for particular partners, who may themselves prefer, or be eligible for, particular
types of relationship (e.g. boys the girls’ age may not be able to afford to marry, while
older men may be more able to do so). Adding such idiosyncratic preferences for one type of
  21
     Treating the decision to use a condom and the decision to have sex separately could potentially have
been useful to interpret the results of the critical thinking (CT) intervention if it had reduced the cost of
protection –through, say, a change in information or sexual norms regarding condoms, and thus increased
condom use. But as we saw above, this does not seem to be the the case, since reported condom use as well
as fertility and STI outcomes were not affected by the CT intervention.


                                                     24
relationship or the other does not affect the predictions below. Note also that depending on
the shape of the u(·) function, unprotected sex may either be elastic or inelastic to pregnancy
cost and STI risk. If many girls are on the margin of whether or not to use condoms, for
example, even small increases in either pregnancy cost or STI risk could have large effects
on pregnancy and STI rates.
    Unprotected sex carries risks of both STI and pregnancy. The perceived probability of
getting an STI is π(sc , sm , am , ac ), where ai is the perceived chance of infection per unpro-
tected sex act. This perceived chance of infection per unprotected sex act is indexed by i as
it may potentially depend on the nature of the relationship, committed or casual. We assume
that the perceived risk of infection per unprotected act is weakly lower in committed than
in casual relationships: am ≤ ac . There could be a number of reasons for this. First, casual
partners may be perceived as more likely to be infected; second, having multiple partners
increases opportunities for exposure; and third, riskier sexual acts may be chosen in casual
relationships (e.g. anal sex to avoid pregnancy). Also note that ai , the perceived chance of
infection per sex act, which is what enters the maximization problem, may be different from
the actual probabilities of infection per unprotected sex act, which we denote as a∗i .
    For any agent, the overall perceived probability of contracting an STI takes the form

                            π(sc , sm , ac , am ) = 1 − (1 − ac )sc (1 − am )sm

If an agent chooses to have only sex of type i, s−i = 0 and this function collapses to
π(s, ai ) = 1 − (1 − ai )s .
    The cumulative perceived probability of pregnancy is v(sc , sm , bc , bm ), where v ∈ [0, 1]
is increasing in the level of any kind of unprotected sex, si , and the perceived chance of
pregnancy per unprotected sex act of this type, bi . We assume that the perceived risk of
pregnancy is lower in casual relationships than in committed relationships: bm ≥ bc . This
is a somewhat “reduced form” way of allowing the cost of preventing pregnancy (but not
necessarily STI) to be lower in casual relationships; e.g. girls could have a greater ability to
shift sexual activity away from fertile time periods, or in the choice of sex acts; for example,
anal sex, as above, would increase the probability of contracting an STI but reduce the
probability of pregnancy per sex act.22 We impose the same specific functional form for the
perceived overall probability of pregnancy as for the probability of STI, that is,

                             v(sc , sm , bc , bm ) = 1 − (1 − bm )sm (1 − bc )sc .


  22
     At the extreme, if we imposed the risk of pregnancy to be zero in casual relationship, the second factor
in the model can be interpreted as the choice between vaginal and anal sex, instead of commited vs casual.


                                                      25
      Now that we have specified the probabilities for STI and pregnancy, we turn to the utility
impacts of each of these two risks.
      Contracting an STI generates a utility cost D. Pregnancy generates a direct utility
increment, B, but this utility sharply decreases in the event that the agent is not supported
by the child’s other parent, which may happen with some probability if the agent is having
sex with more than one person. Thus, Bm , the benefit of pregnancy under exclusive marital
sex is greater than Bc and, importantly for the proof in the appendix that girls will typically
not chose to mix even if we allow it in the model, the benefit of pregnancy is Bc for any level
of casual sex. 23 This utility structure follows the literature in anthropology and evolutionary
biology concerning monogamy in humans and other primates (see for example Fortunato and
Archetti 2009, Low 2007, Reichard and Boesch 2003, and Marlowe 2000): the idea is that if
a father finds out that the mother has been engaged in any level of sex with anyone else at
the same time as the committed relationship, he cannot be sure the baby carries his genes,
and loses interest in supporting her.
      Finally, pregnancy also affects utility because girls who become pregnant typically have
to leave school.24 The cost of this expulsion risk varies in the population due to heterogeneity
in the return to education. We assume earnings are y 0 + θy(e), with y(0) = 0, y 0 (e) > 0,
y 00 (e) < 0, lime→0 y 0 (e) = +∞, and lime→+∞ y 0 (e) = 0. Once a girl gets pregnant she cannot
invest in education: she then earns y0 . We assume the return to education varies among
girls due to differences in θ. We assume that the utility of having a child as a teenager is
never, in itself, worth the opportunity cost of pregnancy: Bi − θj y(e) is negative for i = m, c.
Finally let the cost of education be given by C(e) = eγ.25
      For simplicity in the analysis of the model, we focus on invidual variations in θ (returns
to education). Girls could of course differ in other ways, including in an intrinsic preference
in one kind of sexual activity over the other.
      If a girl chooses not to mix, utility for girl j under relationship type i and level of
unprotected sex s is:

        Uij (s, e) = ui (s) − π(s, ai )D + v(s, bi )(Bi + y0 ) + (1 − v(s, bi ))[y0 + θj y(e)] − eγ
                  = ui (s) − π(s, ai )D + v(s, bi )Bi + (1 − v(s, bi ))θj y(e) + y0 − eγ.

   23
       What matters is that there is a discrete drop in the benefit for pregnancy for any amount of casual sex.
It could be increasing in the amount of casual sex.
    24
       For parsimony, we focus on this source of the tradeoff between education and fertility, but this could also
be a reduced form formulation for the classic Beckerian mechanism in which the opportunity cost of children
is higher for more educated women with greater hourly wages. Indeed, the evidence of differential hazard
rates of childbearing post-subsidy (discussed in section 4.1) is consistent with this mechanism operating.
    25
       We assume that the cost of education is sunk at the beginning of the year but all our results go through
if we remove this assumption.


                                                       26
      With this set-up, we model the education subsidy program as lowering the cost of educa-
tion γ, and the HIV education program as increasing the perceived STI risk associated with
unprotected sex in casual relationships, ac . In the nested case without a distinction between
casual and committed relationships, it would raise both ac and am . The next subsections
provide comparative statics with respect to the two parameters γ and ac .
      In this analysis, we rule out the idea that, given high ai , a further increase in ai makes
people fatalistic so they choose to have more unprotected sex (for an example of this logic
see Kremer, 1996). The prevalence of HIV in our study population is low enough that
abstracting from fatalism in our context seems reasonable. To rule this out, we assume that
                                                                             −1
the utility-maximizing level of unprotected sex, s, satistifes: s̄ ≤ ln(1−a      i)
                                                                                    ∀i. This implies
that the cross derivative of π with respect to si and ai is positive in every case, that is,
∂ 2 π(si ,ai )
  ∂si ∂ai
               > 0.26 Likewise we rule out fatalism with regards to the risk of pregnancy by
                     −1
assuming s̄ ≤ ln(1−b    i)
                           ∀i. This implies that the cross derivative of v with respect to si and bi
                                             2
is positive in every case, that is, ∂ ∂s
                                       v(si ,bi )
                                         i ∂bi
                                                  > 0.
    Before we move on, it is worth mentioning a few limitations of the model as we set it
up. First, the model does not include a risk of rape. While this risk is real, the comparative
statics in the model would be qualitatively similar if all girls were subject to some constant
risk of pregnancy or STI infection through rape, unless this risk were so large as to induce
a fatalistic response to HIV/AIDS education, which our results do not suggest.
    Second, all costs and benefits of various types of relationships and of unprotected sex
are taking the marriage market and any transfers that are part of other sexual relationships
as given. We thus assume these do not change substantially in response to the programs.
We believe this assumption is reasonable for the purpose of understanding the treatment
effects in our field experiment, since only one cohort of students (those in grade 6 in 2003)
was affected by the programs, representing only a minority of adolescents in a given village.
Moreover, as discussed earlier, sexual partners of teenage girls are typically several years
older and therefore the boys directly impacted by the programs were unlikely to have been
potential partners for girls in the sample. Finally, strong norms against sex with even distant
relatives mean most marriages are outside of the immediate neighborhood, and while the
program covered many schools in the area, the treatment arm assignment of neigboring
schools would not be correlated with the treatment arm of a student’s own school.




  26
       To see this, note that it implies (1 − ai )si −1 > 0 and si ln(1 − ai ) + 1 > 0.


                                                          27
6.2    Choice of relationship type, unprotected sex, and education
To solve the utility maximization problem, we assume that agents must choose between the
two types of relationships (i.e. don’t mix). In the appendix we provide (realistic) conditions
on parameters under which this is true in our model. The underlying intuitions for these
conditions are straightforward. First, think about girls for whom the returns to being in
a committed relationship are positive. Introducing any positive amount of casual sex is
very costly for them, in the sense that it leads to an immediate drop in utility (since once
there is any casual sex in the mix, the girl cannot convince the supposed marital partner
that he is the father so the benefits of pregnancy drops from Bm to Bc ). Thus as long as
the the utility-maximizing level of unprotected sex, s, is not too high, they will not want
to introduce casual sex. Second, think about girls who choose some non-zero casual sex.
The main advantage for them to add marital sex in the mix (rather than more casual sex)
would be to decrease the STI risk, but this comes at the cost of increased pregnancy risk
and therefore increased risk of having to forego education. As long as this cost outweighs
the gain in terms of STI risk (which is not very restrictive a condition since girls who choose
casual sex have high returns to education), they will choose not to mix.
    In what follows, we assume these conditions (formalized in the appendix) hold. We thus
drop all i, j subscripts when the analysis is for a given individual and relationship type.
To solve for the optimal level of s, e and relationship type, it is necessary to consider the
Kuhn-Tucker conditions since the optimum could potentially be at a corner where e = 0 or
s = 0. As discussed in the appendix, comparative statics at the corners are either similar
to those at the interior solution or uninteresting because there is no change in behavior in
response to variations in the cost of education or perceived STI risk. We therefore focus on
interior optima below, leaving exposition of the general case for the appendix.
    Interior optima must satisfy the following first-order conditions:

                     ∂U            ∂π(s, a)       ∂v(s, b)
                        = u0 (s) −           D+            [B − θy(e)] = 0
                     ∂s              ∂s              ∂s
                     ∂U
                        = (1 − v(s, b))θy 0 (e) − γ = 0
                     ∂e

    Finally, for an interior solution the Hessian matrix must be negative definite, and hence
its determinant must be positive and the top-left entry negative. After replacing the second
order derivatives and the partial derivatives, this implies that interior solutions must satisfy:


                    ∂ 2U    00       ∂ 2 π(s, a)     ∂ 2 v(s, b)
                         = u   (s) −             D +             [B − θy(e)] < 0
                    ∂s2                  ∂s2             ∂s2


                                                28
                                                                  !2
                                       ∂ 2U ∂ 2U   ∂ 2U
                                detH =           −                     > 0.
                                       ∂e2 ∂s2     ∂s∂e

6.3    Comparative statics for s and e conditional on relationship
       type
We start with comparative statics conditional on relationship type, committed or casual, and
then examine (in the next subsection) how changes in parameters affect switching between
relationship types. We prove only the first lemma in the text: the other proofs follow exactly
the same logic and are in the appendix.

Lemma 1 When γ (the cost of education) increases, conditional on relationship type, the
optimal e decreases and s increases.

Proof. Taking the total derivative of the first-order conditions with respect to γ yields:

                                          ∂ 2U        ∂ 2U
                                               ds  +       de = 0
                                           ∂s2       ∂s∂e
                                     ∂ 2U       ∂ 2U
                                          ds +       de − dγ = 0.
                                     ∂s∂e       ∂e2
                                de         ds
Solving these expressions for   dγ
                                     and   dγ
                                              ,   we obtain:

                                                  ∂2U
                                                  ∂s2        de
                                                         =
                                              detH           dγ
                                                ∂2U
                                              − ∂s∂e   ds
                                                     =    .
                                              detH     dγ
                                                                              de             ds
The second-order conditions allow us to sign these expressions:               dγ
                                                                                   < 0 and   dγ
                                                                                                  > 0.

Lemma 2 When a (the perceived risk of STI) increases, conditional on relationship type, s
decreases and e increases.

Lemma 3 When b (the risk of pregnancy per sex act) increases, conditional on relationship
type, e decreases and the probability of pregnancy increases.

Lemma 4 When B (the benefit of pregnancy) increases, conditional on relationship type, s
increases and e decreases.

Lemma 5 When θ (the return to education) increases, conditional on relationship type, s
decreases and e increases.


                                                        29
6.4     Comparative statics: relationship type
Lemma 6 Given ac , am , bc , bm ,Bc , Bm , θ and γ, the incidence of pregnancy is lower and e
is higher in casual relationships than committed relationships.

Proof. This is trivially true given the lemmas above and the assumptions that in casual
relationships the benefit of pregnancy is lower (Bc ≤ Bm ), the probability of pregnancy per
sex act is lower (bc ≤ bm ), and the STI risk is higher (ac ≥ am ).
    The next step is to assess how changes in the parameters ai (perceived STI risk by
relationship type) and γ (the cost of education) affect which relationship type is chosen. We
focus in this section on the case in which casual and committed relationships are distinct,
and thus the inequalities discussed above (ac ≥ am bc ≤ bm , Bc ≤ Bm ) are strict. First, note
that lower returns to education make committed relationships relatively more attractive and
higher returns make casual relationships relatively more attractive.

Lemma 7 Given ac , am ,bc , bm , Bc , Bm , and γ, then either:
(1) all girls choose casual relationships or
(2) all girls choose committed relationships or
(3) there exists a threshold return to education θt such that girls with θ < θt choose committed
relationships and girls with θ > θt choose casual relationships.

Proof. Both Uc and Um increase in θ, but at different rates: dU    dθ
                                                                     i
                                                                       = (1 − v(si , bi ))y(ei ). Given
the result in lemma 6, v(sm , bm ) > v(sc , bc ) and em < ec . Therefore, dUdθm < dUdθ
                                                                                      c
                                                                                        . This implies
that, as long both types are chosen, there is a threshold level θt such that the individual
chooses to engage in type m (a committed relationship) if and only if θ < θt .
    The next step is thus simply to determine how the programs affect the threshold θt . The
following two lemmas are proven in the appendix:

Lemma 8 When γ (the cost of education) decreases, θt (the threshold return to education
above which girls choose casual relationships) decreases.

Lemma 9 When ac (the perceived chance of infection from an unprotected sex act in a
casual relationship) increases and am does not change, θt increases.

    These results are intuitive. Reductions in the cost of education, such as under the ed-
ucation subsidy program, increase utility in both committed and casual relationships, but
increase utility more in casual relationships (because e tends to be larger in casual relation-
ships). This leads more girls to choose casual relationships, and thus lowers the threshold
return to education beyond which casual relationships are chosen. Meanwhile, increasing


                                                  30
the perceived risks associated with casual sex, as we assume the official HIV prevention
curriculum does, decreases the relative value of casual relationships and thus increases the
threshold below which girls choose committed relationships.


6.5    Predictions
We are now ready to discuss the predictions regarding the impact of the three programs
(education subsidy, HIV training and joint program) on educational attainment, pregnancies,
and STIs.

Main predictions

Assume first that the impact of the education subsidy program is to reduce the cost of
education (model parameter γ), while the impact of the HIV education program is to increase
the spread between the perceived probability of contracting HIV and other STIs in casual
and marital relationships (a relative increase in ac compared to am ).

Proposition 1 A stand-alone education subsidy program reduces pregnancy and increases
educational attainment. It may either increase or decrease STIs.

Proof. Since the education subsidy reduces the cost of education, it reduces s and increases
e for girls in both casual and committed relationships. Moreover, it increases the number of
girls who choose casual, rather than committed, relationships. The education subsidy thus
unambiguously increases education and reduces teenage pregnancy.
    The education subsidy reduces STIs for girls who choose a committed relationship, but
by inducing some to choose casual relationships it may increase their risk. If a∗c is sufficiently
greater than a∗m and s remains positive, then STI risk will increase for those who switch to
a casual relationship. If a sufficient proportion of the population is close enough to the
threshold that they switch, overall STI prevalence will increase. On the other hand, if no
one switches to casual relationships or if a∗m is sufficiently close to a∗c , the reduction in s will
reduce STI prevalence.
    In the appendix, we introduce a numerical example which illustrates the ambiguous effect
of the education subsidy on STIs.

Proposition 2 If casual and committed relationships differ, the stand-alone HIV education
program increases early marriages and reduces the share of single-parenthood pregnancies, but
the overall impact on pregnancy and education is ambiguous. Likewise, it may either increase
or decrease STIs.


                                                 31
   If there is no difference between casual and committed relationships, the HIV education
program reduces both pregnancy and STIs.

Proof. An increase in the perceived risk of STI per casual sex act, ac , due to the HIV
education program, reduces unprotected sex and increases educational effort for those who
choose casual relationships. If committed relationships differ, they become relatively more
attractive, and so some may switch to those relationships. Since the probability of preg-
nancy is higher in committed than in casual relationships, the effect on teenage pregnancy
is ambiguous. However, there is an unambiguous decline in the share of teen pregnancies
that are out of wedlock. The effect on STIs is ambiguous. If no one switches relationship
type, then STIs will fall. If enough people switch to committed relationships and if a∗m is
sufficiently close to a∗c , then STIs may rise because the optimum s is higher in committed
relationships.
    Proposition 2 thus provides one way of distinguishing the proposed two-factor model
from the nested one-factor model without a relationship type distinction. Proposition 3
below provides another.

Proposition 3 If there is only one relationship type, i.e. if committed and casual relation-
ships are identical (a∗m = a∗c , am = ac , bm = bc , and Bm = B c ), then if the joint program causes
a greater reduction in STIs than either of the stand-alone programs, the joint program should
also cause a greater reduction in pregnancy than either of the stand-alone programs. If there
are two relationship types, this need not be the case.

Proof. If there is only one type of relationship, there is no switching. The only way programs
affect pregnancy or STI risk is by changing s. From Lemmas 1 and 2, we know that both
stand-alone programs reduce s, thereby reducing both pregnancy and STIs. If the joint
program causes a greater reduction in STIs than either of the stand-alone programs, then it
implies that it reduces the level of unprotected sex more than either program in isolation,
and therefore the reduction in pregnancy should also be greater.
    If there are two relationship types, the joint program may either increase or decrease
the threshold θt , because it pushes individuals in opposite directions: the education sub-
sidy reduces the relative appeal of committed relationships, but raising the perceived risk
of casual relationships pushes people towards committed relationships. Because switching
from committed to casual relationships reduces the probability of pregnancy and increases
educational effort, the joint program may reduce pregnancy by less than the stand-alone
education subsidy. However, the joint program can lead to a larger decrease in STIs than
under education subsidies alone, because the joint program generates fewer incentives to
switch to casual relationships.


                                                 32
Alternative interpretation of the interventions

In the previous section we have limited the effect of the education subsidy to matter only
through its impact on the opportunity cost of pregnancy. Education could also affect sexual
behavior via other channels. First, by reducing the opportunities to have sex. Second, by
increasing access to information, through direct exposure to education, and through a better
ability to process the information that is available in the environment (Rosenzweig and
Schultz 1989, Thomas, Strauss, and Henriques 1991). Third, the subsidized (new) uniforms
could also have increased girls’ dignity and self-respect, making it easier to say no to sex, or
to impose the use of condoms.
    These effects can in principle all be captured within the framework of our model. The
empowerment effect could be modeled as a reduction in the utility from unprotected sex
(which includes monetary inducement and intimidation), potentially both casual and marital.
The reduction in the opportunities to have sex can also be modeled in the same way (the
increase in the value of time reduce the marginal utility of sex, marital or casual). In both
cases, we would thus expect the education subsidy programs to reduce both pregnancies and
STIs.
    The information effect is the most interesting and potentially most complicated alterna-
tive mechanism to what we propose here, since it could have very different effects depending
on the information that is in fact provided in school and elsewhere in the environment. To
the extent the education subsidy intervention acts by increasing the exposure to information
available in school, however, one clear prediction is that it should re-inforce any impact of
the HIV education treatment. This implies that the joint program should have effects that
are larger in absolute value than those of the HIV education treatment (in the same direc-
tion). This implies in particular that if the stand-alone HIV education program decreases the
number of unmarried pregnancies, the effect of the joint program on unmarried pregnancies
should be larger. Also, to the extent that the HIV education training mainly reinforces the
message that is usually delivered in schools, the stand-alone education subsidy intervention
would have an impact that is similar to the impact of the HIV-education program
    There could also be alternative interpretations of how the HIV education program affects
the model parameters. We model it as increasing the perceived probability of STI in casual,
but not in marital, sexual relationships. This is based on our understanding of the salient
aspects of the HIV education curiculum. However, the implementation by teachers, or
children understanding of it, may be different from what we believe, leading to different
impacts. A first possibility is that condoms are in fact introduced by teachers, and that
increasing the knowledge of condoms does reduce the cost of protected sex. We can directly



                                              33
address this thanks to the randomized critical thinking add-on program. A second possibility
(raised by a referee) is that, perhaps due to fatalism, the HIV education program increases
the value of a pregnancy (possiby on top of the effect we introduce). Assuming the increase
is larger in committed relationships, this would lead to the same kind of comparative statics
as the predictions in our model (increase in the share of pregnancies within marriage, shift
towards marital relationships, and ambiguous impacts on STIs). This however seems unlikely
since we do not find evidence that the HIV education program affected the likelihood that
the first pregnancy was desired. There could also be an increase in pregnancies, but this may
not happen if the perceived probability of contracting STIs in a casual relationship increases
sufficiently.


6.6    Interpreting the data in light of the model
The data is compatible with the predictions of the model allowing for two relationship types.
The education subsidy reduced dropout and teenage pregnancy rates significantly, but not
STI rates, perhaps because casual relationships are indeed somewhat more likely to lead to
STIs than committed relationships. Training teachers on the official HIV curriculum did
not reduce teenage pregnancies but reduced the share of teen pregnancies out of wedlock,
consistent with the idea that it pushed people to choose committed relationships.
    The HIV education program did not reduce STI risk, presumably because the increase
in unprotected sex associated with moving to committed relationships counteracts the lower
average per-act risk of transmission in committed relationships. The joint program had a
weaker effect on both dropout and teen pregnancy rates than the stand-alone education
subsidy, but it reduced STI risk more than the stand-alone education subsidy.
    The finding that the joint program has a larger effect on STI than the education subsidy
alone (p-value = 0.013, Table 4, column 2) but a smaller effect on pregnancy (p-value = 0.058,
Table 2, column 9) allows us to reject the prediction of the single factor model (proposition 3)
that if the joint program causes a greater reduction in STI than either stand-alone programs,
it should also cause a greater reduction in pregnancy than that program. Note that we do
not just see an absence of this effect, which could then potentially be due to sampling error,
but statistically significant effects (at the 6% and 2% level) in opposite directions.
    To understand how the richer model’s predictions can indeed account for this pattern of
results, it is useful to consider an example in which girls are equally divided between four
levels of θ, such that in the control group, the two types with lower θ choose committed
relationships, and the two types with higher θ choose casual relationships. The HIV educa-
tion program reduces the STI risk unless it leads to a switch in relationship type (towards



                                              34
committed relationships) for those with the second to highest level of θ. If it leads to a
switch, it may increase transmission since s is higher among those in committed relation-
ships. The stand-alone education subsidy decreases STI risk, unless it leads the second to
lowest type to switch to casual relationships, in which case STI risk may remain unchanged
or increase. Finally, note that if the two stand-alone programs generate switching, but the
groups that switch are close enough to the threshold after the policy change, these groups
will not switch under the joint program and hence STI rates will fall unambiguously under
the joint program.
    In the model appendix, we provide a simple (and plausible) numerical example following
the discussion above, and show that we can replicate the patterns of our empirical results.
When the model’s parameters are set to match pregnancy and STI rates in the control
group, the numerical example delivers pregnancy and STI rates for each treatment group
similar to those observed in the data. Moreover, the direction and relative magnitudes of
the effects of each treatment in the numerical example match the data. In particular, with
our parameterization, the joint program produces the biggest drop in STI rates, but it does
not reduce pregnancy or dropout rates by as much as the stand-alone education subsidy
program.
    In contrast, our results do not appear to be compatible with the alternative interpreta-
tions of the interventions. Starting with the education subsidy intervention, the fact that
we do not see a reduction in both STI and pregnancies suggest that the effects of education
do not come only through the empowerment and opportunities to have sex. The fact that
the education subsidy intervention and the HIV education intervention have very different
effects, and that the impact of the joint program is in between, suggest that the main impact
of education is not to increase exposure to information provided in school. As for the HIV
education program, the results of the add-on critical thinking intervention suggest that the
introduction of information on condoms does not affect behavior (not even reported use of
condoms), suggesting that information on condoms cannot be the way the program oper-
ates. The comparative statics we observe are in principle compatible with an increase in the
value of pregnancy within marriage but only if there is also an increase in the fear of STI
outside marriage (otherwise we would see a net increase in pregnancies). We will show below
additional evidence suggesting that the value of pregnancies has not gone up significantly.


6.7    Additional evidence
The long-run follow-up survey includes self-reported sexual behavior data that can help check
whether we observe some of the pathways for the effects predicted under the model. This



                                             35
data, shown in Table 6 with specifications identical to those in Tables 3 and 4, needs to
be treated with considerable caution, as self-reports are easily tainted by social desirability
bias.27 Nevertheless, it is broadly consistent with the model. First, girls in the stand-alone
education subsidy schools are significantly less likely to report faithfulness as a way they
use to protect themselves (column 3). This is consistent with the model’s prediction that
education subsidies may lead girls to switch to casual relationships (assuming faithfulness
is an indicator of a committed relationship). The other effects are insignificant but all have
the right sign: girls in the stand-alone education subsidy schools are more likely to report
that they have never had sex, and more likely to report abstinence as one of the methods
they use to protect themselves from HIV, and they also have younger partners, consistent
with the shift to casual sex and away from sex with “committed” older men, i.e., those able
to marry them if a baby is conceived (Dupas, 2011).
    Second, girls in the stand-alone HIV education schools report having had their first
sexual experience at a younger age than the control group and, consistent with the model’s
prediction that HIV education may lead girls to switch to committed relationships, they
are significantly more likely to report faithfulness as a way they protect themselves from
HIV. They have slightly older partners, consistent with the idea that they are moving away
from casual relationships with men who are not likely to mary them. They are less likely
to report condom use, consistent with the model’s suggestion that the level of unprotected
sex s will be higher in committed relationships. While most of these effects have the sign
predicted by the model, we note that they are not statistically significant, except for the
results on faithfulness. The point estimate for the effect of the stand-alone HIV education
program on the likelihood that the first pregnancy was wanted is positive and relatively large
(a 3.7 percentage points increase off of a 30% mean) but not significant. This suggests that
the HIV education program may have increased the value of pregnancy within marriage,
although this is not the case in the joint program.
    For the joint program, the impact on faithfulness is not significant in either direction. The
increase in the number of girls mentioning abstinence is twice as high under the joint program
than under the stand-alone HIV education program, but that difference is not significant.
(Note that the model does not necessarily predict abstinence, just reduced unprotected sexual
activity, for which we do not have a good self-reported proxy).
    Table 7 provides further suggestive evidence, by looking at HSV2 prevalence within mari-
tal status and education categories. Of course such categories are endogenous, and therefore
  27
      For example, 4.6% of girls and 4.8% of boys who report that they never had sex test positive for HSV2
(this is still below the rate among those who report that they ever had sex, which is 14.6% on average, but
this indicates considerable underreporting of sexual activity). These figures are shown in the bottom row of
Table 7.


                                                    36
comparing HSV2 rates across categories (i.e., across rows of Table 7) is not particularly
informative. For example, married women are much more likely to be infected with HSV2
than unmarried women, but this likely reflects the fact that married women have more un-
protected sex (now and probably in the past as well) – it does not necessarily mean that,
conditional on the level of sexual activity, committed sex is riskier. What is potentially
more informative, however, is to compare categories across experimental arms (i.e., make
comparisons across columns of Table 7). For example, compared to the control group, under
the stand-alone education subsidy young women are slightly more likely to be HSV2 posi-
tive within each category, which is consistent with them moving towards more risky, casual
relationships. The reason why, despite this, the overall level of STI does not significantly
increase in the education subsidy group relative to the control group is that, as we saw ear-
lier in Tables 3 and 4, more girls stay in school (and hence unmarried), the safest group. In
contrast, prevalence is lower for girls in the joint program within each category, consistent
with the model’s prediction that the reduction in STIs does not come from a composition
change, but from a decline in unprotected sexual activity within each category.


7     Conclusion
It is widely believed that increasing female education is a critical step in reducing fertility
and improving maternal and child health in developing countries. This paper sheds light on
this important question. Using data from a randomized evaluation, we show that reducing
the cost of education by providing free uniforms reduces school dropout, teen childbearing
and early marriage. This suggests that girls have some agency regarding sexual activity.
Whether girls defer childbearing, however, depends on their beliefs about the value of mar-
riage. We find that HIV prevention curricula that focus on an abstinence-until-marriage
message increase early marriage and counteract the effects of increased access to schooling
on fertility.
    We also show that the interplay between perceived HIV risk, schooling opportunities
and early fertility is complex, and policies that focus on only one of these issues at a time
may have unanticipated effects. We find that combining an education subsidy with Kenya’s
abstinence-until-marriage curriculum can reduce the rate of STIs for young women, but it
does not reduce their risk of early fertility and it does not increase their schooling attainment
as much as the education subsidy implemented alone.
    We develop a model to interpret these results and can use the model to think through
counterfactual HIV prevention education programs. Indeed, it is important to recognize
that our results apply to a particular type of HIV education program in a particular context,


                                               37
even if both the program type and broad content are common. The model first suggests
that programs that increase the perceived risk of HIV associated with both casual and
committed relationships, rather than just casual relationships, could lead to less switching
to committed relationships, and thus potentially have greater effects on pregnancy, STI, and
dropout rates. The model also suggests results would be different in a context with greater
elasticity of unprotected sex due to greater condom acceptability. And of course a program
actively promoting condoms would have different effects.
    Despite the fact that we followed up with our study participants for an unusually long
period of time, our results are relatively “short-run.” The youths in our sample are only at
the onset of their adult life and we cannot speak to what their lifetime STI risk will be. More
than 50% of the girls in our study cohort were not yet married as of our last survey. These
girls will eventually marry and, depending on who they marry, might get infected through
their spouse.
    Nevertheless, our findings imply a particularly important role of the ability (and the
incentives) to stay in school: the reduction in teenage pregnancies obtained through the
education subsidy alone is almost as large as the reduction it caused in school dropouts.
This does not imply that every girl who did not drop out because of the program would have
had a child otherwise; some girls who would have stayed in school anyway if not pregnant
may also have been induced by the program to remain sexually inactive or use contraception.
Instead, this suggests that giving girls additional motivation to delay their first pregnancy
(the opportunity to go to school if they want to do so) is an extremely powerful (and
inexpensive) way to reduce early fertility. Most government and international efforts have
focused on ease of access to basic education (up to grade 6 or 9). Our results suggest that
education gains in the upper end of that range, or even secondary school, especially for girls,
may have a much larger impact on reducing early fertility than we would expect based on
the causal effect of years of primary education on early fertility.




                                              38
References
 [1] Anderson, Siwan and Debraj Ray (2010). “Missing Women: Age and Disease”, Review
       of Economic Studies 77, 1262–1300
 [2] Baird, Sarah, Richard S Garfein, Craig T McIntosh, and Berk Özler (2012). “Effect of
        a cash transfer programme for schooling on prevalence of HIV and herpes simplex
        type 2 in Malawi: a cluster randomised trial”. The Lancet. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-
        6736(11)61709-1
 [3] Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh and Berk Özler (2011). “Cash or condition? Evidence
        from a Randomized Cash Transfer Program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        126(4): 1709-1753.
 [4] Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Edward Miguel and Michael Kremer (2011). “Worms
        at Work: Long-run Impacts of Child Health Gains”. Mimeo.
 [5] Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux and Kjell Silvanes. (2008). “Staying in the classroom
        and out of the maternity ward? The effect of compulsory schooling laws on teenage
        births”. Economic Journal 118 (539): 1025-1054.
 [6] Breierova, L. and E. Duflo (2004). “The Impact of Education on Fertility and Child
        Mortality: Do Fathers Really Matter Less Than Mothers?” NBER Working Paper
        #10513.
 [7] Case, Anne, and Cally Ardington (2006). “The Impact of Parental Death on School
        Outcomes: Longitudinal Evidence from South Africa”. Demography 43(3): 401-20.
 [8] Conti, Gabriella, James J. Heckman, Hedibert F. Lopes, and Rémi Piatek (2012). “Con-
        structing Economically Justified Aggregates: An Application to the Early Origins
        of Health.” Forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.
 [9] Corey L, Wald A, Celum CL, Quinn TC. (2004). “The effects of herpes simplex virus-2
        on HIV-1 acquisition and transmission: a review of two overlapping epidemics.” J
        Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 35(5): 435-45.
[10] Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti. (2003). “Mother’s education and the intergenera-
        tional transmission of human capital: Evidence from college openings.” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 118(4): 1495–1532.
[11] Cutler, David, and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2010). “Understanding Differences in Health
        Behaviors by Education”. Journal of Health Economics, 29(1): 1-28.
[12] De Walque, Damien (2007). “How does the impact of an HIV/AIDS information cam-
        paign vary with educational attainment? Evidence from rural Uganda,” Journal of
        Development Economics, 84(2): 686-714.
[13] Doyle AM, Ross DA, et al. (2010). “Long-Term Biological and Behavioural Impact of
        an Adolescent Sexual Health Intervention in Tanzania: Follow-up Survey of the
        Community-Based MEMA kwa Vijana Trial.” PLoS Medicine, 7(6):e1000287.
[14] Esther Duflo, Michael Kremer and Jonathan Robinson (2011). “Nudging Farmers to Use
        Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya,” American Economic
        Review 101 (6): 2350-2390.


                                           39
[15] Dupas, Pascaline (2011). “Do Teenagers Respond to HIV Information? Experimental
       Evidence from Kenya”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1): 1-36.
[16] Ellis, Bruce, John E. Bates, Kenneth A. Dodge, David M. Fergusson, L. John Hor-
         wood, Gregory S. Pettit, and Lianne Woodward (2009). “Does Father Absence Place
         Daughters at Special Risk for Early Sexual Activity and Teenage Pregnancy?” Child
         Development 74(3): 801–821.
[17] Evans, David, Michael Kremer, Muthoni Ngatia (2009). “The Impact of Distributing
        School Uniforms on Children’s Education in Kenya”, mimeo, World Bank.
[18] Evans, David and Edward Miguel (2007). “Orphans and Schooling in Africa: A Longi-
        tudinal Analysis,” Demography 44(1): 35-57.
[19] Fortunato, L and Archetti, M (2009). “Evolution of monogamous marriage by maxi-
        mization of inclusive fitness,” Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 23: 149-156.
[20] Fraser AM, Brockert JE, Ward RH. (1995) “Association of young maternal age with ad-
        verse reproductive outcomes.” New England Journal of Medicine (332): 1113 –1117
[21] Friedman, Willa, Edward Miguel, Michael Kremer and Rebecca Thornton (2011). “Ed-
         ucation as Liberation?” NBER Working Paper #16939.
[22] Fortson, Jane (2008). “The Gradient in Sub-Saharan Africa: Socioeconomic Status and
        HIV/AIDS,” Demography, 45(2): 303-322.
[23] Grosskurth, Heiner, Frank Mosha, et al. (1995). “Impact of Improved Treatment of
        Sexually Transmitted Diseases of HIV Infection in Rural Tanzania: Randomized
        Controlled Trial,” The Lancet, 346: 530-536.
[24] Harper, Cynthia, and Sara McLanahan (2004). “Father Absence and Youth Incarcera-
        tion”. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 14(3): 369-97.
[25] Iorio, Daniela, and Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis (2011). “Education, HIV Status, and Risky
         Sexual Behavior: How Much Does the Stage of the HIV Epidemic Matter?” Mimeo.
[26] Jensen, Robert (2012). “Do Labor Market Opportunities Affect Young Women’s Work
        and Family Decisions? Experimental Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 27(2): 753-792.
[27] Jensen, Robert, and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2012). “Does Staying in School (and not
        Working) prevent Teen Drinking and Smoking?” Journal of Health Economics, 31(4):
        644-657.
[28] Keats, Anthony (2014). “Women’s Schooling, Fertility, and Child Health Outcomes:
        Evidence from Uganda’s Free Primary Education Program”. Mimeo, Wesleyan Uni-
        versity.
[29] Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS) and ICF Macro (2010). Kenya Demo-
        graphic and Health Survey 2008-09. Calverton, Maryland: KNBS and ICF Macro.
[30] Kenya Institute of Education (KIE) (1999). AIDS Education Facilitators’ Handbook.
        Nairobi, Kenya.
[31] Kremer, Michael (1996). “Integrating Behavioral Choice into Epidemiological Models
        of the AIDS Epidemic”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 549-73.


                                            40
[32] Lam, David, Cally Ardington, and Murray Leibbrandt (2011). “Schooling as a lottery:
       Racial differences in school advancement in urban South Africa.” Journal of Devel-
       opment Economics, 95(2): 121-136.
[33] Lavy, Victor, and Alexander Zablotsky (2011). “Mother‘s Schooling, Fertility, and Chil-
        dren‘s Education: Evidence from a Natural Experiment”. NBER Working Paper
        #16856.
[34] Low, B.S. (2007) “Ecological and socio-cultural impacts on mating and marriage
        systems.” In: Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology (R.I.M.Dunbar and
        L.Barrett, eds), pp. 449-462. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[35] Marlowe, F. (2000) “Paternal investment and the human mating system,” Behavioural
       Processes Volume 51, Issues 1-3, 45-61.
[36] Mash, Rachel, Bob Mash and Pierre de Villiers (2010). “‘Why don’t you just use a
       condom?’: Understanding the motivational tensions in the minds of South African
       women”. African Journal of Primary Health Care and FAmily Medicine (2): 1, 1-4.
[37] McCoy Sandra I, Abigail Kangwende, and Nancy S. Padian (2010). “Behavior change
       interventions to prevent HIV infection among women living in low and middle income
       countries: a systematic review.” AIDS and Behaviour, 14(3): 469-82.
[38] McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer (2011). “The Effect of Female Education on Fertility
       and Infant Health: Evidence From School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth,”
       American Economics Review 101(1): 158-195.
[39] Monstad, Karin, Carol Propper and Kjell Salvanes (2008). “Education and Fertility:
       Evidence from a Natural Experiment”. Scand. J. of Economics 110(4): 827–852.
[40] Obasi A, Mosha F, et al. (1999) “Antibody to herpes simplex virus type 2 as a marker of
       sexual risk behavior in rural Tanzania.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 179(1):16-24.
[41] Osili, Una Okonkwo and Long, Bridget T. (2008) “Does Female Schooling Reduce Fer-
        tility? Evidence from Nigeria.” Journal of Development Economics 87(1): 57-75.
[42] Oster, Emily (2005). “Sexually Transmitted Infections, Sexual Behavior and the
        HIV/AIDS Epidemic”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (2): 467-515.
[43] Orr, Larry, Judith D. Ferris, et al. (2003). Moving to Opportunity: Interim Impacts
        Evaluation. Washington D.C.: U.S. Dept. of HUD.
[44] Ozier, Owen (2011). “The Impact of Secondary Schooling in Kenya: A Regression
        Discontinuity Analysis,” Mimeo, UC Berkeley.
[45] Reichard, U. H. and Boesch, C. eds (2003) Monogamy: Mating Strategies and Partner-
        ships in Birds, Humans and Other Mammals, Cambridge University Press.
[46] Rosenzweig, Mark, T. Paul Schultz (1989) “Schooling, information and nonmarket pro-
        ductivity: contraceptive use and its effectiveness.” International Economic Review
        30:457-477.
[47] Ross DA, Changalucha J, et al. (2007) “Biological and behavioural impact of an adoles-
        cent sexual health intervention in Tanzania: a community-randomized trial”. AIDS
        21:1943–1955.


                                            41
[48] Thomas, Duncan, Firman Witoelar, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Bondan Sikoki, John
       Strauss, Cecep Sumantri and Wayan Suriastini (2012). “Cutting the Costs of At-
       trition: Results from the Indonesia Family Life Survey”, Journal of Development
       Economics 98(1): 108–123.
[49] Thomas, Duncan, John Strauss and Maria-Helena Henriques (1991). “How does
       mother’s education affect child height?”. The Journal of Human Resources, (26):2:
       183-211.
[50] Trussell, James and Anne R. Pebley. 1984. The Potential Impact of Changes in Fertility
        on Infant, Child and Maternal Mortality. Studies in Family Planning. 15(6): 267-280.




                                            42
Figure 1. Distribution of Pregnancy and HSV2 rates, by Treatment Groups




        4
        3
     Density
       21
        0




               0              .2               .4              .6               .8                  1
                              Share of girls ever pregnant within 5 years


                               Control                        Stand-Alone HIV education
                               Joint Program                  Stand-Alone Education Subsidy
        5
        4  3
     Density
     2  1
        0




               0              .2               .4              .6               .8                  1
                               Share of girls HSV2 positive after 7 years


                               Control                        Stand-Alone HIV education
                               Joint Program                  Stand-Alone Education Subsidy


   Notes: School-level averages.
   Two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for equality of distribution between Stand-alone Education
   Subsidy and Joint Program:
    p-value for share ever pregnant (top panel): .024**
    p-value for share HSV2 positive (bottom panel): .044**




                                                      43
Table 1. Baseline Characteristics, by Treatment Group

                                                                  Stand-Alone Stand-Alone
                                                                   Education       HIV     Joint                               Balance Tests
                                                                    Subsidy    Education Program       Control               p-val for test that:

Panel A. Baseline Characteristics of Schools                            (S)         (H)    (SH)           (C)    S=C      H=C     SH = C SH = S SH = H
Average Score on Primary School Graduation Exam in 2003               255.2       249.4    248.6        249.3    0.097*   0.66     0.468      0.146   0.857
                                                                      [29.6]      [24.8]  [32.04]       [26.1]
School Size (total number of students)                                464.6       489.3    473.8        498.9    0.292    0.777    0.587      0.764   0.611
                                                                     [203.1]     [208.8]  [185.7]      [194.3]
Sex Ratio (Female/Male) among Students in 2002                        1.016       1.024    1.012        1.016    0.945    0.455    0.823      0.857   0.556
                                                                      [.124]      [.127]   [.105]       [.135]
Number of Latrines on school compound                                  11.6        11.2      9.9         11.1    0.215    0.635    0.081*    0.068*   0.173
                                                                       [6.3]       [6.4]    [5.7]        [5.5]
Number of primary schools within 2 km radius                           2.01        2.16     2.06         2.06    0.845    0.521    0.925       0.86   0.742
                                                                      [1.95]      [1.82]    [1.8]       [1.76]
Total Number of Teachers in 2003                                       14.2        14.6     13.8         14.6    0.786    0.439    0.282      0.613   0.257
                                                                       [4.2]       [5.3]    [4.4]        [4.7]
Average Age of Teachers in 2003                                        40.0        39.6     39.6         39.6    0.455    0.796    0.845       0.57   0.975
                                                                       [3.1]       [3.8]    [3.8]        [3.5]
Sex Ratio (Female/Male) among Teachers in 2003                         1.22        1.18     1.30         1.15    0.856    0.788    0.281      0.575   0.405
                                                                        [1.]      [.848]   [.987]       [.829]

Panel B. Baseline Characteristics of Study Cohort (Grade 6 in 2003)
Number of Girls in Grade 6                                             29.3           28.8     28.0      29.4    0.859    0.862    0.451      0.566   0.717
                                                                      [15.4]         [15.3]   [14.4]     [14.]
Number of Boys in Grade 6                                              28.2           30.7     30.3      30.4    0.225    0.498    0.739      0.348   0.839
                                                                      [13.3]         [14.6]   [14.7]    [14.1]
Sex Ratio (Female/Male) among Grade 6 students                        1.065          0.968    0.964     1.011    0.127    0.184    0.156     0.071*   0.939
                                                                      [.412]         [.297]   [.356]    [.325]
Averge Age among Girls (at baseline)                                  13.21          13.12    13.18     13.14    0.464    0.378    0.856      0.741   0.519
                                                                       [.56]          [.64]    [.59]      [.6]
Averge Age among Boys (at baseline)                                   13.79          13.72    13.77     13.77    0.878    0.362    0.965      0.905   0.601
                                                                       [.62]          [.69]    [.62]     [.66]
Number of Schools (Total = 328)                                          83             83       80        82
Notes: School Averages. Standard deviations in brackets. p-values in italics.




                                                                                44
Table 2. Short- and Medium Run Impacts: Roll Call Data
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)        (11)
                                                                 Impacts after 3 years                                                Impacts after 5 years

                                       Dropped                                                 Ever      Ever        Dropped                           Ever      Ever
                                                   Attendance
                                        Out of                      Ever        Ever         Pregnant   Married       Out of      Ever        Ever   Pregnant Married
                                                   rate (while
                                       Primary                     Married   Pregnanta       but Never but Never     Primary     Married    Pregnant but Never but Never
                                                    enrolled)
Panel A. Girls                          School                                                Married  Pregnant       School                          Married Pregnant
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)        -0.031        -0.002       -0.026    -0.027           -0.004      -0.002      -0.053    -0.029    -0.044    -0.009    0.005
                                       (0.012)**      (0.006)     (0.010)** (0.011)**         (0.006)     (0.003)   (0.017)*** (0.015)* (0.017)*** (0.007)    (0.004)
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)             0.003        -0.008       0.011     -0.007           -0.014       0.005      -0.015    0.023      0.001    -0.014    0.009
                                        (0.011)       (0.006)      (0.009)   (0.011)         (0.006)**   (0.003)*     (0.015)   (0.014)   (0.015)  (0.007)** (0.004)**
Joint Program (SH)                       -0.016         0.000       0.000     -0.011           -0.013      -0.001      -0.024    0.004     -0.011    -0.002    0.011
                                        (0.012)       (0.006)      (0.009)   (0.010)         (0.006)**    (0.003)     (0.016)   (0.015)   (0.016)   (0.007) (0.004)***
Observations                             9116          8232         9107       9072            9072       9072         8865       8391        8302        8302        8302
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)              0.188         0.939        0.128      0.160           0.046      0.011        0.300      0.265       0.329       0.080       0.012
p-val   (Test:   S = SH)                 0.245        0.712        0.012**      0.149         0.088*      0.812        0.104      0.034**    0.058*       0.322       0.217
p-val   (Test:   H = SH)                0.097*        0.201         0.227      0.728          0.872      0.057*       0.578        0.243      0.449      0.092*       0.759
p-val   (Test:   S = H)                0.005***       0.327         0***       0.083*         0.092*     0.021**     0.024**     0.001***   0.006***      0.469       0.394
p-val   (Test:   SH = S + H )            0.484        0.235         0.285       0.137          0.544      0.309       0.063*       0.607      0.169      0.04**       0.494

Panel B: Boys
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)        -0.025        -0.001        -0.009   -0.002           0.001      -0.004       -0.039     -0.006      0.004        0.000      -0.010
                                       (0.011)**      (0.008)      (0.004)*  (0.003)          (0.001)    (0.003)     (0.016)**   (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.002)    (0.004)**
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)             0.010        -0.021         0.000   -0.002           0.000      0.001         0.010     0.006       0.004       -0.002       0.001
                                        (0.010)     (0.008)***      (0.005)  (0.002)          (0.001)    (0.004)      (0.014)    (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.005)
Joint Program (SH)                       -0.015         0.000        -0.010   -0.006           0.000      -0.004       -0.011     -0.003      0.000       -0.002      -0.003
                                        (0.010)       (0.008)     (0.004)** (0.002)**         (0.001)    (0.003)      (0.015)    (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.005)

Observations                            9461          8985          9393       9433           9382       9382         9261        8577        8897       8558         8558
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)             0.127         0.908         0.022      0.011          0.002      0.012        0.211       0.059       0.032      0.006        0.029
p-val (Test: S = SH)                        0.353       0.857        0.599     0.205       0.119       0.832        0.072*        0.735       0.456       0.546       0.098*
p-val (Test: H = SH)                       0.013**    0.005***     0.004***   0.091*       0.419      0.041**        0.124        0.242       0.558       0.916        0.486
p-val (Test: S = H)                       0.001***     0.011**      0.039**    0.752       0.404       0.096*      0.001***       0.149       0.880       0.460       0.019**
p-val (Test: SH = S + H )                   0.999      0.04**        0.716     0.660       0.162       0.661         0.386        0.747       0.319       0.857        0.318
Notes: Data Source: Roll Call Data (see test section 3.1.1 for details). Estimates obtained through OLS regressions that include controls controls for year of birth, the
timing of the roll call visits, school size and randomization strata dummies. Standard errors clustered at the school level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and
10%.
Columns 1 -6: Data collected through five school visits conducted at regular intervals over three academic years (2003, 2004, 2005). Columns 7 -11: Information
updated through four additional school visits conducted in 2006 and 2007.

                                                                                        45
Table 3. Long-Run Impacts: Individual Long-term Follow-up Survey Data (after 7 years)
                                          (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)               (7)
                                                                                                  Ever Pregnant Ever Married      Had started
                                     Reached 8th      Grades           Ever            Ever
                                                                                                    but Never    but Never        childbearing
                                        grade        Completed        Married       pregnant1
Panel A. Girls                                                                                       Married     Pregnant          by age 16
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)         0.039          0.206          -0.039         -0.034          0.006         0.001            -0.022
                                       (0.017)**      (0.091)**       (0.021)*        (0.021)        (0.013)       (0.004)          (0.012)*
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)            -0.004         -0.021           0.020          0.018         -0.005        -0.002            -0.009
                                        (0.017)        (0.089)         (0.020)        (0.022)        (0.014)       (0.004)           (0.014)
Joint Program (SH)                       -0.008          0.008          -0.012         -0.009         0.006         0.003             -0.005
                                        (0.018)        (0.097)         (0.021)        (0.022)        (0.013)       (0.005)           (0.012)
Sampling Weights                          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Observations                             5685           5685            5715           5719           5715            5715           5719
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)              0.802          9.181           0.392          0.494          0.114           0.012          0.085
p-val   (Test:   S = SH)               0.009***         0.04**          0.223         0.275           0.997           0.658          0.133
p-val   (Test:   H = SH)                  0.812          0.755          0.137         0.218           0.399           0.260          0.773
p-val   (Test:   S = H)                 0.018**        0.017**        0.007***       0.021**          0.394           0.398          0.299
p-val   (Test:   SH = S + H )            0.072*          0.159          0.833         0.836           0.784           0.445          0.141

Panel B. Boys
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)        0.036           0.070           0.008         -0.004          -0.010          0.002         -0.005
                                       (0.014)**       (0.083)         (0.016)        (0.018)         (0.009)        (0.005)        (0.004)
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)            0.000          -0.045          -0.003          0.003           0.002         -0.005         -0.005
                                        (0.014)        (0.080)         (0.016)        (0.017)         (0.008)        (0.005)        (0.003)
Joint Program (SH)                       0.021          -0.011          0.004          0.001           -0.005         -0.001         -0.003
                                        (0.014)        (0.091)         (0.015)        (0.016)         (0.009)        (0.006)        (0.004)
Sampling Weights                          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Observations                             6557           6557            6591           6595           6591            6591           6595
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)              0.854          9.521           0.186          0.214          0.053           0.025          0.015
p-val (Test: S = SH)                        0.317         0.370           0.783         0.777          0.498          0.541           0.490
p-val (Test: H = SH)                        0.121         0.687           0.644         0.894          0.436          0.426           0.411
p-val (Test: S = H)                        0.012**        0.152           0.477         0.687          0.107          0.138           0.950
p-val (Test: SH = S + H )                   0.488         0.767           0.953         0.932          0.739          0.809           0.111
Notes: Source: Long-run follow-up survey (see text section 3.1.2 for details). Estimates obtained through OLS regressions that include
controls for year of birth, the timing of the survey, school size and randomization strata dummies. Standard errors clustered at the school
level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
1
  For boys, "ever pregnant" is equal to 1 if the respondent ever had a child or a pregnant partner.


                                                                      46
Table 4. Long-Run Impacts on Sexually Transmitted Infections (after 7 years)
                                                            (1)                       (2)

                                                       Blood Test:               Blood Test:
Panel A. Girls                                         HIV positive             HSV2 positive
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)                          0.004                    0.009
                                                         (0.006)                   (0.014)
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)                             -0.002                     0.004
                                                         (0.006)                   (0.013)
Joint Program (SH)                                        -0.002                    -0.023
                                                         (0.006)                  (0.013)*
Sampling Weights                                            Yes                       Yes
Observations                                               2382                      5509
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)                                0.009                     0.118
p-val   (Test:   S = SH)                                   0.404                   0.013**
p-val   (Test:   H = SH)                                   0.906                   0.025**
p-val   (Test:   S = H)                                    0.311                     0.701
p-val   (Test:   SH = S + H )                              0.700                    0.051*

Panel B: Boys
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)                          0.001                     0.005
                                                          (0.002)                   (0.009)
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)                              0.000                     -0.002
                                                          (0.002)                   (0.010)
Joint Program (SH)                                         0.003                     -0.009
                                                          (0.003)                   (0.010)
Sampling Weights                                            Yes                       Yes
Observations                                               2659                      6302
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)                                0.001                     0.074

p-val (Test: S = SH)                                        0.595                     0.144
p-val (Test: H = SH)                                        0.421                     0.499
p-val (Test: S = H)                                         0.483                     0.462
p-val (Test: SH = S + H )                                   0.759                     0.380
Data Sources: Col 1: Rapid HIV tests administered to consenting individuals at the end of the long-
run follow-up survey, among a randomly selected subsample. Col 2: Lab Tests performed on blood
draws taken during after follow-up survey. See text section 3.1.2 for details.
Estimates obtained through OLS regressions that include controls for year of birth, the timing of
the survey, school size and randomization strata dummies. Standard errors clustered at the school
level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.

                                                47
Table 5. Main outcomes (short, medium and long run), breakdown by Critical Thinking (CT) intervention treatment
                                                   (1)                (2)                 (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)              (7)          (8)
                                                                                                         Roll Call Data,       Roll Call Data,     In-person survey, 7-yr
                               Data Source:              In-class survey after two years
                                                                                                          3-yr impacts          5-yr impacts              follow-up
                                                Table A5,     Table A5,     Table A5,                  Table 2,    Table 2,       Table 2,         Table 4,     Table 6,
                         Outcome shown in:
                                                  col 6           col 7         col 9                   col 1        col 4          col 9            col 2        col 8
                                                              Mentions       Mentions
                                               Knows that                                             Dropped                                                     Used a
                                                          abstinence when  faithfulness
                                              condoms can                                              Out of        Ever               Ever       HSV-2       condom last
                                                           asked for ways when asked for
                                              prevent HIV                                             Primary      pregnant           pregnant     positive      time had
                                                            to avoid HIV  ways to avoid
                                                infection                                              School                                                       sex
Panel A. Girls                                                 infection  HIV infection
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)                  -0.009         0.022         0.037                   -0.031       -0.027          -0.044           0.009        0.017
                                                  (0.019)       (0.020)     (0.013)***                (0.012)**    (0.011)**      (0.017)***        (0.014)      (0.021)
Stand-Alone HIV education (H), no CT               0.001         0.090          0.051                   -0.006       -0.010          -0.006           0.014       -0.029
                                                  (0.023)     (0.028)***    (0.015)***                 (0.015)      (0.015)         (0.020)         (0.018)      (0.027)
Joint Program (SH), no CT                          0.005         0.016          0.021                   -0.018       0.000           -0.001          -0.031       -0.034
                                                  (0.021)       (0.028)       (0.012)*                 (0.016)      (0.013)         (0.020)        (0.014)**     (0.029)
Stand-Alone HIV education (H), with CT             0.039         -0.021         0.011                    0.012       -0.006           0.007          -0.005        0.009
                                                 (0.021)*       (0.024)        (0.015)                 (0.013)      (0.013)         (0.020)         (0.016)      (0.029)
Joint Program (SH), with CT                        0.075         0.035          0.039                   -0.015       -0.022          -0.021          -0.014       -0.007
                                               (0.023)***       (0.030)      (0.015)**                 (0.015)      (0.014)         (0.021)         (0.017)      (0.030)
Sampling weights                                                                                                                                       Yes          Yes
Observations                                      13338             13338               13338           9116         9072              8302           5509         3700
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)                       0.461             0.461               0.461           0.188        0.160             0.329          0.118        0.282
p-val   (Test:   S = SH no CT)                    0.904              0.904               0.904          0.415       0.059*            0.049**      0.024**        0.191
p-val   (Test:   H no CT = SH no CT)              0.882             0.028**             0.088*          0.555        0.568              0.840      0.017**        0.892
p-val   (Test:   S = H no CT)                     0.674             0.014**              0.349          0.109        0.223             0.062*       0.791         0.106
p-val   (Test:   SH no CT = S + H no CT)          0.696             0.013**            0.003***         0.402       0.091*              0.111      0.023**        0.567

Panel B: Boys
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)                  0.018             0.026                0.016         -0.025       -0.002            0.005          0.005       -0.042
                                                  (0.015)           (0.020)             (0.010)*      (0.011)**     (0.003)           (0.005)       (0.009)     (0.022)*
Stand-Alone HIV education (H), no CT               0.012             0.080                0.035         0.006        -0.001            0.005          0.000       -0.011
                                                  (0.018)         (0.030)***           (0.016)**       (0.014)      (0.004)           (0.007)       (0.012)      (0.029)
Joint Program (SH), no CT                          0.032             0.057                0.003         -0.004       -0.005            0.002         -0.034       -0.013
                                                  (0.020)          (0.025)**             (0.012)       (0.014)      (0.003)           (0.007)     (0.012)***     (0.030)
Stand-Alone HIV education (H), with CT             0.018             0.030                0.012         0.013        -0.002            0.002         -0.003        0.010
                                                  (0.023)           (0.025)              (0.012)       (0.012)      (0.003)           (0.007)       (0.013)      (0.026)
Joint Program (SH), with CT                        0.060             0.077                0.026         -0.026       -0.007            -0.002         0.016        0.031
                                                (0.022)***        (0.029)***            (0.013)*      (0.012)**    (0.003)**          (0.006)       (0.012)      (0.025)
Sampling weights                                                                                                                                       Yes          Yes
Observations                                      13559              13636              13636           9461         9433              8897           6302         4759
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)                       0.655              0.393              0.079           0.127        0.011             0.032        0.074         0.489
p-val   (Test:   S = SH no CT)                        0.891          0.891               0.891            0.142       0.503            0.779        0.024**      0.191
p-val   (Test:   H no CT = SH no CT)                 0.365          0.487               0.083*            0.555       0.372            0.778        0.028**      0.960
p-val   (Test:   S = H no CT)                        0.749          0.063*               0.233          0.038**       0.667            0.953         0.690       0.305
p-val   (Test:   SH no CT = S + H no CT)              0.926          0.214             0.022**            0.462       0.791            0.505        0.027**      0.344
Notes: See respective tables for data sources and specifications.   See text section   2.2 for a description of the CT intervention   and section 3.3 for econometric
specification. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.                  48
Table 6. Long-Run Impacts: Self-Reported Sexual Behavior of Girls
                                         (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)
                                                    When asked about own behavior
                                                      to prevent HIV infection…              First     Age of       If ever had sex:
                                                                              Reports    pregnancy/     oldest                 condom
                                                                                                                   Age at
                                      Ever had     Reports     Reports        Condom         child     partner                last time
                                                                                                                  first sex
                                          sex     Abstinence Faithfulness       Use      was wanted      ever                  had sex
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)       -0.028      0.017        -0.030        -0.001       -0.009      -0.269     0.069        0.017
                                       (0.021)     (0.015)     (0.017)*       (0.010)      (0.029)     (0.225)    (0.095)      (0.021)
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)            0.010      0.012         0.033        -0.011        0.037      0.197      -0.095       -0.010
                                       (0.023)     (0.016)     (0.019)*       (0.010)      (0.029)     (0.256)    (0.092)      (0.022)
Joint Program (SH)                      -0.008      0.025         0.023        -0.014       -0.024      0.047      0.060        -0.021
                                       (0.021)     (0.016)      (0.020)       (0.010)      (0.030)     (0.248)    (0.089)      (0.023)
Sampling Weights                         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations                            5717        5713          5713         5713         2457        3681        3577       3700
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)             0.680       0.211         0.274        0.069        0.304      24.953      16.997      0.282

p-val (Test: S = SH)                       0.303        0.564       0.006***      0.190        0.609    0.209      0.927       0.095*
p-val (Test: H = SH)                       0.398        0.435         0.603       0.765      0.037**    0.600       0.110       0.611
p-val (Test: S = H)                       0.068*        0.754         0***        0.286       0.076*   0.088*      0.097*       0.222
p-val (Test: SH = S + H )                  0.731        0.887         0.472       0.868        0.214    0.736      0.534        0.367
Notes: Data Source: Individual long-run follow-up survey conducted after 7 years. Estimates obtained through OLS regressions that
include controls for year of birth, the timing of the survey, school size and randomization strata dummies. Standard errors clustered
at the school level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.




                                                                  49
Table 7. HSV2 Prevalence Among Girls, by Marital/Schooling status and Treatment Group

                                                                           Stand-Alone Stand-Alone
                                                                                                    Joint
                                                                            Education      HIV                    Control
                                                         # Obs     All   '                         Program
                                                                             Subsidy    Education                  (C)
                                                                                                    (SH)
                                                                               (S)         (H)

Ever Married                                               1839    18.1%         20.6%         17.9%     15.4%      18.2%
Never Married                                              3698     7.6%          8.8%          7.8%      6.0%       7.8%

In school                                                  2186     5.8%          6.4%          6.1%      3.8%       6.4%
Out of school                                              3348    14.6%         16.8%         14.7%     12.2%      14.7%
Out of school and never married                            1518    10.3%         12.4%         10.5%      8.8%      10.0%
Reports that Ever had sex                                  3591    14.6%         16.7%         14.7%     12.4%      14.6%
Reports that Never had sex                                 1948     4.6%          5.1%          4.7%      3.0%       5.3%
Notes: Data Source: Individual Follow-up Survey conducted after 7 years. We present the raw (unweighted) means.




                                                           50
Appendix A. Appendix Tables A1-A5
Table A1. Accuracy of Roll Call Method
                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)                (4)
                                                                        Dep. Var.:
                                       Dummy equal to 1 if Roll Call data is consistent with Quality Control data
                                      Girls reported as  Girls reported as
                                       having started   not having started Girls reported as      Girls reported as
                           Sample:
                                        childbearing       childbearing         having a child   not having a child
                                      in roll call data  in roll call data     in roll call data   in roll call data
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)            0.009              0.004                 0.005              0.016
                                           (0.033)            (0.057)               (0.040)             (0.047)
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)               -0.040             -0.087                -0.053              0.030
                                           (0.040)            (0.059)               (0.044)             (0.038)
Joint Program (SH)                          -0.029             -0.040                -0.059              0.023
                                           (0.033)            (0.063)               (0.039)             (0.041)
Observations                                1144                  276                 931                  452
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)                 0.789                0.826               0.792                0.892
p-val (Test: S = SH)                         0.303                0.500                0.162               0.889
p-val (Test: H = SH)                         0.794                0.498                0.897               0.864
p-val (Test: S = H)                          0.257                0.143                0.249               0.763
Notes: To check the accuracy of the childbearing data obtained through the Roll Call method, a subset of girls were
randomly sampled for a "Quality Control" survey administered at their home in early 2006. Girls who had been
identified as having started childbearing according to the roll call were oversampled. The childbearing information
collected through the home visits was obtained from the target respondent herself in 44% of the cases; from her
mother in 27% of the cases; from another female relative in 10% of the cases; and from a male relative in the rest of
the cases.




                                                          51
Table A2. Attrition in Roll Call Data
                                             (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)
                                                    Outcomes missing after 3 years                Outcomes missing after 5 years
                                                        Attendance
                                          Dropped                                               Dropped
                                                        rate (when
                                           Out of                          Ever       Ever       Out of        Ever          Ever
                                                       enrolled) over
                                          Primary                         Married   Pregnant    Primary       Married      Pregnant
                                                         5 surprise
                                           School                                                School
                                                           visits
Panel A. Girls
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)           0.001           -0.002         -0.002     -0.005      -0.014        -0.001        -0.002
                                          (0.005)          (0.009)        (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.010)       (0.014)       (0.014)
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)              -0.003            0.013          0.000     -0.001      -0.019        -0.021        -0.024
                                          (0.006)          (0.009)        (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.010)*       (0.015)       (0.015)
Joint Program (SH)                          0.010            0.015          0.010      0.007      -0.005        -0.008        -0.006
                                          (0.006)         (0.008)*        (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.012)       (0.018)       (0.018)
Observations                                9487            9487           9487       9487        9487          9487          9487
Mean Attrition (Control Group)             0.037           0.131           0.038     0.044       0.076         0.123         0.132
p-val (Test: S = SH)                       0.113          0.033**         0.061*     0.06*       0.335         0.637          0.782
p-val (Test: H = SH)                      0.049**          0.777           0.155     0.263       0.168         0.418          0.263
p-val (Test: S = H)                        0.490           0.112          0.777      0.508       0.482         0.08*         0.051*

Panel B: Boys
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)          -0.002          0.000           0.000      0.000      0.000          -0.002        0.019
                                          (0.005)         (0.008)         (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.010)        (0.019)      (0.010)*
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)               0.005          0.009           0.003      0.006      -0.002         -0.018        0.010
                                          (0.005)         (0.006)         (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.009)        (0.017)       (0.009)
Joint Program (SH)                          0.004          0.002           0.007      0.003      -0.002         -0.008        0.007
                                          (0.007)         (0.006)         (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.012)        (0.021)       (0.010)

Observations                               9802            9802            9802      9802        9802          9802          9802
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)                0.030           0.077          0.038      0.037       0.059         0.133         0.085
p-val (Test: S = SH)                          0.376          0.803          0.347     0.654      0.827          0.707         0.233
p-val (Test: H = SH)                          0.954          0.225          0.671     0.708      0.984          0.541         0.716
p-val (Test: S = H)                           0.204          0.209          0.536     0.296      0.807          0.232         0.331
Notes: Dependent variables are dummies equal to 1 if the information is missing for the respondent. Estimates obtained through
OLS regressions that include controls for year of birth, school size, randomization strata dummies and roll call dates. Standard
errors clustered at the school level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.

                                                                     52
Table A3. Survey Rates during Long-Run Follow-up (after 7 years)
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)         (10)

                                    Identified as              If Sampled
                                                  If not dead:            If not Dead:  Final Follow-up Sample (with sampling weights)
                                    Dead during                   for IT:
                                                  Found and                Found and
                                      Regular                  Found and                          Non-missing
                                                    Surveyed                Surveyed                          Non-missing Non-missing Follow-up Blood draw
                                      Tracking                  Surveyed               Surveyed     Grades
                                                   during RT               (RT or IT)                           fertility   HSV2 Status survey date date
                                       (RT)                     during IT                          Completed
Panel A. Girls
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)       -0.001       0.087        -0.044        0.060        0.007        0.012        0.006         0.008       -28.381    -31.573
                                       (0.004)    (0.016)***     (0.029)     (0.013)***     (0.014)      (0.015)      (0.014)       (0.016)    (10.991)** (11.206)***
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)            0.001       0.044         0.008        0.021        0.015        0.020        0.015         0.015       -20.842    -21.303
                                       (0.003)     (0.017)**     (0.030)       (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.015)      (0.014)       (0.016)     (10.825)*  (11.740)*
Joint Program (SH)                      -0.004       0.090         0.041        0.073        0.037        0.038        0.037         0.046       -25.140    -28.030
                                       (0.004)    (0.017)***     (0.031)     (0.015)***   (0.014)***   (0.015)***    (0.014)**    (0.015)***   (11.315)** (11.717)**
Observations                            9482         9354         1291          9354         6016         6016         6016          6016           5719         5515
Mean (Control Group)                   0.013        0.444        0.783         0.565        0.942        0.937        0.944         0.910
p-val (Test: S = SH)                    0.401        0.822      0.006***        0.368      0.024**      0.05**       0.022**       0.009***         0.766        0.745
p-val (Test: H = SH)                    0.123      0.006***       0.328       0.001***      0.115        0.189        0.117         0.051*          0.700        0.573
p-val (Test: S = H)                     0.548      0.009***      0.094*       0.006***      0.536        0.569        0.513          0.636          0.478        0.366

Panel B. Boys
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)       -0.001       0.069        0.043          0.043       0.024        0.024         0.025         0.030      -25.510     -31.318
                                       (0.004)    (0.017)***     (0.028)     (0.015)***   (0.010)**    (0.010)**     (0.010)**     (0.014)**   (10.499)** (10.919)***
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)            0.003       0.003        -0.013        -0.017      -0.004       -0.004        -0.005        -0.003      -15.309     -21.287
                                       (0.004)      (0.018)      (0.026)       (0.015)     (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.014)     (10.167)   (10.811)**
Joint Program (SH)                       0.000       0.061        0.046          0.039       0.020        0.022         0.021         0.039      -27.167     -30.824
                                       (0.004)    (0.019)***    (0.025)*      (0.016)**   (0.010)**    (0.010)**     (0.010)**    (0.014)***   (10.986)** (11.189)***
Observations                            9797         9638         1179          9638         6783         6783         6783          6783           6595         6312
Mean (Control Group)                   0.016        0.554        0.845         0.670        0.969        0.964        0.969         0.918
p-val (Test: S = SH)                  0.708        0.696        0.907         0.812       0.674         0.789         0.680          0.524          0.879        0.964
p-val (Test: H = SH)                  0.468      0.003***      0.033**      0.001***     0.018**       0.014**       0.015**       0.002***         0.268        0.383
p-val (Test: S = H)                   0.266        0***         0.07*         0***      0.007***      0.008***      0.005***        0.017**         0.344        0.373
Notes: RT stands for "Regular Tracking" and IT stands for "Intensive Tracking". See Section 3.1.2 in main text for a description of the tracking   procedure used.




                                                                                 53
Table A4. Checking for Differential Attrition across Treatment Arms in Long-Run Data
                                           (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)               (5)               (6)
                                         After 3 years: Ever pregnant (Roll Call Data)          After 5 years: Ever pregnant (Roll Call Data)
                                                       LR Follow-up       LR Follow-up                          LR Follow-up       LR Follow-up
                                          Full                                                     Full
                     Sample:                              Sample             Sample                                Sample             Sample
                                         Sample                                                   Sample
                                                       (unweighted)        (weighted)                           (unweighted)        (weighted)
Panel A. Girls
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)         -0.027           -0.030              -0.022               -0.044           -0.039             -0.036
                                        (0.011)**        (0.013)**            (0.014)            (0.017)***        (0.018)**          (0.021)*
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)             -0.007           -0.011               0.001                0.001            0.005              0.013
                                         (0.011)          (0.012)             (0.013)              (0.015)          (0.018)            (0.021)
Joint Program (SH)                        -0.011           -0.017              -0.010               -0.011           -0.009             -0.009
                                         (0.010)          (0.011)             (0.012)              (0.016)          (0.018)            (0.020)

Sampling Weights                                                                Yes                                                     Yes
Observations                              9072             5654                5654                8302              5341              5341
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)               0.160            0.128               0.125               0.329             0.270             0.283

Panel B: Boys
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)         -0.002            -0.005             -0.005              0.004              0.002             0.001
                                         (0.003)          (0.003)*            (0.003)             (0.005)           (0.006)           (0.007)
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)             -0.002             0.000              0.001              0.004              0.003             0.000
                                         (0.002)           (0.003)            (0.004)             (0.005)           (0.006)           (0.007)
Joint Program (SH)                        -0.006            -0.007             -0.006              0.000             -0.002            -0.004
                                        (0.002)**        (0.002)***          (0.003)**            (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.006)

Sampling Weights                                                                Yes                                                     Yes
Observations                              9433             6522                6522                8897             6317               6317
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)               0.011            0.011               0.010               0.032            0.029              0.031
Notes: Data Source: Roll Call Data. Estimates obtained through OLS regressions that include controls for year of birth, the timing of the roll
call visits, school size and randomization strata dummies. Standard errors clustered at the school level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5
and 10%.
Columns 1-3: Data collected through five school visits conducted at regular intervals over three academic years (2003, 2004, 2005). Columns
4-6: Include four additional school visits conducted in 2006 and 2007.




                                                                        54
Table A5. HIV Education and Knowledge in Program Schools, After Two Years
                                           (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)            (9)
                                                                                                                         Mentions      Mentions       Mentions
                                        HIV was                             Knows that
                                                     HIV was                            Knows that Knows that           abstinence      condoms     faithfulness
                                       mentioned                   Knows      healthy
                                                        ever                              condoms condoms can          when asked     when asked    when asked
                                       in class in                that HIV    looking
                                                     mentioned                          can prevent prevent HIV        for ways to    for ways to   for ways to
                                       the last 4                   kills   individuals
                                                      in class                           pregnancy    infection         avoid HIV     avoid HIV      avoid HIV
                                         weeks                             can have HIV
Panel A. Girls                                                                                                           infection      infection     infection
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)         0.018        -0.014      0.009        0.029         -0.003       -0.010         0.022          0.039         0.037
                                         (0.026)      (0.018)      (0.010)     (0.019)       (0.018)       (0.019)       (0.020)       (0.020)*      (0.013)***
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)             0.053        0.060       -0.009       0.004         0.048         0.020         0.032          0.079         0.030
                                        (0.025)**    (0.016)***    (0.011)     (0.018)      (0.018)***     (0.017)       (0.021)      (0.021)***     (0.012)**
Joint Program (SH)                        0.086        0.064       0.023        -0.008        0.050         0.039         0.025          0.063         0.030
                                       (0.029)***    (0.017)***   (0.010)**    (0.017)      (0.019)**     (0.017)**      (0.023)      (0.023)***     (0.011)***
Observations                             13338         13338       13340        13281         13353        13188          13318          13318         13318
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)              0.461         0.823       0.858        0.512         0.484        0.552          0.390         0.370          0.068
p-val   (Test:   S = SH)                0.016**        0***         0.174      0.048**      0.008***      0.01***         0.892          0.284         0.568
p-val   (Test:   H = SH)                 0.238         0.797      0.004***      0.525         0.927        0.268          0.753          0.497         0.986
p-val   (Test:   S = H)                  0.170         0***         0.1*        0.201       0.008***       0.124          0.618         0.057*         0.598
p-val   (Test:   SH = S + H )            0.683         0.452        0.137       0.125         0.847        0.249          0.347         0.067*        0.033**

Panel B: Boys
Stand-Alone Education Subsidy (S)         0.006        0.000       0.009        -0.005        0.049         0.018         0.026          0.007         0.016
                                         (0.023)      (0.018)      (0.017)     (0.009)      (0.014)***     (0.015)       (0.020)        (0.020)        (0.010)
Stand-Alone HIV Education (H)             0.002        0.053        0.001       -0.010        0.029         0.015         0.054          0.045         0.023
                                         (0.024)     (0.016)***    (0.017)     (0.010)      (0.014)**      (0.016)      (0.021)***     (0.021)**     (0.010)**
Joint Program (SH)                        0.059        0.056        0.016       -0.006        0.051         0.046         0.067          0.000         0.015
                                        (0.025)**    (0.018)***    (0.018)     (0.010)      (0.015)***   (0.017)***     (0.021)***      (0.021)        (0.010)
Observations                             13693         13693       13655        13667         13682        13559          13636          13636         13636
Mean of Dep. Var. (Control)              0.479         0.794       0.567        0.862         0.648        0.655          0.393         0.520          0.079
p-val (Test: S = SH)                    0.039**      0.001***      0.659        0.934         0.906        0.064*        0.059*          0.746         0.898
p-val (Test: H = SH)                     0.03**        0.825       0.362        0.718         0.152        0.057*         0.548        0.036**         0.469
p-val (Test: S = H)                      0.865       0.001***      0.633        0.629         0.179        0.850          0.200         0.056*         0.542
p-val (Test: SH = S + H )                0.135         0.877       0.784        0.515         0.184        0.553          0.678         0.081*         0.103
Notes: Data Source: Anonymous in-class survey self-administered by students in grades 7 and 8 in 2005. The overlap between those administered this survey and
our study sample is only partial (and the overlap likely varies with the treatment assignment), therefore this analysis is only suggestive.
Estimates obtained through OLS regressions that include controls for school size and randomization strata dummies. Standard errors clustered at the school level.
***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
                                                                               55
Appendix B: Model Appendix
Conditions that ensure that only one type of sex is cho-
sen at a time (“No Mixing Condition”)
Recall that the agent j solves the problem

           max u(sc + sm ) − D(π(sc , sm , ac , am )) + (1 − v(sc , sm , bc , bm ))θj y(e) − γe
           sc ,sm ,e
                                                                                                       (3)
                       + y0 + v(sc , sm , bc , bm )(Bm + δ{sc > 0}(Bc − Bm )).

   The girls are differentiated by θj ∈ [θmin , θmax ] and γj ∈ [γmin , γmax ]. As usual define
s ≡ sm + sc . Recall that in the absence of any concerns about STIs or pregnancy, the utility
maximizing amount of unprotected sex is s̄, after which the pure marginal utility of more
sex is negative (that is, u0 < 0 for s > s̄).
   The FOC for an interior solution are



 u0 (sc ) = −D(1−am )sm (1−ac )sc (log(1−ac ))−(1−bc )sc (1−bm )sm (log(1−bc ))(θj y(e)−Bc ) (4)




u0 (sm ) = −D(1 − am )sm (1 − ac )sc (log(1 − am )) − (1 − bc )sc (1 − bm )sm (log(1 − bm ))(θj y(e) − Bc )
                                                                                                       (5)
     and finally
                                  (1 − v(sc , sm , bc , bm )θj y 0 (e) = γ                             (6)

    If sc = 0 then the FOC with respect to s is:

          u0 (s) = −D(1 − am )s (log(1 − am )) − (1 − bm )s (log(1 − bm ))(θj y(e) − Bm )              (7)

while if sm = 0 then it is:

             u0 (s) = −D(1 − ac )s (log(1 − ac )) − (1 − bc )s (log(1 − bc ))(θj y(e) − Bc )           (8)

    Suppose that there are some agents in the population who find it worthwhile to engage
in some casual sex, will such an agent wish to add some marital sex? She will not do so if
the marginal cost of marital sex is higher; that is: she will not mix, if and only if, at the



                                                      56
level of sex that she chooses,

                                                                   !
                   1 − ac                                1 − bm
                            
           − D log        (1 − ac )sc < −(1 − bc )sc log        (θj y(e) − Bc )           (9)
                   1 − am                                1 − bc

    Consider the lowest possible education that a girl who chooses casual sex will choose,
and say this corresponds to the education chosen by the girl with θj = θ∗ . A sufficient but
not necessary condition for this expression to hold is the following: at any level of sc which
will actually be chosen, we have

                                                                   !
                   1 − ac                                1 − bm
                            
           − D log        (1 − ac )sc < −(1 − bc )sc log        (θ∗ y(e) − Bc )          (10)
                   1 − am                                1 − bc

   Assume that the parameters of the model are such that
                                                        !
                              1 − am             1 − bc
                                      
                        D log              < log        (θ∗ y(e) − Bc )                  (11)
                              1 − ac             1 − bm

   What this requires is the following: for girls who choose some non-zero casual sex, the
cost from increased STI risk of increasing casual sex is lower than the cost from increased
pregnancy risk of increasing committed sex. This seems plausible, as girls who choose casual
sex have high returns to education.
   If inequality 11 holds, then what happens as sc increases? If ac > bc , then naturally 11
implies 10. If ac < bc then the two sides may eventually cross as sc → ∞. Hence, to ensure
no mixing, we must have that nobody wants any amount of sex that exceeds this "crossing
point". So denote the crossing point s¯c , then we need that s̄ < s¯c where

                                                                   !
                  1 − ac                                  1 − bm
                            
           −D log        (1 − ac )s¯c = −(1 − bc )s¯c log        (θ∗ y(e) − Bc )         (12)
                  1 − am                                  1 − bc

    Now consider the agent who finds it worthwhile to engage in marital sex. She will never
want to add only a small amount of sc because any gain would be marginal but the cost is
discrete – the benefit of pregnancy drops from Bm to Bc . Similarly, as long as s̄ is not too
large, we can rule out that she would want to add so much sex that it would be worth it
to choose mixing over simply more marital sex. Specifically, suppose that there are some
agents in the population with a returns to education such that they find it worthwhile to
engage in some marital sex ( (θj <θ∗ ). They will not add casual sex if the marginal cost of


                                               57
casual sex is higher than the marginal cost of marital sex; that is: they will not mix, if and
only if, at the level of sex chosen,


            1 − am
                  
D log              (1 − am )sm < (1 − bm )sm [log (1 − bc ) (θj y(e) − Bc ) − log (1 − bm ) (θj y(e) − Bm )]
            1 − ac
                                                                                                   (13)

   Since θj <θ∗ and by assumption Bm ≥ Bc , a sufficient condition for 13 to hold is that:


      1 − am
                  
D log        (1 − am )sm < (1 − bm )sm [log (1 − bc ) (θ∗ y(e) − Bc ) − log (1 − bm ) (θ∗ y(e) − Bc )]
      1 − ac
                                                                                             (14)

   which can be simplified as:
                                                                         !
                      1 − am                               1 − bc
                               
                D log        (1 − am )sm < (1 − bm )sc log        (θ∗ y(e) − Bc )                 (15)
                      1 − ac                               1 − bm

    If inequality 11 holds as assumed above, then what happens as sm increases? If am > bm ,
then naturally 11 implies 10. If am < bm then the two sides may eventually cross as
sm → ∞. Hence, to ensure no mixing, we must have that nobody wants any amount of
sex that exceeds this "crossing point". So denote the crossing point s¯m , then we need that
s̄ < s¯m where

                                                                         !
                      1 − am                                 1 − bc
                              
                D log        (1 − am )s¯m = (1 − bm )s¯m log        (θ∗ y(e) − Bc ).              (16)
                      1 − ac                                 1 − bm


Corner Solutions and Proofs
Corner solutions to the individual’s utility maximization problem
First, consider the corner where the individual chooses no education (e = 0), which yields
the following optimization condition:

              ∂U (s, e = 0)            ∂π(s, a)    ∂v(s, b)
                            = u0 (s) −          D+          [B − θy(e = 0)] = 0.
                   ∂s                    ∂s          ∂s
   The other corner is where the individual abstains from any level of unprotected sex
(s = 0), which yields the following optimization problem:



                                                    58
                ∂U (s = 0, e)
                              = (1 − v(s = 0, b))θy 0 (e) − γ = θy 0 (e) − γ = 0.
                     ∂e

Comparative statics with respect to the intensive margin

Lemma 1: For an interior solution, an increase in γ (the cost of education) reduces e and
increases s. For a corner solution at e = 0, an increase in γ will not affect s. For a corner
solution at s = 0, an increase in γ will reduce e.
Proof. The case for an interior solution is proven in the main text.
    Now, suppose that we have a corner solution at e = 0. Then the first-order condition

                                 ∂π(s, a)    ∂v(s, b)
                      u0 (s) −            D+          [B − θy(e = 0)] = 0
                                   ∂s          ∂s

implies that

                                             ds
                                                =0.
                                             dγ

   Finally, suppose that we have a corner solution at s = 0. Then we have

                                         ∂ 2U
                                              de − dγ = 0
                                         ∂e2

so that

                                          de    1
                                             = ∂2U < 0
                                          dγ   ∂e2


as desired.

    • Lemma 2: For an interior solution, an increase in a (the perceived riskiness of the
relationship) reduces s and increases e. For a corner solution at e = 0, an increase in a will
reduce s. For a corner solution at s = 0, an increase in a will not affect e.
Proof. First, suppose that we have an interior solution. We take the total derivative of the
                                                       de     ds
first-order conditions with respect to a and solve for da and da .

                           ∂ 2U      ∂ 2U       ∂ 2 π(s, a)
                                ds +      de −              Dda = 0                      (17)
                           ∂s2       ∂s∂e          ∂s∂a
                                            ∂ 2U         ∂ 2U
                                                  ds +        de = 0.                    (18)
                                            ∂s∂e         ∂e2



                                               59
                                        de
Solving the system of equations for     da
                                           :
                        2
                              
               ∂ 2 U  ∂∂eU2  ∂ 2 U        ∂ 2 π(s, a)
                      −  2
                        ∂ U
                             de +      de −             Dda = 0                                      (19)
               ∂s2      ∂s∂e
                                  ∂s∂e         ∂s∂a
                                                       ∂2U ∂2U
                                                                                     "           #
                                                       ∂s2 ∂e2     ∂ 2U   da ∂ 2 π(s, a)
                                               −         ∂2U
                                                                 +      =                D           (20)
                                                         ∂s∂e
                                                                   ∂s∂e   de    ∂s∂a
                                                   2        2
                                                                      2
                                                                   ∂2U
                                           − ∂∂sU2 ∂∂eU2 +        ∂s∂e          da
                                                   ∂ 2 U ∂ 2 π(s,a)
                                                                            =                        (21)
                                                                    D           de
                                                   ∂s∂e ∂s∂a
                                                                2
                                                        ∂ 2 U ∂ π(s,a)
                                                        ∂s∂e ∂s∂a
                                                                       D        de
                                                                            =                        (22)
                                                                −detH           da
                                                               ∂ U                   2
      In the final expression, the numerator is negative since ∂s∂e < 0 (as shown earlier),
∂ 2 π(s,a)
  ∂s∂a
           > 0 (by assumption), and D > 0 (by definition). The denominator is negative since
from the second order condition detH > 0. Therefore, the overall expression is positive:
de
da
     > 0.
                                          ds
      Solving the system of equations for da yields:
                                   2
                                               
                                  ∂ U
               ∂ 2U      ∂ 2 U  ∂s∂e       ∂ 2 π(s, a)
                    ds +        −  2
                                  ∂ U
                                      ds −             Dda = 0                                      (23)
               ∂s2       ∂s∂e     ∂e2
                                               ∂s∂a
                                                                     2
                                                        2       ∂2U                  "           #
                                                       ∂ U      ∂s∂e          da ∂ 2 π(s, a)
                                                          2
                                                             − ∂2U          =                D       (24)
                                                       ∂s        ∂e2
                                                                              ds    ∂s∂a
                                                           2  2
                                                         ∂ U ∂ π(s,a)
                                                         ∂s∂e ∂s∂a
                                                                      D         ds
                                                                            =      .                 (25)
                                                                detH            da
                                                                               ds
     As discussed earlier, the numerator in this expression is negative, hence da < 0.
     Now, suppose that we have a corner solution at e = 0. Then equation 17can be rewritten
as


                                  ∂ 2U      ∂ 2 π(s, a)
                                       ds −             Dda = 0
                                  ∂s2          ∂s∂a

so that
                                                   ∂ 2 π(s,a)
                                        ds           ∂s∂a
                                                              D
                                           =            ∂2U
                                                                     < 0.
                                        da              ∂s2




                                                         60
   Finally, suppose that we have a corner solution at s = 0. Then the first order condition

                                         (1 − v(s = 0, b))θy 0 (e) − γ = 0

implies that

                                                             de
                                                                =0
                                                             da

as desired.
    Lemma 3 For an interior solution, an increase in b (the risk of pregnancy) decreases
e. The probability of pregnancy increases. For a corner solution at e = 0, the probability
of pregnancy increases. For a corner solution at s = 0, an increase in b leaves e and the
probability of pregnancy unchanged.
Proof. First, suppose that we have an interior solution. As in the proof of Lemma 2, we
take the total derivative of the first-order conditions with respect to b and solve for de
                                                                                        db
                                                                                           .

                           ∂ 2U      ∂ 2U      ∂ 2 v(s, b)
                                ds +      de +             [B − θy(e)]db = 0                        (26)
                           ∂s2       ∂s∂e         ∂s∂b


                                ∂ 2U      ∂ 2U      ∂v(s, b) 0
                                     ds +    2
                                               de −         θy (e)db = 0.
                                ∂s∂e      ∂e          ∂b

   Solving the system yields:


                                       ∂ 2 U ∂ 2 v(s,b)                    ∂ 2 U ∂v(s,b)
                               de      ∂s∂e ∂s∂b
                                                        [B   − θy(e)] +    ∂s2     ∂b
                                                                                         θy 0 (e)
                                  =                                                                 (27)
                               db                               detH

   After some algebra, equation 27 can be rewritten:


                                                                     ∂ 2 π(s,a)
                                                         h                          i
                                      ∂v(s,b)
                          de            ∂b
                                              θy 0 (e)   u00 (s) −       ∂s2
                                                                                D
                             =
                          db                             detH
                                      ∂v(s,b)
                                        ∂b
                                              θy 0 (e) [u00 (s)   + s ln(1 − a)(1 − a)s−1 ]
                                =
                                                                  detH
                   ∂v(s,b)
   Using that θ,     ∂b
                           ,   detH and y 0 (e) are positive and u00 (s) and ln(1 − a) are negative, we
can sign de
         db
            < 0.




                                                               61
                      dv
     To prove that    db
                           > 0, recall that one of the first order conditions is

                                            (1 − v(s, b)θy 0 (e) = γ

     From this we get that
                                                dv   −θy 00 (e)
                                                   =             .
                                                db   (θy 0 (e))2
     Since y 00 (e) < 0 and θ > 0, we can sign this expression dv
                                                               db
                                                                  > 0.
     Now, suppose that we have a corner solution at e = 0. Then equation 26 can be rewritten
as

                                          ∂ 2U      ∂ 2 v(s, b)
                                               ds +             Bdb = 0
                                          ∂s2          ∂s∂b

     which implies that
                                                         2
                                             ds   −B ∂ ∂s∂b
                                                        v(s,b)
                                                =   ∂2U
                                                               >0
                                             db     ∂s2
           2                                       2
   since ∂ ∂s∂b
            v(s,b)
                   > 0 by assumption and ∂∂sU2 <0. Thus the level of unprotected sex increases
and the risk of pregnancy increases.
   Finally, suppose that we have a corner solution at s = 0. Then the first order condition

                                      (1 − v(s = 0, b))θy 0 (e) − γ = 0

               de             dv
implies that   db
                    = 0 and   db
                                   = 0.

      • Lemma 4: For an interior solution, an increase in B (the benefit of pregnancy)
increases s and reduces e. For a corner solution at e = 0, an increase in B will increase s.
For a corner solution at s = 0, an increase in B will not affect e.
Proof. First, suppose that we have an interior solution. As in the proof of Lemma 2, we
                                                                                        de
take the total derivative of the first-order conditions with respect to B and solve for dB and
 ds
dB
    .

                                    ∂ 2U      ∂ 2U      ∂v(s, b)
                                       2
                                         ds +      de +          dB = 0                  (28)
                                    ∂s        ∂s∂e        ∂s


                                            ∂ 2U      ∂ 2U
                                                 ds +      de = 0.
                                            ∂s∂e      ∂e2




                                                       62
                                              de
   Solving the system of equations for        dB
                                                 :
                             2
                                    
                   ∂ 2 U  ∂∂eU2  ∂ 2 U         ∂v(s, b)
                       2
                          − ∂ 2 U de +      de +          dB = 0
                   ∂s       ∂s∂e
                                       ∂s∂e        ∂s
                                                     ∂2U ∂2U
                                                     ∂s2 ∂e2       ∂ 2U          dB ∂v(s, b)
                                               −       ∂2U
                                                               +            =−
                                                       ∂s∂e
                                                                  ∂s∂e           de ∂s
                                                            ∂ 2 U ∂v(s,b)
                                                            ∂s∂e ∂s             de
                                                                            =      .               (29)
                                                               detH             dB

The numerator is [−θ ∂v(s,b)
                         ∂s
                             y 0 (e)] ∂v(s,b)
                                        ∂s
                                              , which is negative since θ, ∂v(s,b)
                                                                             ∂s
                                                                                   , and y 0 (e) are all
                                                                     de
defined to be positive. So, the overall expression is negative: dB      < 0.
                                                ds
    Solving the system of equations for dB :
                                         2
                                                   
                                      ∂ U
                   ∂ 2U      ∂ 2 U  ∂s∂e        ∂v(s, b)
                      2
                        ds +        − ∂ 2 U ds
                                              +          dB = 0
                   ∂s        ∂s∂e     ∂e2
                                                   ∂s
                                                                  2
                                                       2      ∂2U
                                                     ∂ U      ∂s∂e               dB ∂v(s, b)
                                                        2
                                                          − ∂2U             =−
                                                     ∂s        ∂e2
                                                                                 ds ∂s
                                                           2
                                                          ∂ U  ∂v(s,b)
                                                          ∂s∂e ∂s               ds
                                                                            =      .               (30)
                                                              −detH             dB

The numerator, as previously argued, is negative. So, the overall expression is positive:
ds
dB
   > 0.
   Now, suppose that we have a corner solution at e = 0. Then equation 28 can be rewritten
as


                                      ∂ 2U      ∂v(s, b)
                                         2
                                           ds +          dB = 0
                                      ∂s          ∂s

so that
                                                      ∂v(s,b)
                                        ds              ∂s
                                                              D
                                           =−             2
                                                        ∂ U
                                                                   > 0.
                                        dB               ∂s2


   Finally, suppose that we have a corner solution at s = 0. Then the first order condition

                                  (1 − v(s = 0, b))θy 0 (e) − γ = 0




                                                       63
implies that

                                                          de
                                                             =0
                                                          dB

as desired.

   • Lemma 5: For an interior solution, an increase in θ (the index of return to education)
reduces s and increases e. For a corner solution at e = 0, an increase in θ will reduce s. For
a corner solution at s = 0, an increase in θ will increase e.
Proof. First, suppose that we have an interior solution. To prove Lemma 5, we take the
                                                                                de
total derivative of the first-order conditions with respect to θ and solve for dθ  (which will
                               ds
turn out to be positive) and dθ (which will turn out to be negative).


                                          ∂ 2U        ∂ 2U      ∂v(s, b)
                                             2
                                               ds +        de −          y(e)dθ = 0
                                          ∂s          ∂s∂e        ∂s
                                     ∂ 2U       ∂ 2U
                                          ds +      2
                                                      de + (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e)dθ = 0.
                                     ∂s∂e        ∂e
                                                       de
   Solving the system of equations for                 dθ
                                                          ,   first we solve for ds in the second equation:

                                      ∂ 2U       ∂ 2U
                                           ds = − 2 de − (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e)dθ
                                      ∂s∂e        ∂e
                                                 ∂2U
                                                − ∂e2 de − (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e)dθ
                                           ds =               ∂2U
                                                                                  .
                                                                     ∂s∂e


Then we plug into the first equation:
                            2
                                                                 
              ∂ 2 U  − ∂∂eU2 de − (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e)dθ  ∂ 2 U      ∂v(s, b)
                  2                   ∂ 2U                 +      de −          y(e)dθ = 0
              ∂s                      ∂s∂e
                                                             ∂s∂e        ∂s
                                 2 
        ∂2U ∂2U             ∂2U
                                                  2
                                                                                                   
                  −                                                            ∂v(s,b)      ∂2U
       ∂s2 ∂e2             ∂s∂e               − ∂ U (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e) −
                                               ∂s2                              ∂s
                                                                                       y(e) ∂s∂e
                                      ds +                                                         dθ = 0
                                     
                  ∂2U                                                 ∂2U
      
                  ∂e2                                                 ∂e2
                                                       ∂2U                            ∂v(s,b)      ∂2U
                                                       ∂s2
                                                           (1   − v(s, b))y 0 (e) +     ∂s
                                                                                              y(e) ∂s∂e       de
                                                                                                          =      .   (31)
                                                                         −detH                                dθ

    The denominator is negative (concavity condition). The first term of the numerator is
                 2
negative since ∂∂sU2 < 0 by a second-order condition and (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e) > 0 by initial
assumptions. The second term of the numerator is also negative since ∂v(s,b) ∂s
                                                                                y(e) > 0 by
                         ∂2U       ∂v(s,b) 0
initial assumptions and ∂s∂e = −θ ∂s y (e) < 0 (also by initial assumptions). Since the
numerator is composed of two negative terms, it too is negative. The overall expression then,


                                                                64
                                                              de
with the negative numerator and denominator, is positive: dθ     > 0.
                                       ds
   Solving the system of equations for dθ , first we solve for ds in the second equation:

                                      ∂ 2U        ∂ 2U
                                           de = −       ds − (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e)dθ                                     (32)
                                      ∂e2         ∂s∂e
                                                  ∂2U
                                                − ∂s∂e ds − (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e)dθ
                                           de =                ∂2U
                                                                                   .                                    (33)
                                                                      ∂e2


Then we plug into the first equation:
                                          2
                                                                                   
           ∂ 2U                ∂ U
                     ∂ 2 U  − ∂s∂e ds − (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e)dθ  ∂v(s, b)
                ds +                        ∂2U
                                                                 −         y(e)dθ = 0
           ∂s2       ∂s∂e                   ∂e 2                    ∂s
                                 2 
        ∂2U ∂2U             ∂2U
                                                   2                                             2
                                                                                                        
                  −                                                                ∂v(s,b)
       ∂s2 ∂e2             ∂s∂e                − ∂ U (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e) −
                                                ∂s∂e                                ∂s
                                                                                           y(e) ∂∂eU2
                                      ds +                                                              dθ = 0
                                     
                  ∂2U                                                   ∂2U
      
                  ∂e2                                                   ∂e2
                                                        ∂2U                             ∂v(s,b)        2
                                                        ∂s∂e
                                                             (1   − v(s, b))y 0 (e) +     ∂s
                                                                                                y(e) ∂∂eU2       ds
                                                                                                             =      .   (34)
                                                                            detH                                 dθ

The concavity condition asserts that the denominator is positive. The first term of the
                             ∂2U
numerator is negative since ∂s∂e = −θ ∂v(s,b)
                                        ∂s
                                              y 0 (e) < 0 and (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e) > 0 by initial
conditions. The second term of the numerator is also negative since ∂v(s,b)     ∂s
                                                                                    y(e) > 0 by
                        ∂2U
initial assumptions and ∂s2 < 0 by a second-order condition. The numerator, composed of
two negative terms, is negative. The overall expression, with the positive denominator, is
           ds
negative: dθ  < 0.
    Now, suppose that we have a corner solution at e = 0. Then equation (18) can be
rewritten as


                                               ∂ 2U      ∂v(s, b)
                                                  2
                                                    ds −          y(e)dθ = 0
                                               ∂s          ∂s

so that
                                                           ∂v(s,b)
                                                   ds        ∂s
                                                                   y(e)
                                                      =        ∂2U
                                                                            < 0.
                                                   dθ          ∂s2


   Finally, suppose that we have a corner solution at s = 0. Then equation 32 can be
rewritten as

                                          ∂ 2U
                                               de + (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e)dθ = 0
                                          ∂e2



                                                              65
so that

                                     de    (1 − v(s, b))y 0 (e)dθ
                                        =−         ∂2U
                                                                  >0
                                     dθ            ∂e2


as desired.



Comparative statics with respect to choice of relationship type
We first prove Lemma 8, which states that when γ (the cost of education) decreases or
increases, θt (the threshold return to education above which girls choose casual relationships)
moves in the same direction increases.θt is the value of θ which satisfies Uc = Um . That is,

                 u(sc ) − π(sc , ac )D + v(sc , bc )Bc + (1 − v(sc , bc ))θt y(ec ) − ec γ
              = u(sm ) − π(sm , am )D + v(sm , bm )Bm + (1 − v(sm , bm ))θt y(em ) − em γ.

   We take the total differential with respect to θt , γ, sm , em , sc , ec :

                       ∂Uc       ∂Uc
                           dsc +     dec + (1 − v(sc , bc ))y(ec )dθt − ec dγ
                       ∂sc       ∂ec
                       ∂Um        ∂Um
                     =      dsm +      dem + (1 − v(sm , bm ))y(em )dθt − em dγ.
                       ∂sm        ∂em
                                                                                dθt
   Taking into account the first-order conditions and solving for               dγ
                                                                                    ,   we get:

                                             em − ec                          dθt
                                                                            =     .                (35)
                          (1 − v(sm , bm ))y(em ) − (1 − v(sc , bc ))y(ec )   dγ

                                   dUm       dUc
The denominator is simply           dθ
                                         −    dθ
                                                 ,   which is negative. The numerator is also negative,
which confirms that dθ
                    dγ
                       t
                         >0

   Finally, we prove Lemma 9, which states that when ac (the perceived chance of infection
from an unprotected sex act in a casual relationship) increases and am does not change, θt
(the threshold return to education above which girls choose casual relationship) increases.




                                                         66
Proof. We take the total differential with respect to θt , ac , sm , em , sc , and ec :

                      ∂Uc        ∂Uc                                      ∂π
                          dsc +       dec + (1 − v(sc , bc ))y(ec )dθt −     Ddac                  (36)
                      ∂sc        ∂ec                                     ∂ac
                      ∂Um          ∂Um
                    =      dsm +        dem + (1 − v(sm , bm ))y(em )dθt
                      ∂sm          ∂em
                                            ∂π
                                          − ∂a c
                                                 D                         dθt
                                                                        =      .                   (37)
                      (1 − v(sm , bm ))y(em ) − (1 − v(sc , bc ))y(ec )    dac

                                                                                    ∂π
As above, the denominator is negative. The numerator is negative since              ∂ac
                                                                                        D   > 0. Hence,
dθt
dac
    > 0.




                                                  67
Appendix C: Numerical Example
The following is a numerical example that shows that the set of results we observe in our
data can be obtained under reasonable circumstances. It is neither a calibration nor a test
of the model; instead, it is simply a numerical example to show that the model can deliver
similar results to our empirical data.
    Assume the following functional forms:

   • u(s) = 3.8s − 0.5s2

   • y(e) = 2 log(e + 1)

We assume the following baseline parameter values: D = 10, Bc = 2.5, Bm = 3.5, ac =
a∗c = 0.04, am = a∗m = 0.03, bc = 0.15, bm = 0.22, y0 = 3 and γ = 0.31. For θ, the return
to education, we consider that the population is evenly distributed across four types: θ =
1.8, 2, 2.2, and 2.4. With these baseline parameter values, we roughly match the pregnancy
and STI rates observed in the control group.
    We consider that the education subsidy program lowers the cost of education, γ, from
0.31 to 0.24. The HIV education program increases the perceived risk of contracting an STI
when engaging in casual sex, ac , from 0.04 to 0.052, while leaving am unchanged.
    The chosen functional form for u: u(s) = 3.8s − 0.5s2 , implies that there is a satiation
point for unprotected sex at s = 3.8, after which u0 (s) < 0. This satiation point is sufficiently
low to ensure that the cross derivative is positive at the optimum. Indeed, as shown in the
                                                        −1
main text, the cross derivative condition is s < ln(1−a)    . Since the highest value of a we
consider is 0.051, this condition is satisfied for any s < 19.1, and the satiation point s = 3.8
satisfies the condition.
    In what follows, we first numerically solve the model for an interior solution for each θ type
under each treatment (control, stand-alone education subsidy, stand-alone HIV education,
or joint program), and then calculate the resulting STI rates, pregnancy rates, education
attainment and utility levels for each type and for the overall population. We then solve for
the corner solutions and show that the interior solution is optimal for all types.


Interior Solution
We first solve for the θt threshold under which committed relationships are preferred and
above which casual relationships are preferred. As predicted, the education subsidy lowers
the threshold while the HIV education program increases it:



                                               68
                                                                θt threshold
                                         Control                        2.06
                   Stand-Alone Education Subsidy                        1.90
                      Stand-Alone HIV Education                         2.33
                                  Joint Program                         2.16

          Table 1: Values of threshold θt under each program (interior solution)

    Thus, in the control group, half the population chooses a committed relationship (those
with θ = 1.8 and θ = 2), and the other half chooses casual relationships. The education
subsidy induces the type 2 girls (those with θ = 1.8) to switch to casual relationships. The
HIV education program induces the type 3 girls (those with θ = 2.2) to switch from casual
to committed relationships. The joint program induces no switching.
    The following table provides STI rates that obtain for each θ type under each treatment,
assuming an interior solution. For reference, bold indicates that the type of relationship
chosen is casual (as per the threshold values estimated above). The last column shows the
population average (which is simply the average across types since we assume the four types
are equally prevalent.)

                                      θ = 1.8         θ=2     θ = 2.2   θ = 2.4   Population
                          Control     0.0944         0.0902   0.1032    0.0965     0.0961
    Stand-Alone Education Subsidy     0.0909         0.1044   0.0975    0.0896     0.0956
       Stand-Alone HIV Education      0.0944         0.0902   0.0852    0.0915     0.0903
                   Joint Program      0.0909         0.0858   0.0926    0.0843     0.0884

            Table 2: STI rates by θ-type under each program (interior solution)

    As in our data, the two stand-alone programs have a minimal impact on the STI rate,
while the joint program reduces it substantially.
    The table also illustrates how the two stand-alone programs each have an ambiguous
effect on STI rates, as they affect different types in different directions. For example, the
education subsidy program decreases the STI rate among girls who do not switch types of
relationship. However, among those induced to switch from committed to casual relation-
ships (the subgroup with θ = 1.4), the education subsidy program increases STI rates. The
population effect thus depends on the magnitude of the changes in STI rates, as well as
the relative sizes of the population types. Under our parameter assumptions, the effect is
slightly negative. In contrast, for the joint program, the STI rate unambiguously decreases
for all types as there is no switching.

   The following table provides the pregnancy rates by treatment and type. As above, bold
indicates that casual relationships are chosen.


                                                69
                                     θ = 1.8         θ=2      θ = 2.2   θ = 2.4   Population
                          Control    0.5548         0.5376    0.3519    0.3324     0.4442
    Stand-Alone Education Subsidy    0.5404         0.3553    0.3353    0.3120     0.3858
       Stand-Alone HIV Education     0.5548         0.5376    0.5163    0.3176     0.4816
                   Joint Program     0.5404         0.5189    0.3209    0.2957     0.4190

        Table 3: Pregnancy rates by θ-type under each program (interior solution)

   The stand-alone education subsidy program clearly reduces the pregnancy rate, while the
stand-alone HIV education program slightly increases it. The joint program decreases the
pregnancy rate, but not as much as the stand-alone education subsidy.

   The next table provides the education attainment by treatment and type:

                                     θ = 1.8        θ=2       θ = 2.2    θ = 2.4 Population
                          Control      4.17         4.97        8.20       9.34    6.67
    Stand-Alone Education Subsidy      5.89         9.74       11.19      12.76    9.90
       Stand-Alone HIV Education       4.17         4.97        5.87       9.57    6.14
                   Joint Program       5.89         7.02       11.45    13.099.36 9.36

   Table 4: Levels of education chosen by θ-type under each program (interior solution)

   Analogously, the stand-alone education subsidy increases overall educational attainment,
while the stand-alone HIV education program slightly decreases it. The joint program in-
creases educational attainment, but not as much as the education subsidy alone.

   Finally, we show the utility levels for each type under each treatment group. This is
needed to rule out the corner solutions (which we solve below).

                                           θ = 1.8         θ=2      θ = 2.2   θ = 2.4
                                Control     12.41          12.72     13.21     13.81
          Stand-Alone Education Subsidy     12.75          13.24     13.88     14.57
             Stand-Alone HIV Education      12.41          12.72     13.07     13.54
                         Joint Program      12.76          13.13     13.61     14.32

          Table 5: Utility levels by θ-type under each program (interior solution)




                                               70
Ruling out Corner Solutions
Corner 1: s = 0 and e ≥ 0

The first-order condition with respect to e can be written as follows:

                               U (s = 0, e) = 2θ log(e + 1) − eγ
                                 ∂U (s = 0, e)    2θ
                                               =      −γ =0
                                      ∂e         e+1
                                                      2θ
                                                   e=    − 1.
                                                       γ

   Plugging in the parameter values for θ and γ, we can easily compute the levels of education
chosen by each type under each treatment and plug those back in the utility function. We
obtain the following utility levels for each type under each treatment:

                                             θ = 1.8    θ=2        θ = 2.2   θ = 2.4
                                 Control       5.54     6.54         7.58      8.66
           Stand-Alone Education Subsidy       6.39     7.49         8.64      9.82
              Stand-Alone HIV Education        5.54     6.54         7.58      8.66
                          Joint Program        6.39     7.49         8.64      9.82

      Table 6: Utility levels by θ-type, under each program (corner solution with s=0)

    Comparing the utility levels in Table 6 to those in Table 5, it is clear that the corner
solution with s = 0 is dominated for all types under all treatments.


Corner 2: s ≥ 0 and e = 0

The first-order condition with respect to s can be written as follows:

           U (s, e = 0) = −0.5s2 + 3.8s − [1 − (1 − a)s ] D + [1 − (1 − b)s ] B + C
          ∂U (s, e = 0)
                        = −s + 3.8 + (1 − a)s ln(1 − a)D − (1 − b)s ln(1 − b)B = 0.
               ∂s

Clearly this is independent of the type θ, and therefore all types adopt the same sexual
behavior. What’s more committed relationships dominate under all treatments, therefore
everyone chooses committed relationships and the same level of unprotected sex. The
resulting utility level is 10.30 for everyone under all treatments. Comparing this to utility
levels in Table 5, it is clear that the corner solution with e = 0 is dominated by the interior
solution for all types under all treatments.



                                              71
