                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       HOW FINANCIALLY LITERATE ARE WOMEN? AN OVERVIEW AND NEW
                               INSIGHTS

                                        Tabea Bucher-Koenen
                                         Annamaria Lusardi
                                            Rob Alessie
                                         Maarten van Rooij

                                        Working Paper 20793
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20793


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




The authors wish to thank Ben Rump and Audrey Brown for excellent research and editorial assistance,
and Mijke van den Broeke and Mario Padula for suggestions and comments. They are also grateful
to participants at the FCAC-OECD conference on financial literacy held in Toronto in May 2011;
the Netspar conference on Pension Communication and Choices held in The Hague in April 2012;
the CeRP Conference, held in Turin in September 2012; and the European Economic Association Annual
Meeting held in Toulouse, France, in August 2014 for many comments. Financial support from Netspar
is gratefully acknowledged. Moreover, the authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from
the European Investment Bank Institute through its EIBURS initiative. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions presented in this article are entirely those of the authors and should not be attributed
in any manner to the European Investment Bank or its Institute, Netspar, the De Nederlandsche Bank,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Tabea Bucher-Koenen, Annamaria Lusardi, Rob Alessie, and Maarten van Rooij. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How financially literate are women? An overview and new insights
Tabea Bucher-Koenen, Annamaria Lusardi, Rob Alessie, and Maarten van Rooij
NBER Working Paper No. 20793
December 2014
JEL No. D14,D91

                                           ABSTRACT

We document strikingly similar gender differences in financial literacy across countries. When asked
to answer questions that measure knowledge of basic financial concepts, women are less likely than
men to answer correctly and more likely to indicate that they do not know the answer. In addition,
women give themselves lower scores on financial literacy self-assessments than men. Both young
and old women show low levels of financial literacy. Moreover, women for whom financial knowledge
is likely to be very important—for example widows or single women—know little about concepts
relevant for day-to-day financial decisions. Even women in favorable economic conditions are less
financially knowledgeable than men. This is important because financial literacy has been linked to
economic behavior, including retirement planning and wealth accumulation. Women live longer than
men and are likely to spend time in widowhood. As a result, improving women’s financial literacy
is key to helping them prepare for retirement and promoting their financial security.


Tabea Bucher-Koenen                              Rob Alessie
Max Planck Institute                             University of Groningen
for Social Law and Social Policy                 Department of Economics
Munich Center for the Economics of Aging         P.O. Box 800
Amalienstraße 33, 80799 Munich, Germany          9700 AV Groningen
bucher-koenen@mea.mpisoc.mpg.de                  r.j.m.alessie@rug.nl

Annamaria Lusardi                                Maarten van Rooij
The George Washington University                 Dutch Central Bank
School of Business                               P. O. Box 98
2201 G Street, NW                                1000 AB Amsterdam
Duques Hall, Suite 450E                          The Netherlands
Washington, DC 20052                             M.C.J.van.Rooij@DNB.NL
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu
                                      1.    Introduction

With rapidly changing financial markets and increasing individual responsibility—in
particular for retirement income—being able to make informed financial decisions has
become of paramount importance. Yet, empirical research from various countries shows that
many people know little about the concepts underlying saving and investment decisions. This
may have substantial consequences for financial well-being, especially as it relates to the
accumulation of retirement wealth (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2008; 2011a,b; 2014).

Not only is financial illiteracy widespread, but it is particularly severe among women. This is
important because women tend to live longer than men; thus their savings needs are different.
Women are likely to spend at least part of their retirement in widowhood. Evidence from the
United States suggests that the death of a spouse is an important determinant of female old-
age poverty (see Sevak, Weir, and Willis, 2003/2004; Weir and Willis, 2000). Moreover,
women tend to have less attachment to the labor market, with interrupted careers because of
childbearing and potentially fewer financial resources over the life cycle. With fewer available
resources and higher life expectancies, women’s financial security after retirement is
potentially at risk. For example, Lusardi and Mitchell (2008) show that women are much less
likely to plan and thus less likely to be prepared for their retirement than men.

In this paper we present evidence from financial literacy surveys around the world, with a
special focus on women so as to provide insights into the financial literacy gender gap. We
build on the work of Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b; 2014) that compares financial literacy in
twelve countries, but we perform additional analyses on a subset of those countries. We use
data from American, Dutch, and German surveys to evaluate levels of financial literacy via
both objective and subjective measures. One advantage of using data from these countries is
that we were able to coordinate the data collection effort and use information that is strictly
comparable across countries. Moreover, we can make use of institutional characteristics, such
as differences in East and West Germany, to gain additional insight into the roots of gender
differences in financial literacy.

We confirm large gender differences in financial literacy in the United States, Germany, and
the Netherlands. Not only are female respondents less likely to answer financial literacy
questions correctly but they are also more likely to state that they do not know the answers to
the questions. Gender gaps are large and strikingly similar across countries. The gender gap in
financial literacy continues to persist even after taking into account marital status, education,
income, and other socioeconomic characteristics. Moreover, we find a gender gap in financial
literacy even among the young—this in spite of younger women having higher education
levels and labor force participation. We also find that women are not likely to consult
financial advisors to compensate for their lack of knowledge.

Gender differences occur not only in objective measures of financial literacy but also in self-
reported financial literacy. When asked to assess their financial knowledge, women tend to
give themselves lower scores than men. There is a mismatch between actual and self-assessed
literacy and the size of that mismatch also differs between women and men. Not many women
who answer the financial literacy questions correctly give themselves high scores while some
of those who respond with at least one “do not know” answer rate their knowledge as high,
suggesting that the “do not know” answer may—to some extent—measure lack of confidence.


                                               3
We also show that financial literacy can be linked to behavior: Those who are more
financially literate are more likely to plan for retirement, to invest in the stock market and pay
attention to fees, and to borrow at low costs. Financial literacy can also be linked to greater
financial well-being.

The structure of our paper is as follows. In section 2 we provide a summary of existing
empirical results on the gender gap in financial literacy. We focus on results from the United
States, the Netherlands, and Germany and show that the gap is very robust and does not go
away even when we account for a set of demographic and economic characteristics. In section
3 we examine financial literacy gender gaps across age, marital status, household decision-
making role, and geographic regions. In section 4 we examine self-assessed literacy, and in
section 5 we study the relationship between financial advice and financial literacy. In section
6, we discuss the links between financial literacy and financial behavior. We conclude with a
discussion of our findings in section 7.

                     2.   Uncovering the gender gap in financial literacy

While it is challenging to measure financial literacy, Lusardi and Mitchell (2011a) have
designed a financial literacy module that has proven effective in measuring knowledge of
simple but fundamental financial decision-making concepts and enabling comparisons of that
knowledge across countries. The questions they developed—explained in more detail
below—were initially designed for the US Health and Retirement Study and were
subsequently incorporated into several other US surveys. These questions have since been
fielded in more than twenty countries.1

The use of the same financial literacy questions across countries allows researchers to identify
similarities in financial knowledge in distinct economic environments. Moreover, it enables
identification of demographic groups that display low levels of knowledge. Women have
emerged as a group that consistently shows low levels of financial literacy.

2.1 Data sources and financial literacy

We combine information taken from three nationally representative household surveys. For
the United States, we use the 2009 National Financial Capability Study (NFCS). This survey
was commissioned by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) Investor
Education Foundation in consultation with the Department of the Treasury and the President’s
Advisory Council on Financial Literacy. About 1,500 American adults were surveyed by
telephone.2 For the Netherlands, we use De Nederlandsche Bank Household Panel (DHS).
The DHS is an online panel of around 2,000 households run by CentERdata at Tilburg
University. Data were collected in June 2010.3 For Germany we use data from SAVE—a
representative panel of German households. The panel has been run by the Munich Center for



1
   For an overview of the international comparison of financial literacy across twelve countries, see
Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b; 2014). See Beckmann for a description of the financial literacy questions
asked in ten Eastern European countries and see Boisclair, Lusardi, and Michaud (2014) for financial
literacy questions asked in Canada.
2
   For more detail about these data, see Lusardi and Mitchell (2011c). While more recent data have
become available, these data are most comparable with the Dutch and German data.
3
   For details about the data set and findings about financial literacy, see Alessie, Van Rooij, and
Lusardi (2011a and b) and Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2011a).
                                                  4
the Economics of Aging (MEA) since 2001. In 2009 about 2,200 households participated.
Respondents fill in a paper-and-pencil questionnaire.4

To evaluate financial literacy, respondents were asked three simple questions covering
fundamental concepts of economics and finance, expressed in everyday terms, that require
simple interest rate calculations and an understanding of the workings of inflation and risk
diversification.5 These questions were the same across the three countries. The exact wording
of the questions is as follows:

1) Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5
    years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to
    grow?6
    More than $102; Exactly $102; Less than $102; Do not know; Refuse to answer.

2) Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was
   2% per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy with the money in this
   account?
 More than today; Exactly the same; Less than today; Do not know; Refuse to answer.

3) Please tell me whether this statement is true or false. “Buying a single company’s stock
   usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund.”
   True; False; Do not know; Refuse to answer

The first two questions measure whether respondents have a basic understanding of interest
rates and inflation, which are economic concepts at the basis of financial decision-making.
The third question evaluates knowledge of risk diversification, a more sophisticated concept
that allows researchers to differentiate respondents across levels of financial literacy. Below
we discuss the findings for the United States, the Netherlands, and Germany.

2.2 The gender gap in financial literacy

In Table 1a, we use data from the 2009 NFCS to describe the differences in financial literacy
in the population and between women and men in the United States. Overall, financial literacy
is rather low. A large fraction of Americans lack knowledge of simple financial concepts. For
example, less than half of respondents correctly answered the question about interest rates and
inflation and only one-third were able to correctly answer all three questions. Most important,
women are much less likely to correctly answer the financial literacy questions than men; for
each question, the proportion of correct answers was lower among women than men. For
example, while 55% of men correctly answered the two questions about interest rates and
inflation, only 38% of women did so. Moreover, while 38% of men correctly answered all
three questions, only 22% of women did so. There is another important and notable gender
difference in the responses to these questions. Women are much more likely than men to
indicate that they do not know the answer to the questions.7 The proportion of “do not know”
responses was particularly high on the risk diversification question; as many as 41% of
4
  For more details about SAVE see Börsch-Supan et al. (2009); for more information about financial
literacy in SAVE, see Bucher-Koenen and Lusardi (2011).
5
  See Lusardi and Mitchell (2011a,b) for more detail on the measurement of financial literacy.
6
   Values in the US survey are expressed in dollars; values in the Dutch and German surveys are
expressed in euros.
7
  The percentage of respondents who refused to answer the financial literacy questions was very small:
about 1% for any one of the three questions.
                                                  5
women indicated that they did not know whether a single company stock is riskier than a
stock mutual fund. Moreover, half of women gave at least one “do not know” response to the
three financial literacy questions.

                                        (Table 1 about here)

Results for the Netherlands are reported in Table 1b. The findings are rather similar to those
from the United States. While the proportion of correct answers is a little higher in the
Netherlands than in the United States, financial literacy is not widespread among the Dutch
population either. About 73% of respondents correctly answered the questions about interest
rates and inflation, but less than half of respondents in the sample (45%) were able to
correctly answer all three questions. Most important, the Dutch data as well show a gender
gap in financial literacy. Women are less likely to correctly answer the financial literacy
questions. Moreover, as in the United States, women in the Netherlands are much more likely
to indicate that they do not know the answer to the questions. While 38% of men gave at least
one “do not know” response to the three questions, 46% of women answer with at least one
“do not know.”

German respondents’ answers to the three questions are displayed in Table 1c. 8 Findings are
again very similar to those reported above. While about 70% of respondents correctly
answered the questions about interest rates and inflation, only about half of the sample
answered all three questions correctly. Moreover, women performed significantly worse than
men. Compared to male respondents, women were equally likely to give correct answers to
the interest rate question but were significantly less likely to correctly answer the inflation and
risk diversification questions. About 60% of male respondents correctly answered all
questions, compared to 48% of female respondents. Again, we find that women are
disproportionately more likely to indicate that they do not know the answer. About 30% of
male respondents and more than 43% of female respondents had at least one “do not know”
response.

Comparing the gender gap in financial literacy among the United States, the Netherlands, and
Germany reveals a striking similarity across the three countries.9 In all three countries, women
were disproportionately more likely than men to state that they do not know the answer to a
financial literacy question, in particular when considering the risk diversification question.

Very similar differences in financial literacy between men and women have been found in
Sweden (Almenberg and Säve-Söderbergh, 2011), New Zealand (Crossan, Feslier, and
Hurnard, 2011), Italy (Fornero and Monticone, 2011), Japan (Sekita, 2011), Australia
(Agnew, Bateman, and Thorp, 2013), France (Arrondel, Debbich, and Savignac, 2013), and
Switzerland (Brown and Graf, 2013). In all of these countries, women are not only less likely
to correctly answer the three financial literacy questions but they are more likely to indicate


8
  In the German case, it is not possible to differentiate between “do not know” and “refuse to answer”
responses, but in comparable surveys where it is possible to differentiate, the proportion refusing to
answer is very low.
9
  When comparing results across countries one has to keep in mind that the design of the surveys in
the three countries was different: in the United States, a telephone interview was conducted; in the
Netherlands, respondents completed an online questionnaire; and in Germany, the questionnaire was in
paper-and-pencil format. Thus, the gender gap holds across survey formats.

                                                  6
that they do not know the answer to the financial literacy questions. Thus, we see a consistent
pattern of responses across countries.

Russia and Romania provide interesting exceptions to the pattern. Klapper and Panos (2011)
and Beckmann (2013) report no pronounced gender difference in the proportion of correct
responses to the financial literacy questions in Russia and Romania, respectively. In general,
the level of financial literacy is very low in these countries, with Russian and Romanian men
and women appearing to know equally little. However, as in the countries previously
mentioned, there is a significant gender difference in the number of “do not know” responses
to all questions. In both Russia and Romania, women are much more likely than men to
indicate that they do not know the answer to the financial literacy questions.

The gender gap in financial literacy is also evident when using a larger set of questions (up to
18) that assess understanding of both simple and complex financial concepts among Dutch,
American, and German respondents (see van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011a; Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2009; and Bucher-Koenen, 2011, respectively). Responses to this broader set of
questions confirm the general prevalence of and the gender-specific differences in “do not
know” answers. For every question in this additional set, women were significantly more
likely than men to indicate that they do not know the answer to the questions. Moreover, the
proportion of “do not know” answers is quite high, in particular for complex questions. For
example, in Germany more than 40% of women stated that they do not know the answer to
questions about the function of the stock market and 56% do not know the answer to
questions about the workings of mutual funds. Thus, the pattern of responses we find for the
three basic financial literacy questions mentioned above is replicated when considering a
wider and more sophisticated set of questions.

Gender differences in financial literacy are also found in surveys covering different age
groups. For example, Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto (2014) examined financial literacy among
an older cohort of respondents in the 2008 American Health and Retirement Study (HRS).
They find that among American respondents over age 50, women know substantially less than
men about complex aspects of investment and finance, and they perform less well on complex
calculations. Because older women are more inclined to reply that they “do not know” the
answer to the financial literacy questions, they are more likely to be classified among those
with low literacy. These results are in line with results from an earlier examination of
financial literacy among baby boomers using 2004 HRS data (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007).

Gender disparities in financial literacy are also found in studies that use different measures of
financial literacy. Earlier papers, mainly based on surveys in the United States, find a large
gap in financial literacy between men and women (Hogarth and Hilgert, 2002; Hilgert,
Hogarth, and Beverly, 2003). Gender differences also occur in other samples that cover
specific subgroups of the population, such as those by Moore (2003), Mandell (2004), Agnew
and Szykman (2005), and Agnew et al. (2008).

The gender gap in financial literacy does not seem to be domain specific. Lusardi and Tufano
(2009a,b) investigate debt literacy and find large differences between men and women: in
some cases the share of women who gave correct answers was about 20 percentage points
below the share of men. They also find that the gender gap in debt literacy applies for all age
groups. Hung, Parker, and Yoong (2009) compare various financial literacy measures on the
basis of data from the American Life Panel. They find that the gender disparity is persistent
over time and across measurement methodologies.

                                               7
Overall there is compelling and robust evidence of a gender gap in financial literacy across
countries with different financial market development and institutional set up. The difference
between women and men is strikingly similar across countries.

2.3 Is the gender gap real?

Financial literacy is closely linked to demographic characteristics such as marital status, age,
education, and income (see Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b; 2014). So far, we have considered
differences between women and men. But do these differences hold up when we account for
differences in demographic and economic characteristics between women and men? In Tables
2 and 3, we report a set of multivariate regressions using data from the United States, the
Netherlands, and Germany.10 In Table 2 the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to
1 for respondents who answered all three financial literacy questions correctly. In Table 3 the
dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if a respondent has at least one “do not know”
response.

                                       (Table 2 about here)

In each regression, we add a female dummy and, additionally, a set of controls that could
account for the gender gap in financial literacy. We first note that the largest gender gap is in
the Netherlands; Dutch women are 20 percentage points less likely than Dutch men to answer
all three financial literacy questions correctly. American women are about 16 percentage
points less likely than American men to give three correct answers, while German women are
12 percentage points less likely than German men to give correct answers to all three
questions. In specifications 2 and 3 we add information on marital status and age. The gender
effect decreases only slightly when controlling for these variables. In specification 4, we also
add education dummies. Finally, we add income dummies. Controlling for these demographic
characteristics hardly changes the gender gap among American respondents. American
women are still about 14 percentage points less likely to give three correct answers. In the
Netherlands the gender gap reduces by about 9 percentage points. Income differences between
men and women seem responsible for about half of the gender gap among Dutch respondents.
In Germany the gender gap reduces to half of the original difference mainly as a result of
accounting for differences in education levels between men and women. Though marital
status, age, education, and income can explain part of the gender gap in financial literacy, they
do not explain it fully. Even after controlling for demographic and economic characteristics,
women are less likely to answer all three financial literacy questions correctly.

We report similar findings when turning to the probability of respondents answering at least
one question with “do not know” (Table 3). Without taking account of covariates, women in
all three countries are between 13 and 17 percentage points more likely to reply with “do not
know.” After considering the same covariates as before, the gender gap diminishes but
remains statistically significant. Across countries and even after accounting for economic and
demographic characteristics, women are much more likely to state that they do not know the
answer to the financial literacy questions.

                                       (Table 3 about here)


10
  We are not using an Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition because, when running separate regressions for
men and women, we did not reject equality of the coefficient estimates. Therefore no decomposition is
called for.
                                                 8
These results are in line with the findings by Fonseca et al. (2010) that covariates such as
education, income, and marital status explain about 25% of the observed gender gap in
financial literacy in the US. Thus, even though the gender gap can be partly explained by
differences in socioeconomic characteristics between men and women, a large difference
remains unexplained.

                               3. Zooming in on financial literacy

3.1. The gender gap across age

Having established that the gender gap in financial literacy is large across countries and does
not go away even after we account for many demographic and economic characteristics, we
turn next to examining the gap more closely and studying specific subgroups of the population
to gain additional insight.

We first investigate financial literacy across different age groups. Women, especially older
women, may be less financially literate than men because of traditional societal roles. Older
generations of women are more likely to have stayed home to care for children and less likely
to have engaged in the workforce where they might have dealt with financial decisions or to
have discussed finances with colleagues, family, and friends. Today’s younger generations of
women are more likely to participate in the labor market, to be educated (for example, to have
a college degree), and to move away from traditional societal roles. By examining data from
three countries, we can determine whether similarities in financial literacy hold true across
different institutional frameworks.

In Figures 1A–1C, we compare performance on the financial literacy questions of female and
male respondents in different age groups. In general the age pattern of responses to the
financial literacy questions for both men and women is in line with other studies that have
argued that financial expertise shows a reverse U-shaped pattern over age (see Agarwal et al.,
2009).11 In the United States, the Netherlands, and Germany, financial literacy is rather low
among the young, but is lower among young women than young men. Thus, gender
differences in financial literacy are present from the start of the life cycle in all three
countries. While we cannot infer cohort patterns from a single cross-section, a look across the
surveyed age groups suggests that gender differences in financial literacy continue to be
pervasive among today’s young people. This is worrisome because young people have to
make many important financial decisions—from whether and how much to invest in
education to dealing with credit cards and other debt to contributing to retirement accounts—
and women seem less equipped than men to effectively do so.

                                    (Figures 1A-1C about here)

Other surveys find similar results. For example, using the same financial literacy questions,
Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto (2010) documented a gender difference in financial literacy
among young adults (age 23 to 28) in the United States. Interestingly, the difference holds
true even at high levels of education. For example, female respondents with a college degree
are 13 percentage points less likely to give correct responses to the financial literacy questions
than young males with a college degree (Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto, 2010). Similarly,
Goldsmith and Goldsmith (1997), Chen and Volpe (1998 and 2002), and Ford and Kent

11
  In a single cross section, we cannot differentiate age from cohort effects, but our interest is on the
young and the old.
                                                   9
(2010) found large differences in financial literacy between male and female college students.
Other papers provide additional insight. For example, according to Chen and Volpe (2002),
female college students are less enthusiastic about financial topics, less confident, and less
willing to acquire financial skills. Moreover, Mandell (2008) found substantial gender
differences in financial literacy among high school students; thus gender differences exist
even beyond the age groups we have considered in our analysis.

Women’s lack of financial literacy is found even among respondents with high levels of
education. Mahdavi and Horton (2012) analyze the financial knowledge of alumnae from an
elite female college in the United States. They report that financial literacy is low, even in this
special group of women. In other words, even very well-educated women who are likely to
have well-educated peers are not particularly financially literate, which could imply that
women acquire financial literacy differently than do men or have different opportunities for
learning than men.

3.2 Financial decision-making within the household

Several papers make a compelling case that differences in financial literacy emerge due to
specialization within the household, where men traditionally make the majority of household
financial decisions (Hsu, 2011, and Fonseca et al., 2010). Thus, women in a partnership
(married or living with a partner) may accumulate less financial knowledge than men. Yet,
because women tend to outlive men, there is an incentive for women to acquire financial
knowledge when they become widowed. In Table 4 we present level of financial literacy by
marital status. Because of the rich data in the three countries under consideration, we can also
consider respondents’ decision-making role within the household.

What we find is that married women exhibit lower levels of financial literacy than married
men, a result that holds true across countries. However, gender differences are large even for
respondents who have experienced a marital breakup (those who are divorced or widowed;
but note that the number of observations in these subgroups is small). Moreover, widows
show very low levels of financial literacy across all countries. There is a gender gap in
financial literacy even between single men and single women. In the United States, in
particular, single women display very low levels of financial literacy in comparison with
single women in the Netherlands and Germany. The regression results presented in the
previous section point in a similar direction; the financial literacy gender gap remains almost
unchanged in all three countries when taking marital status into account (see column 2 in
Table 2). In other words, this variable alone is not able to explain the size of the gender gap
we see in the data.

                                           (Table 4 about here)

Marital status may, however, be an imperfect proxy for identifying the decision maker in the
household. In all our data sets we are able to identify who the decision maker in the household
is. Moreover, we can analyze the relationship between gender and financial decision making
roles. We identify four groups of decision makers: (i) “Sole decision maker with partner,” i.e.,
decision makers who live with a partner but individually decide about financial issues; (ii)
“sole decision maker without partner,” i.e., singles and widows; (iii) respondents who claim
that their “partner makes most financial decisions”; and (iv) “joint decision makers.”12 Our
results indicate that female sole decision makers without a partner have lower levels of

12
     In the German case this can be jointly with a person outside the household.
                                                     10
financial literacy than do male sole decision-makers without a partner (Table 5). Female
respondents who decide jointly with their partner also know significantly less than respective
male respondents.13 Thus, even when they are the decision maker, women display lower
financial knowledge than male decision makers. Overall, we find it worrisome that women
who have to decide by themselves, i.e., single women and widows, show such low levels of
financial literacy.
                                    (Table 5 about here)

3.3 Gender differences in financial literacy between East and West Germany

The German SAVE allows us to shed more light on gender differences and the channels
though which financial literacy may be acquired by investigating gender differences in
financial literacy between East and West Germany. Individuals in these two regions were
exposed to different financial markets and institutions before German unification. Thus, we
can study the size of the gender gap in financial knowledge in East and West Germany twenty
years after unification and assess how well respondents living in the East perform on financial
literacy questions compared to those living in the West. This comparison may provide insight
into the roots of the gender differences we have documented so far.

Women (men) in the West are significantly more likely to answer all three financial literacy
questions correctly compared to women (men) in the East (Bucher-Koenen and Lusardi,
2011). Thus, even twenty years after German unification, there is still a significant gap in
financial knowledge between respondents from East and West Germany. Interestingly, there is
a strong gender difference among respondents in the West but no significant gender difference
among respondents living in East Germany. Thus, history and experience can be at the root of
learning, a fact confirmed in other studies. Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b) find, for example,
that American respondents who had been exposed to inflationary episodes are more likely to
know about inflation, while Japanese respondents who had a long experience with deflation
are much more likely to respond with “do not know” to the question about inflation.

One reason that has been put forward to explain the lack of gender differences in the East is
that women’s labor market participation is higher in East Germany than in West Germany.
However, the gender disparity in the West remains significant even after controlling for
income, education, and labor market status in a multivariate regression, whereas the gender
difference in the East remains insignificant.

Previously we reported that there are no gender differences in financial literacy in Russia,
another former Communist country where financial markets were not well developed. The
lack of gender difference in financial literacy may be related to the fact that the former
Communist societies were much more egalitarian with respect to gender roles. On the other
hand, the findings in East Germany and Russia could also be interpreted as prima facie
evidence that as financial markets develop, women are left behind in terms of financial
knowledge. If this is the case, the financial market development of recent years may lead to
the emergence of a gender gap in these former Communist societies. However, more research
is necessary to understand how and under what circumstances men and women acquire
financial knowledge.


13
  There are no significant gender disparities for individuals who are sole decision-makers and live
with a partner or between men and women claiming that their partner makes the decisions. We must
note, however, that these groups are small, so inferences are tentative.
                                                11
                      4. Are women aware of their lack of knowledge?

In addition to providing information about actual levels of financial literacy, the surveys in the
United States, the Netherlands, and Germany offer information about self-assessed financial
literacy. It is thus possible to evaluate not just how much people actually know but also how
much they think they know. Moreover, differences in self-assessed literacy are important
because subjective knowledge has an independent effect on financial decision-making (Hadar,
Sood, and Fox, 2010). Most important for this paper, it is possible to evaluate whether there
are gender differences not only in financial literacy but also in self-reported literacy and,
moreover, whether the mismatch between actual and perceived knowledge is different for
women and men.

In all three surveys, respondents were asked the following question:

“On a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means very low and 7 means very high, how would you
assess your overall financial knowledge?”

Figures 2A–2C show the self-assessed literacy for men and women in the American, Dutch,
and German samples, respectively.

                                  (Figures 2A-2C about here)

While many American respondents fared rather poorly on the three financial literacy
questions, results in Figure 2A indicate that a high proportion of American respondents gave
themselves high self-assessment scores. Around two-fifths (38%) of respondents awarded
themselves top scores (6 and 7), and only 13% gave themselves very low scores (1, 2, or 3).
Overall, about 70% of respondents indicated that their knowledge exceeds the median score
(4), a figure that is surprising given the actual number of correct responses to the financial
literacy questions. We have seen that women—based on the three knowledge questions—are
less financially literate than men. Although American women do assign themselves slightly
lower financial knowledge scores, the differences in self-assessed financial literacy between
women and men are relatively small and not significant.

Dutch respondents are somewhat less conservative about their financial knowledge than
American respondents (See Figure 2B). On average, about 27% of the Dutch assessed
themselves as knowledgeable about financial issues (6 or 7), and 18% evaluated themselves as
being at the bottom of the scale (1, 2, or 3). But even in the Netherlands, about 60% of
respondents considered their knowledge to be above median (a score of 4). But, relevant to
our analysis, female respondents gave themselves lower scores than men. Twenty-one percent
assigned themselves a 6 or 7, and 22% ranked themselves as having low financial literacy.
Thus, many Dutch women seem to be aware of their lack of knowledge.

German respondents rate themselves even more conservatively than respondents from the
Netherlands and the United States (See Figure 2C). Only a little more than 22% assessed
themselves as being very knowledgeable (6 or 7); roughly the same percentage (23%) rated
themselves as not knowledgeable (1, 2, or 3). Overall, only slightly more than half of the
respondents (54%) evaluated themselves as having an above-median score (4). Similar to the
Netherlands, German women rated themselves more conservatively than men. Twenty-one
percent of women evaluated themselves as having high financial literacy, and 24% assigned
themselves to the lower literacy ranks.

                                               12
In Figures 3A–3C we compare actual and subjective financial literacy between men and
women. We evaluate the percentage of individuals among each self-rated category who were
able to correctly answer the three financial literacy questions and the percentage of those with
at least one “do not know” response. We find a rather strong correlation between actual and
self-assessed financial knowledge for both men and women in all three countries. The
percentage of respondents who answered all questions correctly increases as self-assessed
knowledge increases; the share of those with at least one “do not know” answer declines as
self-assessed knowledge declines. Interestingly, the percentage of women who correctly
answered all three questions and gave themselves high scores (6 or 7) is not very high, while a
relatively high proportion of women who answered with at least one “do not know” gave
themselves high scores. This may indicate that “do not know” responses reflect not simply
lack of knowledge but difficulty in articulating the answer to a specific question and/or lack of
confidence in the answer.

                                  (Figures 3A-3C about here)

Overall we have a consistent set of findings on gender differences in financial literacy in the
three countries. Female respondents are less likely to respond correctly and more likely to
state that they do not know the answer to a financial literacy question. Additionally, when
asked to assess their financial knowledge, women assign themselves lower scores than men.

                                  5. Seeking financial advice

Having established that a gender gap exists in financial literacy, and in more than one country,
the important question is whether this gap matters for financial decision making. One way to
overcome lack of financial knowledge is to ask for financial advice. If women recognize their
lack of knowledge, as discussed in the previous section, one way to potentially compensate
for lack of knowledge would be to rely on professional financial advisors when making
financial decisions. However, several studies show that women are much less likely ask for
advice (see Loibl and Hira, 2006) and are less likely to use online resources as a source of
information (Loibl and Hira, 2011).

We present evidence on sources of financial advice among Dutch and German respondents in
Table 6.14 First, we note that only a small proportion of the population rely on professional
advice. Professional financial advisors are the main source of financial information for about
25% of Dutch respondents. More than half of respondents get their information mainly from
the Internet, newspapers, magazines, and other written sources, and about 23% consult family
and friends. However, women are much more likely than men to report family and friends as
their main source of information (30% vs. 19%). Men and women are almost equally likely to
rely on a financial professional. If we look at sources of financial information across levels of
financial literacy among Dutch respondents, we find that those with high financial literacy,
i.e., those able to correctly answer the three financial literacy questions, are more likely to
consult professional financial advisors (26%) than are respondents with low financial literacy
(21%). Those with low levels of literacy are much more likely to rely on family and friends as
their main source of financial information (32% vs. 20%). This finding supports work that
shows that financial literacy and financial advice are complements rather than substitutes
(Hackethal et al. 2012; Collins, 2012; Bucher-Koenen and Koenen, 2014).


14
  Questions on professional advice are asked differently in the United States and are not directly
comparable.
                                               13
Of German respondents, about one-third state that they do not consult anyone when making
financial decisions, another third consult professional advisors, and around 50% talk to
family, friends, or colleagues about their finances (Table 6; Panel B). 15 Looking at sources of
financial advice by gender, we find that women are much more likely than men to consult
informal sources of advice (53% vs. 44%), while men are slightly more likely to consult
professional advisors (31% vs. 35%). If we split the sample by financial literacy level instead
of gender, the difference becomes more pronounced. About 43% of respondents with low
levels of financial literacy do not talk to anyone about their finances. This fraction is much
lower among those with high levels of financial literacy (26%). In turn, those with high levels
of financial literacy are much more likely to consult professional advisors (40%), whereas
only 23% of those with low literacy rely on the services of professionals.

One of the reasons why women, who have lower financial literacy than men, are less likely to
consult professional advisors is because they may have difficulty judging the quality of the
advice they receive. Women may be unable to find a good financial advisor or may not know
what to do when they have a conflict with an advisor (Alcon, 1999). In an audit study of
financial advice, Mullainathan, Nöth, and Schoar (2012) found that young female investors
received lower quality advice than young male investors. Advisors were less likely to ask
women for personal information that would tailor the advice to their needs, and women were
less frequently advised to invest in stocks or bonds. Most importantly, advisors were much
more inclined to ask women to transfer their funds before providing them with advice,
meaning that female investors were pressured to choose an advisor before knowing anything
about the quality of the advice that they would receive. This is in line with the theoretical and
empirical work by Bucher-Koenen and Koenen (2014), who set up a model of financial advice
and financial literacy in which advisors have an incentive to offer clients with low financial
literacy lower quality advice. This tailoring of advice is confirmed empirically.

Overall, there is little evidence that women with low financial literacy are more likely to
consult professionals when making financial decisions in order to compensate for their lack of
knowledge. On the contrary, women and those with low financial literacy are less likely to
turn to financial advisors. This strategy may be rational because women seem to be more
likely to receive low-quality advice. Unfortunately, if low financial literacy and lack of
financial advice feed into each other, women may not acquire the skills or receive the support
necessary to make sound financial decisions.


                    6. Does the gender gap in financial literacy matter?

Having established that there are large differences in financial literacy between men and
women, we now turn to the question of whether this has an effect on the quality of personal
financial decisions and financial well-being. We discuss two separate strands of literature: one
that investigates the link between financial literacy and financial decision-making, and
another that examines gender and financial well-being.

An increasing number of studies investigate the effect of financial literacy on financial
decision-making. Individuals with low financial knowledge are found to be less likely to plan
for retirement, a finding that holds true in the United States, Germany, and the Netherlands

15
  Note that the findings from Germany may not be strictly comparable to those from the Dutch DHS
because the question was asked in a rather different way. Results do not add up to 100% because
respondents can consult both formal and informal sources of advice at the same time.
                                               14
(Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007, 2009, 2011a,c; Bucher-Koenen and Lusardi, 2011; Van Rooij,
Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011b, 2012). These findings also hold true when looking at a sample of
older women in the United States (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2008). Moreover, individuals with
low financial literacy are less likely to invest in risky but potentially high-yielding assets such
as stocks or bonds (Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011a; Yoong, 2011) and are more likely
to make financial mistakes such as borrowing at high rates (Lusardi and Tufano, 2009a;
Agarwal et al., 2009), making financial losses permanent (Bucher-Koenen and Ziegelmeyer
2013) or failing to minimize fees (Hastings, Mitchell, and Chyn, 2011). Mottola (2013) found
that women with low levels of financial literacy were more likely to engage in costly credit
card behavior than men. Those with more financial knowledge hold much higher levels of
wealth (Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2012). Thus, if women, on average, have lower
levels of financial literacy and do not obtain high-quality financial advice, they may be at risk
of failing to plan for retirement and making other financial mistakes. Alcon (1999) finds that
women perceive their lack of financial knowledge as an obstacle to financial planning.

The second strand of literature deals with gender and financial well-being. Jefferson (2009)
provides a review of the literature on gender and pensions. Because in most countries pension
benefits are related to contributions made during one’s working life, gender gaps in income
and labor force participation can translate into lower pension income for women. With
pension reforms shifting responsibility from state pensions to occupational and private
pensions, the link between labor market status and retirement income will become even
stronger, potentially widening the gender gap in retirement income. On the other hand, the
shift from defined benefit (DB) to defined contribution (DC) pension plans enhances freedom
of choice and increases opportunities to manage risk related to human capital and social
security wealth (see Baxter, 2002). However, this requires women to be aware of the risks
associated with the different forms of capital and to efficiently manage those risks.

Currently, the data show a prevalence of poverty among older women. Siegenthaler (1996)
provides an overview of studies examining old-age poverty. He reports that poverty rates
among single female households in the United States and Germany are high compared to
other countries. Sevak, Weir, and Willis (2003/2004) as well as Weir and Willis (2000) report
evidence that elderly women in the United States have a high likelihood of becoming poor.
The threat of old-age poverty is particularly high for women with low socioeconomic status
prior to widowhood, because they tend to become widowed earlier due to the correlation
between socioeconomic status and mortality. The authors consider this worrisome because
elderly widows have few alternatives for enhancing their financial situation. They argue that
this is related to insufficient insurance and financial preparation, especially among women
who become widowed between age 50 and 65 (see also Weir and Willis, 2003). Biro (2011)
examined the economic and health situation of elderly people in Europe and found that female
widows above the age of 50 are ten percentage points more likely to report financial
difficulties compared to single and married women of the same age. No such differences are
found for men.

There are also a large number of studies that point to the difficulties that women face with
other decisions. For example, women are more inclined to reply “do not know” to survey
questions about their expected retirement age and expected retirement income (Alessie, Van
Rooij, and Lusardi, 2011b). Hurd and McGarry (1995) as well as Teppa (2011) report
evidence that women tend to underestimate their own life expectancy. Therefore they may
insufficiently prepare for retirement.


                                                15
Women are also less likely to have defined contribution pension plans (Sundén and Surette,
1998), and they invest more conservatively, i.e., they are less likely to own stocks and more
likely to invest in fixed-income securities (see Almenberg and Dreber, 2011; Bajtelsmit and
VanDerhei, 1997; Hinz, McCarthy, and Turner, 1997; and Sundén and Surette, 1998).
Additionally, there are gender differences not only with respect to long-term saving and
investment behavior, but also with respect to short-term objectives and behavior. Hira and
Mugenda (2000), for instance, find that women are more likely to shop compulsively or
without need and are less satisfied with their ability to handle financial emergencies. Alesina,
Lotti, and Mistrulli (2013) examine credit conditions of self-employed and small business
owners in Italy and show that female borrowers systematically get worse credit conditions,
even after controlling for risk characteristics and bank fixed effects.

All in all, the existing evidence points to the fact that women and those with low financial
literacy have difficulties making financial decisions and that this can have severe
consequences for their financial well-being.

                                   7. Concluding remarks

The analysis of financial literacy in different countries and in different population subgroups
has shown that financial illiteracy is particularly severe among women. This has far-reaching
consequences, because financial literacy can be linked to important financial decisions, such
as planning for retirement and accumulating retirement wealth.

Particularly worrisome is that financial illiteracy is more widespread among single women
and widows, who do not have a partner or spouse to consult when making financial decisions.
Moreover, the gender gap in financial literacy is still present among the young. A low level of
financial knowledge may have serious consequences because of the increasing individual
responsibility for retirement security. The shift from DB to DC systems may have major
consequences for women because of their lower levels of financial knowledge in addition to
lower incomes during their working lives, interrupted employment histories, and longer life
expectancies. Moreover, women are very likely to spend at least part of their retirement as
widows. The evidence suggests that it is particularly difficult for women to obtain
independent, high-quality advice. Therefore, enhancing the financial knowledge of women
and equipping them with the tools to make sound financial decisions should be a top priority
for policymakers.

While more research is needed to understand the sources of gender differences in financial
literacy, the good news is that many women recognize their lack of knowledge, as indicated
by their tendency to rate themselves low on a personal financial knowledge scale. This
awareness makes them an ideal target for financial education programs. Previous research has
shown that financial education programs seem to be particularly successful for women. For
example, Clark et al. (2006) provide evidence that women are more likely than men to change
their behavior after attending a seminar on retirement goals and saving behavior. Specifically,
they are more likely to increase their retirement age and adjust their saving behavior. Lusardi,
Keller, and Keller (2008) show that financial education programs can be rather effective for
women. Focus groups and in-depth interviews with women reveal that women would like
such programs to be offered. In view of the gender differences found in the research, an
effective way forward for financial education programs is to target women and men separately
and to offer programs that recognize the differences between women and men in terms of both
financial knowledge and financial behavior.

                                              16
References

Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson (2009), “The age of
reason: Financial decisions over the life cycle and implications for regulation,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2009, pp. 51-117.

Agnew, Julie R., and Lisa R. Szykman (2005), “Asset allocation and information overload:
The influence of information display, asset choice and investor experience,” The Journal of
Behavioral Finance, 6(2), pp. 57-70.

Agnew, Julie R., Lisa R. Anderson, Jeffrey R. Gerlach, and Lisa R. Szykman, (2008), “Who
Chooses Annuities? An Experimental Investigation of the Role of Gender, Framing, and
Defaults,” American Economic Review, 98(2), pp. 418-422.

Agnew, Julie R., Hazel Bateman, and Susan Thorp (2013), “Financial Literacy and
Retirement Planning in Australia,” Numeracy, 6(2), 7.

Alcon, Arnaa (1999), “Financial planning and the mature woman,” Journal of Financial
Planning, 12(2), pp. 82-88.

Alesina, Alberto F., Francesca Lotti, and Paolo Emilio Mistrulli (2013), “Do Women Pay
More for Credit? Evidence from Ital,” Journal of the European Economic Association 11(s1),
pp. 45-66.

Alessie, Rob, Maarten van Rooij, and Annamaria Lusardi (2011a), “Financial literacy and
retirement preparation in the Netherlands,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance,
10(4), pp. 527-545.

Alessie, Rob, Maarten van Rooij, and Annamaria Lusardi (2011b), “Financial literacy,
retirement preparation and pension expectations in the Netherlands,” DNB Working Paper no.
289.

Almenberg, Johan, and Anna Dreber (2011), “Gender, Financial Literacy and Stock Market
Participation,” Stockholm School of Economics Economic Research Institute Working Paper,
737.

Almenberg, Johan, and Jenny Säve-Söderbergh (2011), “Financial literacy and retirement
planning in Sweden,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4), pp. 585-598.

Arrondel, Luc, Majdi Debbich, and Frédérique Savignac (2013), “Financial Literacy and
Financial Planning in France,” Numeracy, 6(2), 8.

Bajtelsmit, Vickie L., and Jack L. VanDerhei (1997), “Risk aversion and pension investment
Choices,” in Positioning pensions for the twenty-first century, edited by Michael S. Gordon,
Olivia S. Mitchell, and Marc M. Twinney. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp.
45-66.

Baxter, Marianne (2002), “Social Security as financial asset: Gender-specific risks and
returns”, Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 1(1), pp. 35-52.


                                            17
Beckmann, Elisabeth (2013), “Financial Literacy and Household Savings in Romania,”
Numeracy, 6(2), 9.

Biro, Aniko (2011), “Poverty of widows in Europe”, discussion paper, Central European
University, The University of Edinburgh.

Boisclair, David, Annamaria Lusardi and Pierre-Carl Michaud (2014), “Financial Literacy and
Retirement Planning in Canada,” NBER Working Paper n. 20297.

Börsch-Supan, Axel, Michela Coppola, Lothar Essig, Angelika Eymann, and Daniel Schunk
(2009), “The German SAVE Study - Design and Results,” 2nd ed., Mannheim Institute for the
Economics of Aging (MEA).

Bucher-Koenen, Tabea, and Johannes Koenen (2014), “Do smarter consumers get better
advice?,” working paper, Max-Planck-Institute for Social Law and Social Policy.

Bucher-Koenen, Tabea (2011), “Financial literacy, Riester pensions and other private old age
provision in Germany,” Max-Planck-Institute for Social Law and Social Policy, MEA
Discussion Paper 250-11.

Bucher-Koenen, Tabea, and Annamaria Lusardi (2011), “Financial literacy and retirement
planning in Germany,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4), pp. 565-584.

Bucher-Koenen, Tabea, and Michael Ziegelmeyer (2013), “Once Burned, Twice Shy?
Financial Literacy and Wealth Losses during the Financial Crisis,” Review of Finance,
forthcoming.

Brown, Martin, and Roman Graf (2013), “Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning in
Switzerland,” Numeracy, 6(2), 6.

Chen, Haiyang, and Ronald P. Volpe (1998), “An analysis of personal financial literacy
among college students,” Financial Services Review, 7(2), pp. 107-128.

Chen, Haiyang, and Ronald P. Volpe (2002), “Gender differences in personal financial
literacy among college students,” Financial Services Review, 11(3), pp. 289-307.

Clark, Robert L., Madeleine D’Ambrosio, Ann A. McDermed, and Kshama Sawant (2006),
“Retirement plans and saving decisions: The role of information and education,” Journal of
Pension Economics and Finance, 5(1), pp. 45-67.

Crossan, Diana, David Feslier, and Roger Hurnard (2011), “Financial literacy and retirement
planning in New Zealand,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4), pp. 619-635.

Collins, M. (2012), “Financial advice: A substitute for financial literacy?,” Financial Services
Review, 21(4), pp. 307-322

Fonseca, Raquel, Kathleen J. Mullen, Gema Zamarro, and Julie Zissimopoulos (2010), “What
explains the gender gap in financial literacy? The role of household decision making,”
Journal of Consumer Affairs, 46(1), pp. 90-106.


                                               18
Ford, Matthew W., and Daniel W. Kent (2010), “Gender differences in student financial
market attitudes and awareness: An exploratory study,” Journal of Education for Business,
85(1), pp. 7-12.

Fornero, Elsa, and Chiara Monticone (2011), “Financial literacy and pension plan
participation in Italy,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4), pp. 547-564.

Goldsmith, Elizabeth, and Ronald E. Goldsmith (1997), “Gender differences in perceived and
real knowledge of financial investments,” Psychological Reports, 80(1), pp. 236-238.

Hackethal, A., Haliassos, M., & Jappelli, T. (2012), “Financial advisors: A case of
babysitters?,” Journal of Banking & Finance, 36(2), pp. 509-524.

Hadar, Liat, Sanjay Sood, and Craig Fox (2010), “It’s not only what you know but also how
knowledgeable you feel: Subjective knowledge in consumer financial decisions,”
Unpublished manuscript, University of California, Los Angeles.

Hastings, Justine, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Eric Chyn (2011), “Fees, framing, and financial
literacy in the choice of pension manager,” Financial literacy: Implications for retirement
security and the financial marketplace, pp. 101-115.

Hinz, Richard P., David D. McCarthy, and John A. Turner (1997), “Are women conservative
investors? Gender differences in participant directed pension investments,” in Positioning
pensions for the twenty-first century, edited by Michael S. Gordon, Olivia S. Mitchell, and
Marc M. Twinney. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 91-103.

Hira, Tahira K., and Olive Mugenda (2000), “Gender differences in financial perceptions,
behavior and satisfaction,” Journal of Financial Planning, 13(2), pp. 86-92.

Hogarth, Jeanne, and Marianne Hilgert (2002), “Financial knowledge, experience and
learning preferences: Preliminary results from a new survey on financial literacy,” Consumer
Interest Annual, 48(1), pp. 1-7.

Hilgert, Marianne, Jeanne Hogarth, and Sondra Beverly (2003), “Household financial
management: The connection between knowledge and behavior,” Federal Reserve Bulletin,
89, pp. 309–322.

Hsu, Joanne W. (2011), “Aging and strategic learning: The impact of spousal incentives on
financial literacy,” Networks Financial Institute Working Paper, no. 2011-WP-06, Indiana
State University.

Hung, Angela A, Andrew M. Parker, and Joanne K. Yoong (2009), “Defining and measuring
financial literacy,” RAND Working Paper, no. WR-708.

Hurd, Michael D., and Kathleen McGarry (1995), “Evaluation of the subjective probabilities
of survival in the health and retirement study,” Journal of Human Resources, pp. S268-S292.

Jefferson, Therese (2009), “Women and retirement pensions: a research review,” Feminist
Economics, 15(4), pp. 115-145.


                                              19
Klapper, Leora, and Georgios A. Panos (2011), “Financial literacy and retirement planning:
The Russian case,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4), pp. 599-618.

Loibl, Cäzilia, and Tahira K. Hira (2006), “A workplace and gender-related perspective on
financial planning information sources and knowledge outcomes,” Financial Services Review,
15(1), pp. 21-42.

Loibl, Cäzilia, and Tahira K. Hira (2011), “Know your subject: A gendered perspective on
investor information search,” Journal of Behavioral Finance, 12(3), pp.117-130.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Punam Keller, and Adam Keller (2008), “New ways to make people
save: a social marketing approach,” in Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the
Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving Programs, edited by Annamaria Lusardi,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 209-236.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2007), “Baby boomers retirement security: the
role of planning, financial literacy and housing wealth,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
54(1), pp. 205-224.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2008), “Planning and financial literacy: How do
women fare?,” American Economic Review, 98(2), pp. 413-417.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2009), “How ordinary consumers make complex
economic decisions: Financial literacy and retirement readiness,” NBER Working Paper no.
15350.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2011a), “Financial literacy and planning:
Implications for retirement wellbeing,” in Olivia S. Mitchell and Annamaria Lusardi (eds.),
Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 17-39.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2011b), “Financial literacy around the world: An
overview,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4), pp. 497-508.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2011c), “Financial literacy and retirement
planning in the United States,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4), pp. 509-
525.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2014), “The economic importance of financial
literacy: Theory and evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature, 52(1), pp. 5-44.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto (2010), “Financial literacy among the
young,” Journal of Consumer Affairs, 44(2), pp. 358-380.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto (2014), “Financial sophistication in
the older population,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance,1 3(4), pp. 347-366.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano (2009a), “Debt literacy, financial experiences, and
overindebtedness,” NBER Working Paper, no. 14808.


                                             20
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano (2009b), “Teach workers about the peril of debt,”
Harvard Business Review, November, pp. 22-24.

Mahdavi, Mahnaz and Nicholas Horton (2012), “Financial literacy among educated women:
Room for improvement,”Journal of Consumer Affairs, 48, pp. 403–417.

Mandell, Lewis (2004), “Financial literacy: Are we improving? Results of the 2004 National
Jump$tart Survey,” Washington, D.C.: Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy.

Mandell, Lewis (2008), “Financial education in high school,” in Annamaria Lusardi (ed.),
Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and
Saving Programs, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 257-279.

Moore, Donna (2003), “Survey of financial literacy in Washington State: Knowledge,
behavior, attitudes and experiences,” Technical Report 03-39, Social and Economic Sciences
Research Center, Washington State University.

Mottola, Gary (2013), “In our best interest: Women, financial literacy and credit card
behavior”, Numeracy, 6(2), 4.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, Markus Nöth, and Antoinette Schoar (2012), “The market for financial
advice: An audit study,” NBER Working Paper, no. 17929.

Sekita, Shizuka (2011), “Financial literacy and retirement planning in Japan,” Journal of
Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4), pp. 637-656.

Sevak, Purvi, David R. Weir, and Robert J. Willis (2003/2004), “The economic consequences
of husband’s death: Evidence from HRS and AHEAD,” Social Security Bulletin, 65(3), pp.31-
44.

Siegenthaler, Jurg K. (1996), “Poverty among single elderly women under different systems
of old-age security: A comparative review,” Social Security Bulletin, 59(3), pp. 31-44.

Sundén, Annija E., and Brian J. Surette (1998), “Gender differences in the allocation of assets
in retirement savings plans,” American Economic Review, 88(2), pp. 207-211.

Teppa, Federica (2011), “Can the longevity risk alleviate the annuitization puzzle? Empirical
evidence from Dutch data,” DNB Working Paper No. 223.

Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie (2011a), “Financial literacy and
stock market participation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 101(2), pp. 449-472.

Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie (2011b), “Financial literacy and
retirement planning in the Netherlands,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 32(4), pp. 593-
608.

Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie (2012), “Financial literacy,
retirement planning, and households wealth,” Economic Journal, 122(560), pp. 449-478.




                                              21
Weir, David, and Robert Willis (2000), “Prospects for widow poverty,” in Forecasting
Retirement Needs and Retirement Wealth, edited by Olivia S. Mitchell, P. Brett Hammond,
and Anna M. Rappaport. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 208–234.

Weir, David R., and Robert J. Willis (2003), “Widowhood, divorce, and loss of health
insurance among near elderly women: evidence from the Health and Retirement Study,”
Michigan Retirement Research Center, Working Paper 2003-040.

Yoong, Joanne (2011), “Financial illiteracy and stock market participation: Evidence from the
RAND American Life Panel,” in Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and
the Financial Marketplace, edited by Olivia S. Mitchell and Annamaria Lusardi. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 76–97.




                                             22
Figures

Figure 1: Self-reported Financial Literacy for Men and Women in the US Financial
Capability Study (Panel A), in the Dutch DHS (Panel B), and in the German SAVE (Panel C).
                                                 United States
                          40

                          30                                  33 32
                Percent




                          20
                                                                        20 21
                                                                                  18 17
                          10                       16 17
                               8 6     6 6
                           0
                               1&2       3           4          5         6           7
                                             Self-assessment category         Women       Men
          (A)


                                                 Netherlands
                          40

                          30                                       34
                                                              31             29
                                                    27
                Percent




                          20
                                                         19             18
                          10           13
                               9             8
                                   5                                              3 4
                           0
                               1&2       3            4         5         6           7
                                             Self-assessment category         Women       Men
          (B)


                                                 Germany
                          40

                          30                                       35
                                                              29
                                                   26
                Percent




                          20
                                                        20
                          10           15 14                            16 16
                               9 8                                                5 8
                          0
                               1&2      3            4          5        6            7
                                             Self-assessment category         Women       Men
          (C)


                                                    23
                Figure 2: Self-reported and Actual Financial Literacy for Men and Women in the US
                Financial Capability Study (Panel A), in the Dutch DHS (Panel B), and in the German SAVE
                (Panel C).

                                        US - Women                                                                   US - Men
                80                                                                        80
                60            70                                                          60
                                     64
      Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                            60                                                                  56
                40                                   48                                   40          50                             53
                                                            41                                                         46
                                                                   39                                                       41             40
                20                                        32                              20                         33       35
                                                  28                                                                                        24
                                   17      15                    18                              14                                   20
                  0       9                                                                                13
                                                                                          0
                         1&2        3      4       5       6       7                              1&2      3        4      5       6       7
                                 Self-assessment category                                                Self-assessment category
                       3 correct responses    at least 1 do-not-know
(A)                                                                                            3 correct responses    at least 1 do-not-know


                                   Netherlands - Women                                                      Netherlands - Men
                80                                                                        80
                60                                                                        60                                               75
                              67                                                                                                     68
      Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                                                                                                            63
                40                                                 55                     40       54           52
                                     47      49
                                                  4037    43                                     40                  43
                20                 35      36               35   34                       20               30          32
                                                                                                                                25
                  0       9                                                                                                           15    15
                                                                                           0
                         1&2        3       4       5       6      7                              1&2       3       4       5       6      7
                                  Self-assessment category                                                Self-assessment category
                       3 correct resonses     at least 1 do-not-know                           3 correct responses    at least 1 do-not-know
(B)

                                     Germany - Women                                                            Germany - Men
                  80                                                                 80

                                                                                     60                                                    76
                  60                                                                                                                 68
                              65
                                                                                Percent
        Percent




                                                                 59                                62      58        60     59
                  40                  50          50      54                         40
                                           4845
                                    42              40
                  20      30                                34                       20          30         34                  30
                                                                      27                                               27             23
                                                                                                                                            14
                  0                                                                       0
                          1&2        3       4       5       6      7                            1&2        3       4      5        6      7
                                   Self-assessment category                                               Self-assessment category
(C)                    3 correct responses     at least 1 do-not-know                          3 correct responses    at least 1 do-not-know




                                                                           24
                      Figure 3: Financial Literacy by Age

                            US - 3 correct answers
                80


                60

                                                        55
      Percent

                40
                                        40
                                   33                                36
                20        26                       27
                                                               19
                     12
                 0
                      <35           36-50          51-65         >65
                                             Age             women     men
(A)

                               NL - 3 correct answers
                80


                60
                          59            57              56
      Percent




                40                                                   49
                     38            36              36
                20                                             28

                0
                      <35           36-50          51-65         >65

(B)                                          Age             women     men


                            DE - 3 correct answers
                80


                60                      69
                          64
                                                        57
      Percent




                                   55
                40   47                            50                50

                                                               34
                20


                 0
                      <35           36-50          51-65        >65
                                             Age             women        men
(C)




                                        25
Table 1a: Summary Statistics from the US 2009 Financial Capability Study (%)
A: Interest Question            Full Sample      Female              Male
>$102                           64.9             58.8                71.3
=$102                           11.3             13.1                9.5
<$102                           9.2              10.0                8.4
Do not know                     13.5             16.6                10.3
Refuse to answer                1.0              1.5                 0.5
B: Inflation Question
More                            11.2             12.3                10.0
Exactly the same                9.0              9.8                 8.1
Less                            64.3             58.0                71.0
Do not know                     14.2             18.4                9.8
Refuse to answer                1.4              1.6                 1.1
C: Risk Question
Correct (false)                 13.3             10.6                16.2
Incorrect (true)                51.8             46.8                57.1
Do not know                     33.7             41.4                25.6
Refuse to answer                1.2              1.2                 1.2
D: Cross-question Consistency
Interest & Inflation            46.2             37.7                55.2
All correct                     30.2             22.5                38.3
None correct                    12.3             15.1                9.3
At least 1 do-not-know          42.4             50.0                34.3
All do-not-know                 4.7              6.3                 3.0
# Observations                  1488             768                 720

Note: Distribution of responses to financial literacy questions in the full sample and for
female and male respondents. All figures are weighted.




                                           26
Table 1b: Summary Statistics from the 2010 Dutch DNB Household Survey (%)

A: Interest Question             Full Sample         Female               Male
>€102                            84.8                83.1                 86.6
=€102                            3.4                 4.3                  2.5
<€102                            1.7                 1.9                  1.6
Do not know                      8.9                 9.5                  8.3
Refuse to answer                 1.1                 1.1                  1.1
B: Inflation Question
More                             2.7                 2.8                  2.7
Exactly the same                 5.7                 6.9                  4.3
Less                             76.9                72.0                 81.9
Do not know                      13.5                16.9                 10.1
Refuse to answer                 1.2                 1.4                  1.0
C: Risk Question
Correct (false)                  51.9                42.1                 62.0
Incorrect (true)                 13.3                16.1                 10.5
Do not know                      33.2                39.9                 26.2
Refuse to answer                 1.6                 1.9                  1.3
D: Cross-question Consistency
Interest & Inflation             73.4                68.3                 78.6
All correct                      44.8                35.0                 55.1
None correct                     10.5                11.5                 9.4
At least 1 do-not-know           37.6                45.9                 29.0
All do-not-know                  8.1                 8.2                  8.0
# Observations                   1665                847                  818

Note: Distribution of responses to financial literacy questions in full sample and for female
and male respondents. All figures are weighted.




                                             27
Table 1c: Summary Statistics from the 2009 German SAVE (%)
A: Interest Question                   Full Sample        Female            Male
>€102                                  82.4               81.1              83.8
=€102                                  3.0                3.2               2.8
<€102                                  3.7                3.4               4.0
Do not know/ refuse to answer          11.0               12.4              9.4

B: Inflation Question
More                                   0.9                0.5               1.3
Exactly the same                       3.8                4.3               3.1
Less                                   78.4               74.1              83.2
Do not know/ refuse to answer          17.0               21.0              12.4

C: Risk Question
Correct (false)                        61.8               56.8              67.6
Incorrect (true)                       5.9                5.2               6.6
Do not know/ refuse to answer          32.3               38.0              25.8

D: Cross-question Consistency
Interest & Inflation                   71.9               68.1              76.3
All correct                            53.2               47.5              59.6
None correct                           10.3               11.5              8.9
At least 1 do-not-know/ refuse         37.0               43.3              29.9
All do-not-know/ refuse                8.4                9.7               6.9
# Observations                         1059               553               506

Note: Distributions of responses to financial literacy questions in full sample and for female
and male respondents. All figures are weighted.




                                              28
Table 2: Linear Probability Model: Dependent Variable “3 Answers Correct”
Panel A: US Financial Capability Survey
                    (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)
Female            -0.158***     -0.146***    -0.145***      -0.152***    -0.138***
                (0.0247)      (0.0242)     (0.0240)       (0.0228)     (0.0228)
Marital
                                   x            x              x            x
Status
Age                                             x              x            x
Education                                                      x            x
Income                                                                      x
Observations      1,488         1,488        1,488          1,488        1,488
R2                 0.03         0.065        0.086          0.166        0.187
Panel B: Netherlands DNB Panel
Female            -0.201***     -0.199***    -0.204***      -0.197***    -0.116***
                (0.0294)      (0.0294)     (0.0298)       (0.0290)     (0.0342)
Marital
                                   x            x              x            x
Status
Age                                             x              x            x
Education                                                      x            x
Income                                                                      x
Observations      1,665         1,665        1,665          1,665        1,665
R2                0.041         0.042        0.051          0.098        0.126
Panel C: Germany SAVE survey
Female            -0.115***     -0.096***    -0.116***         -0.059*    -0.066**
                 (0.031)       (0.031)      (0.032)        (0.032)      (0.031)
Marital
                                   x            x              x            x
Status
Age                                             x              x            x
Education                                                      x            x
Income                                                                      x
Observations      1,059         1,059        1,059          1,059        1,059
R2                0.013         0.027        0.037           0.11        0.141
                  * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;** significant at 1%.




                                                29
Table 3: Linear Probability Model: Dependent Variable “At Least One Do-Not-Know”
Panel A: US Financial Capability Survey
                    (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)
Female             0.156***       0.140***     0.139***       0.146***     0.131***
                (0.0272)       (0.0271)     (0.0268)       (0.0259)     (0.0261)
Marital Status                      x            x              x            x
Age                                              x              x            x
Education                                                       x            x
Income                                                                       x
Observations      1,488          1,488        1,488          1,488        1,488
R2                0.025          0.054        0.073          0.137        0.154
Panel B: Netherlands DNB Panel
Female             0.168***       0.162***     0.168***       0.163***   0.0975***
                (0.0296)       (0.0297)     (0.0301)       (0.0297)     (0.0342)
Marital Status                      x            x              x            x
Age                                              x              x            x
Education                                                       x            x
Income                                                                       x
Observations      1,665          1,665        1,665          1,665        1,665
R2                 0.03          0.033        0.038          0.065        0.089
Panel C: Germany SAVE survey
Female             0.128***       0.106***     0.121***         0.074**    0.081***
                 (0.029)        (0.030)      (0.030)        (0.030)      (0.030)
Marital
                                    x            x              x            x
Status
Age                                              x              x            x
Education                                                       x            x
Income                                                                       x
Observations      1,059          1,059        1,059          1,059        1,059
R2                0.018          0.039        0.047          0.099        0.131
                  * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;** significant at 1%.




                                                30
Table 4: Distribution of responses to financial literacy questions by marital status among
women and men
Panel A: US Financial Capability Study
                      Women                                             Men
marital status   % 3 correct      % at least 1 do marital status   % 3 correct   % at least 1 do
(relative                         not know        (relative                      not know
frequency)                                        frequency)
Married                                           Married
                 27.7             41.6                             47.7          27.8
(51.1%)                                           (58.9%)
Single                                            Single
                 13.4             57.4                             23.5          43.1
(25.7%)                                           (25.6%)
Divorced                                          Divorced
                 24.4             58.0                             29.6          40.7
(12.2%)                                           (11.0%)
Widowed                                           Widowed
                 17.1             62.3                             21.4          54.1
(11.0%)                                           (4.6%)
Observations     768                                               720
Panel B: Netherlands DNB Panel
                    Women                                               Men
marital status   % 3 correct      % at least 1 do marital status   % 3 correct   % at least 1 do
(relative                         not know        (relative                      not know
frequency)                                        frequency)
Married                                           Married
                 35.2             43.5                             56.7          28.5
(67.9%)                                           (77.9%)
Single                                            Single
                 43.8             48.2                             53.7          33.9
(14.0%)                                           (15.6%)
Divorced                                          Divorced
                 21.6             57.3                             56.1          36.1
(10.7%)                                           (3.7%)
Widowed                                           Widowed
                 25.6             48.0                             61.5          32.5
(7.3%)                                            (2.8%)
Observations     656                                               685
Panel C: Germany SAVE Survey
                    Women                                               Men
marital status   % 3 correct      % at least 1 do marital status   % 3 correct   % at least 1 do
(relative                         not know        (relative                      not know
frequency)                                        frequency)
Married                                           Married
                 51.6             40.0                             60.6          28.0
(55.5%)                                           (59.3%)
Single                                            Single
                 47.4             40.7                             62.2          28.1
(14.9%)                                           (26.1%)
Divorced                                          Divorced
                 49.9             38.0                             52.6          38.8
(15.4%)                                           (9.2%)
Widowed                                           Widowed
                 28.7             64.5                             48.8          44.4
(14.2%)                                           (5.4%)
Observations 553                                                   506
Note: All figures are weighted.



                                              31
Table 5: Distribution of responses to financial literacy questions by financial decision
maker among women and men
Panel A: US Financial Capability Study
                    Women                                                 Men
Financial           %         % at least 1 do        Financial decision   %       % at least 1 do
decision maker      3 correct not know               maker                3       not know
(relative                                            (relative            correct
frequency)                                           frequency)
Sole with partner                                    Sole with partner
                    20.8      47.0                                        52.3    23.1
(32.5%)                                              (49.0%)
Sole w/o partner                                     Sole w/o partner
                    34.7      45.4                                        47.0    11.1
(1.6%)                                               (2.3%)
Partner decides                                      Partner decides
                    19.6      44.9                                        34.4    44.0
(20.7%)                                              (13.1%)
Joint decisions                                      Joint decisions
                    32.9      38.9                                        43.6    28.5
(44.4%)                                              (34.9%)
Observations        436                              Observations         464
Panel B: Netherlands DNB Panel
                    Women                                               Men
Financial           %         % at least 1 do        Financial decision %       % at least 1 do
decision maker      3 correct not know               maker              3       not know
(relative                                            (relative          correct
frequency)                                           frequency)
Sole with partner                                    Sole with partner
                    21.5      63.9                                      65.0    23.3
(8.4%)                                               (16.5%)
Sole w/o partner                                     Sole w/o partner
                    37.3      47.7                                      55.5    33.7
(34.1%)                                              (22.6%)
Partner decides                                      Partner decides
                    40.8      38.3                                      26.0    48.4
(10.2%)                                              (8.0%)
Joint decisions                                      Joint decisions
                    35.4      44.8                                      54.9    28.6
(47.3%)                                              (52.9%)
Observations        662                              Observations       656
Panel C: Germany SAVE Survey
                    Women                                               Men
Financial           %         % at least 1 do        Financial decision %       % at least 1 do
decision maker      3 correct not know               maker              3       not know
(relative                                            (relative          correct
frequency)                                           frequency)
Sole with partner                                    Sole with partner
                    53.8      29.4                                      67.8    25.2
(5.9%)                                               (6.5%)
Sole w/o partner                                     Sole w/o partner
                    40.4      50.4                                      54.5    35.3
(39.1%)                                              (36.1%)
Partner decides                                      Partner decides
                    57.1      30.1                                      54.2    25.5
(2.6%)                                               (2.8%)
Joint decisions                                      Joint decisions
                    51.6      40.2                                      62.4    27.2
(52.4%)                                              (54.6%)
Observations        553                              Observations       506
Note: All figures are weighted.
                                                32
Table 6: Financial Advice by Gender and Financial Literacy
Panel A: Netherlands DNB Panel
                       No Personal Advice Formal Advice Informal Advice
                                           By              By Family And Friends
                                           Professionals
All (N=1,392)          52.2                23.1            24.7

                                     By gender
Women (N=694)          46.6                23.4            29.9
Men (N=698)            57.8                22.8            19.4

                                By financial literacy
3 answers correct
                       55.3                  25.9          18.9
(N=631)
At least one do-not-
                       47.1                  21.1          31.8
know (N=526)

Panel B: Germany SAVE survey
                    No Personal Advice       Formal Advice Informal Advice
                                             By            By Family And Friends
                                             Professionals
All (N=1,059)          33.5                  33.1          48.8

                                     By gender
Women (N=553)          30.3                31.4            53.0
Men (N=506)            37.2                35.0            44.0

                                By financial literacy
3 answers correct
                       26.5                  40.1          55.1
(N=560)
At least one do-not-
                       43.2                  23.4          41.1
know (N=391)




                                        33
