NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE THE WORLD’S POOREST BEING LEFT BEHIND?
Martin Ravallion
Working Paper 20791
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20791

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

For helpful discussions on the topic of this paper and comments on the paper the author is grateful
to Francois Bourguignon, Mary Ann Bronson, Cait Brown, Shaohua Chen, Denis Cogneau, Garance
Genicot, Peter Lanjouw, Nkunde Mwase, Henry Richardson, Dominique van de Walle and seminar
participants at the International Monetary Fund. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Martin Ravallion. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Are the World’s Poorest Being Left Behind?
Martin Ravallion
NBER Working Paper No. 20791
December 2014
JEL No. I32,I38,O15
ABSTRACT
The traditional approach to poverty measurement puts no explicit weight on success at increasing the
typical level of living of the poorest—raising the consumption floor. To address this deficiency, the
paper defines and measures the expected value of the floor, allowing for transient effects and measurement
errors in survey data. On using all suitable and available surveys for the developing world over 1981-2011,
the expected value of the floor is about half the $1.25 a day poverty line. There has been only modest
progress in raising the floor, despite much progress in reducing the number living near the floor.

Martin Ravallion
Center for Economic Research
Georgetown University
ICC 580
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
mr1185@georgetown.edu

1.

Introduction
At the launch of the 2011 Millennium Goals Report, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-

moon said that:
“The poorest of the world are being left behind. We need to reach out and lift them into our
lifeboat.”

This view that the developing world’s poorest have been left behind is heard quite often.2 Yet
other observers appear to tell a very different story. They use aphorisms such as “a rising tide
lifts all boats” or they point to evidence that the poor are “breaking through from the bottom.”3
This paper tries to make sense of these seemingly conflicting views on this important
question. The central issue is how we should assess progress against poverty. The approach of
economists and statisticians has been to count the poor in some way. One might track the
proportion of the population living below some deliberately low poverty line or use a more
sophisticated measure giving higher weight to poorer people. A prominent early advocate of this
approach was Arthur Bowley (the first Professor of Statistics at the London School of
Economics) who wrote 100 years ago that: 4
“There is perhaps, no better test of the progress of a nation than that which shows what proportion
are in poverty; and for watching the progress the exact standard selected as critical is not of great
importance, if it is kept rigidly unchanged from time to time.” Bowley (1915, p.213)

I dub this the counting approach. The theoretical foundations of the approach are found in a large
literature on poverty measurement, in which various axioms have been proposed.5
This approach has found evidence of falling incidence and depth of absolute poverty in
the developing world over recent decades, when judged by poverty lines typical of developing
countries.6 However, Ban Ki-moon’s view could still be right if the past applications of the
2

To give another example, a press release by the International Food Policy Research Institute carried the headline:
“The world’s poorest people not being reached.” The press release was for an IFPRI report Ahmed et al. (2007).
3
The former is attributed to John F. Kennedy, while the latter expression is due to Radelet (2015). Another version
is the claim that “growth is good for the poor” (the title of an influential paper by Dollar and Kraay, 2002).
4
There are antecedents in the literature. On the history of thought on measuring poverty see Ravallion (2015).
5
The most commonly used axioms are: (i) focus: that the measure of poverty should be unaffected by any changes
in the incomes (or consumptions) of those who are not deemed to be poor ; (ii) monotonicity: that, holding all else
constant, the measure of poverty must rise if a poor person experiences a drop in her income; (iii) scale invariance:
that the measure is unchanged when all incomes and the poverty line increase by the same proportion; (iv) transfers:
this holds if the measure of poverty rises whenever a given sum of money is transferred from a poor person to
someone who is richer. Other axioms have been proposed; for a recent overview see Foster et al. (2013), which
identifies 12 axioms, including those above.
6
See Chen and Ravallion (2010) and Ravallion and Chen (2013).

2

counting approach have essentially missed the poorest. The poorest subset of the poor can be
called the “ultra-poor.”7 In principle, progress against poverty can be achieved in large part by
lifting people near the poverty line out of poverty, with little gain to the ultra-poor.
That is not what this paper finds. Using various definitions of ultra-poverty, the progress
we have seen over the last 30 years in reducing the number of people living under $1.25 a day
has come with roughly similar progress in lifting people out of ultra-poverty. By this approach
the poorest as a whole have not been left behind.
However, the paper also argues that the counting approach is not the only defensible way
of assessing whether the poorest have been reached. If overall economic progress is not to “leave
the poorest behind” then logically it must, in due course, raise the lower bound to the distribution
of permanent consumption levels in society. That lower bound can be called the consumption
floor. Human physiology makes the existence of a positive floor plausible, given the nutritional
requirements for basal metabolism. This can be called the “the biological floor.” In practice,
however, we would hope that the actual consumption floor rises above the biological floor.
Private social interactions can probably provide some degree of protection. A consumption floor
above the biological minimum may also stem from a policy-supported minimum income.
Figure 1 illustrates the difference between this perspective and the counting approach.
Each panel gives two cumulative distribution functions (CDFs). In each case, the upper CDF is
the initial one and the lower CDF is for some later date. The drop in the incidence of poverty
(which could be for an ultra-poverty line) is similar in panels (a) and (b). In panel (a), the
counting approach might reasonably claim that many of the poorest have been reached even
though the floor has not risen, so some people still remain living at the same very low level. In
panel (b), the same reduction in the poverty rate has come with a rising floor—implying that
none of the poorest are left behind.
The idea that we should judge progress in part at least by success in raising the floor is
missing from all standard poverty measures. The concept of the consumption floor is
conceptually distinct from existing poverty lines.8 Naturally, any poverty line aims to reflect
what “poverty” means in a specific society, on the understanding that (potentially many) people
live below that level. The poverty line is a normative concept, while the consumption floor is a
7
8

This term was introduced by Lipton (1988).
For further discussion of poverty lines in theory and practice see Ravallion (2012).

3

positive one. Nor do standard poverty measures necessarily reflect any progress in raising the
floor. Although a higher consumption floor (ceteris paribus) automatically reduces any measure
of consumption poverty satisfying the monotonicity axiom, none of the standard axioms of
poverty measurement attach any explicit weight to the level of the floor. This is due, at least in
part, to the difficulties in identifying the floor.9 Given the current interest in assuring that no one
is left behind, this is surely a gap in the current “dashboard” of development indicators.
Focusing on the floor can also draw support from a literature, though largely outside
economics. An important school of moral philosophy has argued that we should judge a society’s
progress by its ability to enhance the welfare of the least advantaged, following the principles of
justice proposed by John Rawls (1971).10 By this view, a higher floor (as in Figure 1(b)) is not
only preferred, but is the main criterion of distributive justice (subject to other criteria of liberty,
as identified by Rawls).11 While Rawls’s “difference principle” is often interpreted as “maximin”
(to maximize the minimum level of welfare), Rawls insisted that some degree of averaging was
required in defining the “least advantaged”:
“I assume that it is possible to assign an expectation of well-being to representative individuals
holding these positions.” (Rawls, 1971, p. 56, my emphasis.)

I call the idea of focusing on the expected welfare of the poorest stratum in assessing social
progress the Rawlsian approach.
The difference between the two approaches illustrated by Figure 1 begs some questions
for which we currently have little idea of the answers: The consumption floor plausibly exists,
but at what level? What is the relationship between the two approaches? Has success judged by
the counting approach also come with success in raising the floor, such as through new social
protection policies in developing countries?
The task of addressing these questions calls for a method of estimating the level of the
consumption floor. This is a difficult task, as the floor is the lower bound of the distribution, and
could well be subject to sizeable measurement errors, and also idiosyncratic transient effects in
9

See, for example, Freiman’s (2012) comments on Rawls’s difference principle.
Rawls proposed two principles of distributive justice. First, each person should have equal right to the most
extensive set of liberties compatible with the same rights for all. Second, subject to the constraint of liberty, social
choices should only permit inequality if it is efficient to do so—that a difference is only allowed if both parties are
better off as a result; this is what Rawls called the “difference principle.”
11
While popularity need not guide ethical judgments it is at least notable in the context of understanding debates
about distributive justice that there is experimental evidence indicating that a non-negligible number of people make
distributional judgments consistently with a Rawlsian “maximin” criterion (Michelbach et al., 2003).
10

4

consumption or income. The paper proposes two methods for the task both of which can be
implemented with readily available data sources. Both methods use data from national poverty
lines in poor countries, but otherwise they make very different assumptions. The first method
aims to identify an expected consumption floor amongst those who are identified as poor in
absolute terms by the standards of poor countries. It would not be sensible to simply measure the
lowest observed consumption level in the available data. Echoing above quote from Rawls
(1971), it makes more sense to form an expectation over a stratum of people with low observed
consumption levels, where the expectation is based on an assumed distribution of measurement
errors and transient effects. The lowest observed consumption is assumed to have the highest
probability of being at the floor, but that probability is less than one. The probability declines
linearly as consumption rises above the lowest observed value up to some critical point, above
which there is zero probability of being the poorest. The second method assumes that national
poverty lines comprise the expected value of the consumption floor plus a relative component
proportional to actual mean consumption. Both methods of quantifying the floor suggest a
consumption floor today that is about half of the international poverty line of $1.25 a day. This is
probably close to the consumption of essential foods for those living around $1.25 a day.
The paper’s principal empirical finding is that, while the counting approach shows huge
progress for the poorest, the Rawlsian approach does not. The distribution of the gains amongst
the poor has meant that the consumption floor has risen little over those 30 years. While there
has been marked progress in reducing the numbers of the ultra-poor, and the poorest have not
been left behind, the expected value of the lowest level of living amongst those who are
considered poor by developing country standards has advanced rather little.
In demonstrating the difference between the counting and Rawlsian approaches, the paper
also throws new light on how the idea of the consumption floor can be interpreted in terms of
standard poverty measures. This permits straightforward applications to the task of monitoring
progress in raising the level of living of the world’s poorest.
After discussing the literature and policy discussions related to the idea of a consumption
floor (Section 2), the paper describes the data to be used in this study (Section 3). Then it turns to
the two proposed methods of estimating the floor and their results (Sections 4 and 5). Next the
paper presents recent evidence using the counting method (Section 6). Section 7 looks at the
empirical relationships with rates of growth in average living standards. Section 8 concludes.
5

2.

The consumption floor in theory and policy
While the Rawlsian approach of using success in raising the consumption floor as an

indicator of social progress has not been favored by economists, it has deep roots in development
and social-policy thinking. Versions of the approach thrive today in policy discussions.
In a famous example, in 1948 (shortly before his assassination) Mahatma Gandhi was
asked “How can I know that the decisions I am making are the best I can make?” He answered:
“I will give you a talisman. Whenever you are in doubt, or when the self becomes too much with
you, apply the following test. Recall the face of the poorest and the weakest man whom you may
have seen, and ask yourself if the step you contemplate is going to be of any use to him. Will he
gain anything by it?” (Gandhi, 1958, p.65)

The spirit of Gandhi’s talisman was echoed (in somewhat dryer terms) 65 years later in a report
initiated by the U.N. on setting new development goals, which argued that:
“The indicators that track them should be disaggregated to ensure no one is left behind and targets
should only be considered ‘achieved’ if they are met for all relevant income and social groups.”
(United Nations, 2013, Executive Summary; my emphasis)

Endorsing this view, Kevin Watkins (2013, p.1) refers explicitly to Gandhi’s talisman, and
argues that “As a guide to international cooperation on development, that’s tough to top.”
If the poorest person sees a gain in permanent consumption then (by definition) the
consumption floor must rise. Social policies aim in part to support consumption levels at a point
well above the biological minimum. Indeed, something close to the Rawlsian approach and
Gandhi’s talisman has long been proposed as a guiding principle for thinking about antipoverty
policy in rich and poor countries alike. One motivation for the laws establishing statutory
minimum wage rates that first appeared in the late 19th century is that they help raise the
consumption floor.12 From the 1970s, we started to see arguments being made in support of the
idea of a “basic-income guarantee”—a fixed cash transfer to every adult person.13 The idea is
that the basic income would provide a firm floor to living standards. This idea gained momentum
since in the 1990s in both rich and poor countries.14 When financing through a progressive
income tax, the idea becomes formally similar to Milton Friedman’s (1962) Negative Income
12

There are also well-known efficiency arguments, notably in non-competitive labor markets. The first minimum
wage law was introduced by New Zealand in 1894.
13
This too is an old idea, with antecedents going back to at least Thomas Paine’s (1797) pamphlet Agrarian Justice
recommending the all agrarian land should be subject to taxation—a “ground rent,” the revenue from which should
be allocated equally to all adults in society, as all have a claim to that property.
14
See, for example, Van Parijs (1995), Raventós (2007) and Bardhan (2011).

6

Tax. The International Labor Organization (2012) has recommended a comprehensive “Social
Protection Floor,” comprising “nationally defined sets of basic social security guarantees”
spanning health, schooling and income security.
While economists measuring poverty have not attached any special significance to the
level of the consumption floor, the concept has long played a role in positive economics. Indeed,
the idea goes back to the first economists. Early ideas of the “subsistence wage” can be
interpreted as the wage rate required to assure that the biological floor is reached for a typical
family. The idea of a consumption floor played a key role in classical economics.15 Famously,
the Reverend Thomas Malthus (1806) argued that the economic dynamics of population growth
assures that the unskilled wage rate stays at the subsistence level; any temporary increase
(decrease) in the consumption of working-class families in a neighborhood of the floor would
induce population growth (contraction). The idea of a floor has been a feature of development
models for dualistic economies since Arthur Lewis’s (1954) model postulated a perfectly elastic
supply of labor to the developing modern sector at the subsistence wage.
The idea has continued to play a role in modern economics. It has been built into demand
models, such as the widely-used linear expenditure system. The idea is found in modern
theoretical treatments of the problem of determining the optimal population size.16 It has also
been incorporated in modern dynamic models.17 For example, some theoretical models have
postulated an instantaneous utility function of the Stone–Geary form; consumers then maximize
the present value of the utility stream subject to their consumption not falling below the floor (in
addition to other standard constraints).18 There are also arguments on the production side,
whereby the existence of a floor generates a low-level non-convexity in production possibility
sets. Various theoretical arguments have been made in the literature that can generate such nonconvexities. The essential argument is that worker productivity and/or access to credit (given
default likelihoods) suffer when a person’s consumption is close to the floor.19
Such arguments suggest an efficiency case for policy effort to raise the floor, in addition
to the equity case. In response to both efficiency and equity concerns, the new millennium has
15

See Blaug’s (1962) discussion of the classical model of wage determination.
See Dasgupta (1993, Chapter 13).
17
See, for example, Azariadis (1996), Ben-David (1998) and Kraay and Raddatz (2007).
18
An example is found in Lopez and Servén (2009), who add a subsistence consumption parameter to the type of
model discussed in Aghion et al. (1999).
19
Examples include Mirrlees (1975), Stiglitz (1976), Dasgupta and Ray (1986), Lipton (1988) and Banerjee and
Newman (1994).
16

7

seen a significant change in the set of development policies, which have come to embrace a
range of direct interventions, variously called “antipoverty programs,” “social safety nets,” and
“social assistance;” here I call them social safety nets (SSN’s).20 Their common feature is the use
of direct income transfers to poor families. This was rare in the developing world prior to the
mid-1990s, but today almost every country has at least one SSN program (World Bank, 2014).
The only estimate made to date (to my knowledge) indicates that 0.75-1 billion people in
developing countries currently receive social assistance (Barrientos, 2013). The new SSN
programs have mainly in the form of conditional cash transfers and workfare schemes (World
Bank, 2014). The compilation of survey-based estimates of SSN coverage spanning 2000-2010
in the World Bank’s ASPIRE database suggests that the proportion of the population receiving
help from SSN programs is growing rapidly, although there are probably selection biases in the
data.21 The term “safety net” evokes the idea of a floor, and some of the programs can be
interpreted as efforts to raise the floor, including the two largest programs to date in terms of
population coverage, namely China’s Di Bao program and India’s National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme, which is interpretable as an attempt to enforce the minimum wage rate in an
informal economy.22 Raise the consumption floor is a common motivation for SSN programs.
The fact that SSN coverage is expanding so much raises the hope that the consumption
floor is rising. Of course, whether this is happening in practice is another matter. Despite the
expansion of SSN programs, the majority of the poor are still not covered; the ASPIRE data
indicate that only about one-third of the poorest quintile in the developing world receives any
help from SSNs.23 To assess whether economic growth and expanding SSN coverage is
achieving progress against poverty consistently with the Rawlsian approach, one needs to define
and measure the consumption floor. No such definition and measure is currently available.

20

A good working definition is: “Social safety nets are non-contributory transfers designed to provide regular and
predictable support to targeted poor and vulnerable people.” (World Bank, 2014, p.xii.)
21
Comparing the latest and earliest surveys for the 25 countries with more than one observation in the ASPIRE
database (with observations spanning 2000-2010) I find that the overall coverage rate (percentage of the population
as a whole receiving help from the SSN) is increasing at an average proportionate rate of 9.1% per annum (standard
error of 2.8%); in levels the rate is 3.5% points per year (standard error of 1.1% points). However, there may well be
selection bias in this sample, whereby the introduction of a SSN program stimulates survey data collection.
22
The Di Bao program makes transfers to bring urban residents up to locally determined “Di Bao lines” (see, for
example, Ravallion, 2014b). The Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme in India aims to guarantee up to 100 days of
work per household per year doing unskilled manual labor at stipulated minimum wage rates; see Dutta et al. (2014).
23
These are data for around 2008-2011. The one-third calculation uses the latest estimates in ASPIRE at October
2014 and is population-weighted.

8

3.

Data and descriptive statistics
The primary data source is the World Bank’s PovcalNet website. Here only a brief

summary is provided.24 The database draws on distributional data from 900 surveys spanning
125 developing countries. Using the most recent survey for each country, 2.1 million households
were interviewed. All poverty measures in PovcalNet are estimated from the primary (unit record
or tabulated) sample survey data rather than relying on pre-existing estimates. Prior truncations
of the data (trimming the bottom or top) are avoided as far as possible, and appear to be rare at
the bottom of the distribution (though are known at the top). Past estimates are updated to ensure
internal consistency with new data.25 Households are ranked by either consumption or income
per person, with consumption being preferred when both are available. About 70% of the surveys
allow a consumption-based measure. The measures of consumption (or income, when
consumption is unavailable) are reasonably comprehensive, including both cash spending and
imputed values for consumption from own production. All distributions are weighted by
household size and sample weights. The poverty count is the number of people living in
households with per capita consumption or income below the international poverty line. All
currency conversions are at purchasing power parities using the results of the 2005 round of the
International Comparison Program.26
The surveys were mostly done by governmental statistics offices as part of their routine
operations. Not all available surveys are included in PovcalNet. A survey was dropped if there
were known to be serious comparability problems with the rest of the data set. Obvious
comparability problems were addressed by either re-estimating the consumption/income
aggregates or by dropping a survey. Of course, there are data problems that cannot be dealt with,
and differences in survey methods can create differences in the estimates obtained.
The latest results from these data confirm past findings that the developing world has
seen impressive progress against absolute poverty over the last 30 years, with signs of

24

The sources and estimation methods are described in greater detail in Chen and Ravallion (2010).
The version of the data set used here is for November 2014.
26
Adjusting this line consistently with the new PPPs available 2011, the equivalent line in PPP $’s for India (say) is
about $2.00 a day in 2011 prices. (This is calculated by converting the $1.25 a day line for 2005 to Indian rupees and
then converting to 2011 local prices using the CPI for India, and finally converting back to 2011 $’s using the 2011
PPP.) This line gives a poverty measure for India very close to the measure using $1.25 a day at 2005 PPP.
25

9

acceleration since 2000. The proportion of the developing world’s population living below $1.25
a day fell from 53% to 17% over this 30-year period.
In implementing the second method of estimating the consumption floor, the paper uses
the compilation of national poverty lines in Ravallion et al. (2009).

4.

Estimating the consumption floor: Method 1
With a sound sampling design and large enough sample we can be confident about our

estimate of the overall mean from a survey. But it is less clear how reliably we can estimate the
consumption floor—the lower bound of the distribution of consumption. If we knew the true
consumptions we could confidently estimate the floor directly from a sufficiently large sample.
However, there are measurement errors and transient consumption shortfalls, whereby observed
consumption in a survey falls temporarily below the floor (such as due to illness), but recovers
soon after the survey is done. How then might we estimate the floor?
The expected value of the lowest consumption: There is a non-negligible chance that
anyone within some stratum of low observed consumption levels in survey data is in fact living
at the floor. The first task is to define that stratum. Let its upper-bound in terms of observed
consumption y be denoted y * . By assumption, there is no chance of someone living above y *
being in fact the poorest if we knew their true permanent consumption.
Let x i denote the true level of permanent consumption of the i’th person, with i=1,…,n.
The consumptions are ordered from the poorest, so the lowest level is x 1 , which is the
consumption floor. We have an n-vector of observed consumptions or incomes, y, with
y i  x i   i , where  i is the measurement error or latent transient effect. Here measurement

errors can be taken to include both statistical errors (reporting errors, selective non-response) and
mistakes in measurement, such as in calibrating price indices. The task is to estimate E ( x 1 y ) .
There is a positive probability that a person with a given observed consumption less than
y is in fact living at the floor. The probability distribution of the underlying errors is not data, of
*

course. But there are some defensible assumptions we can make. It is reasonable to assume that
the probability of being the poorest person is highest for the person who appears to be worst off
in the data. It is also reasonable to assume that the probability of any observed consumption
10

being the true lower bound falls as observed consumption rises until y * . These assumptions
guarantee that the expected value of the floor cannot exceed the mean of observed consumptions
for those living under y * , which is a logically defensible property.
Intuitively, the extent of inequality observed amongst those living below y * plays a role in
determining the expected value of the floor. Imagine first that all those living below y * had the
*
same observed consumption, the mean y for the q persons with y i  y * . Then the floor is of
*
course y . Now introduce inequality amongst the poor. Then E ( x 1 y )  y * . Intuitively, higher

observed inequality amongst the poor implies a larger spread of y’s below the mean and hence a
*
lower E ( x 1 y ) relative to y .

Inequality amongst the poor is reflected in various distribution-sensitive poverty
measures, satisfying the standard transfer axiom in poverty measurement. The most widely-used
distribution-sensitive measure is the squared-poverty gap,

SPG 

 (1  y

i

2

/Z) /n

where Z is the

yi  z

poverty line; this measure was introduced by Foster, Greer and Thorbecke (FGT) (1984). If we
set

Z  y

*

then, intuitively, we expect a higher value of such a measure to be associated with a
*

lower expected floor for any given y . The precise relationship between the floor and measures
of poverty also depends on the distribution of the errors in estimating the lowest consumption
level, to which we now turn.
The probability that person i, with the observed y i , is in fact the worst off person is
denoted  ( y i ) = Prob ( y i  x 1 ) . It is assumed that:
 ( y i )  k (1  y i / y ) for y i  y
*

(1)

*

 0 for y i  y *

To assure that the probabilities sum to unity one sets k  1 /( nPG ) where PG 

 (1  y

*

i

/ y )/n

yi  z

is the poverty gap index for a poverty line of y * . Thus  ( y i ) is person i’s share of the aggregate
poverty gap using y * as the poverty line.

11

The expected value of the floor is a weighted mean of the values of the y i / y * (for
yi  y

*

) with weights given by each person’s share of the aggregate gap:
*

E ( x1 y ) / y 

 ( y

i

) yi / y

(2)

*

yi  z

Now consider the value of SPG/PG. By construction, this is a weighted mean of the values of
1  yi / y

*

conditional on y i  y * , also with weights given by the shares of the poverty gap:

 (y

SPG / PG 

yi  y

(3)

*

i

)( 1  y i / y )

*

Comparing (2) and (3) we immediately have the following formula for the expected value of the
consumption floor (in $’s per person per day):
(4)

*

E ( x 1 y )  y (1  SPG / PG )

It is plain that the poverty measures can suggest progress even when the expected value
of the floor is falling. For example, if y = (0.50, 0.50, 1.00, 1.25, 2.5, 5) and y *  1 . 25 then
PG=0.233 and SPG=0.127; the expected value of the floor is 0.57. Suppose that the distribution
changes to (0.50, 0.50, 1.25, 1.25, 2.5, 5). Then both PG and SPG show an improvement (the
indices falling to 0.200 and 0.120 respectively) but the floor has fallen to 0.50.
It is plain from (4) that the necessary and sufficient condition for a rising floor is that the
proportionate rate of decline in PG exceeds that for SPG when using y * as the poverty line.
Intuitively, a rising floor requires faster progress against the distribution-sensitive poverty gap
measure, SPG, when based on the observed consumptions. If both poverty measures are falling
then one requires that SPG is falling faster than PG for the expected value of the floor to rise.
The formula in (4) makes the relationship between the expected floor and poverty
measures clear, but it is still not obvious what role is played by inequality amongst the poor.
With some straightforward algebra, the following alternative formula can be derived:27
*

E ( x1 y )  y 

27


*

*2

y  y

(5)

*

This formula is derived by first noting that SPG 

 (1  y
yi  y

*

that PG  ( q / n )( 1  y i / y * ) and then substituting into (4).

12

i

*

2



*

2

/ y ) / n  ( q / n ) (1  y i / y )  

*2

/y

*2

 and

where  * 2 

 (y
yi  y

*

 y ) / q is the sample variance amongst those for whom y i  y . This
*

i

2

*

*
makes clear how the gap between y and E ( x 1 y ) reflects the inequality amongst those with

y i  y , as measured by their variance of consumption normalized by the mean gap, y *  y * .
*

The formula in (4) can be generalized by setting   ( y i )  k (1  y i / y * )  ( 

 1 ),

giving:
(6)

*

E  ( x 1 y )  y (1  P  1 / P )

where P is the FGT class of poverty measures:
P 

1
n

 (1  y
yi  y

* 

i

/y )

*

(Note that PG  P1 and SPG  P2 .) However, in this context the parameter  determines how
fast the probability of being the poorest person falls as observed consumption increases, rather
than the degree of aversion to inequality amongst the poor, as in the FGT index.
Note that 

 0

can be ruled out; the probability must fall as consumption increases. To

put the point another way, if one uses 

 0 then

every consumption below y * is equally likely to

be the lowest value, so y * (1  P1 / P0 ) is the mean consumption of the poor ( y * ). However, values
of 

 1 can

be defended, to allow the probability to decline non-linearly. The choice of 

1

(rather than 2 or higher) is made for a practical reason, namely that PovcalNet only gives values
of P for   0 , 1, 2 .
Estimates of the consumption floor: One can take either an absolute or relative approach
to setting y * . The former approach sets y * at a constant value in real terms, while the latter fixes
instead the proportion of the population who could be living at the floor. However, it does not
seem plausible that the same proportion of the population could be living at the floor in a poor
society as a rich one; it is more believable that the poorer the society the larger the set of people
who could be living at the floor if we knew their true permanent consumption.
Using the absolute approach, a plausible assumption for y * is to set it according to
poverty lines found in the poorest countries. This is how the international poverty line of $1.25 a
day at 2005 purchasing power parity was set (Ravallion et al., 2009), namely by finding the
average of the national lines of the poorest 20 or so countries. So the first key assumption made
13

here is that there is no chance that any observed consumption level above $1.25 a day
corresponds to a true level of consumption that is in fact the floor. The $1.25 line corresponds
closely to the 20th percentile in 2010. So this is a wide range. I test sensitivity to using a lower
value for y * of $1.00 a day and using a relative definition, such that a constant percentage of the
population is identified as the group of people who may be living at the true floor.
Table 1 gives my estimates of the expected value of the floor from the data described in
Section 2. The table gives the estimated floor for z=$1.00 as well as $1.25, although the
discussion will focus on the latter case. Figure 2 plots the estimated consumption floor over
1981-2011, as well as the mean consumptions of both the poor and the overall population of the
developing world. Panel (b) gives a “blow-up” of the lower portion, also identifying the
*2
*
*
contribution of inequality amongst the poor, i.e.,  /( y  y ) (recalling equation (5)).

The estimate of the expected value of the lowest consumption level is $0.67 per day.28
The main source of statistical imprecision in this estimate is the cut-off point z. The global
sample sizes for estimating SPG and PG are huge (over 2 million sampled households from over
900 surveys for the recent years, though less as one goes back in time). Using the Ravallion et
al. (2009) estimate of the standard error of the $1.25 a day poverty line, the implied standard
error of the present estimate of the floor is $0.10 per day.29 The 95% confidence interval for the
consumption floor is thus $0.47 to $0.87 per day.
It should be emphasized that this assumes that there is zero probability of an observed
consumption above $1.25 a day corresponding to the consumption floor. Naturally, a higher
(lower) y * will raise (lower) the estimated floor. If anything, I suspect that $1.25 is on the high
side. Alternatively, if one sets y * =$1.00 then the time mean of the floor falls to $0.55.30 The
second method of determining the floor discussed below will be found to be consistent with the
assumption that y * is about $1.25.
28

This is the un-weighted mean over time. The inter-temporal variance is so low that it is unlikely that population
weighting would make any detectable difference.
29
Ravallion et al. (2009) used Hansen’s (2002) estimator for a piece-wise linear (“threshold”) model in estimating
the standard error of the lower (flat) segment of the relationship between national poverty lines and private
consumption per person.
30

For an upper bound on y * one might assume instead that nobody above the median consumption for the

developing world could be living at the floor. This would entail y * =$2.00 per day (the median for 2005), in which
case the time-mean of the estimated floor rises to $0.90 a day. However, the median is surely an implausibly high
value of for z.

14

Also notice that this estimation method does not insist that nobody should be found living
below the expected consumption floor. That would be too stringent. Even putting measurement
errors aside, at any one survey date there will invariably be some people temporarily living
below any consumption floor. For 2011, PovcalNet indicates that 3.7% of the population of the
developing world lived below $0.67 a day. The proportion living below the lower bound of the
95% confidence interval for this estimate of the floor is 1.8%.31
It is evident from Figure 2 that the estimated floor has proved to be quite stable over
time; indeed, the inter-temporal standard error is less than $0.01 per day (although this does not
factor in all the sources of variance as reflected in the “full” standard error of $0.10). The
estimated consumption floor rose by only 9 cents per day over 30 years, from $0.59 to $0.68,
reflecting a (slightly) steeper pace of decline in SPG than PG. The contribution of inequality
amongst those living below $1.25 rose from $0.14 to $0.20 over the period (Table 1, Column 5),
representing 19% and 23% of y * respectively.
The growth rate (regression coefficient of the log on time) in the floor is 0.34% per
annum, with a standard error of 0.08%. There is divergence between the poor as a whole and the
poorest, with a growth rate for the poor population of 0.46% per annum (s.e.=0.06). (And the
divergence is statistically significant; t-test=4.39; prob.=0.14%.) Using an upper bound of $1.00
a day there is even less sign of a positive trend over time in the implied floor; the estimate of the
floor rises from $0.52 to $0.53 over the period, although it rises then falls (Table 1).32
However, the divergence between the mean for the poor and the consumption floor is
minor compared to the expanding gap between both and the overall mean of household
consumption per person (Figure 2), which grew at an annual (per capita) rate of 2.1% over this
period (s.e.=0.24%) and the rate of growth roughly doubled from the turn of the century.
Strikingly, there is no sign that the upsurge in average living standards in the developing world
since 2000 has put upward pressure on the consumption floor (Figure 7). In relative terms, the
consumption floor has fallen from 22% of the mean in 1981 to 13% in 2011.
The above results have used a fixed absolute standard for defining the upper bound of
consumption above which there is no chance of being the poorest person (setting
31

y

*

to either

This is probably an overestimate given that PovcalNet uses grouped data for many countries, which require curve
fitting; the software uses parameterized Lorenz curves fitted to the grouped data. These will give non-zero estimates
to very low levels, even when the micro data do not indicate any observations.
32
The trend coefficient is very close to zero (a coefficient of 0.0002, with a standard error of 0.0009).

15

$1.25 or $1.00 a day in 2005 prices). It was argued that this is more plausible than a relative
approach to defining the stratum of people who could be living at the floor. However, it should
be noted that using a relative standard implies a rising absolute floor over time. For example,
suppose one focuses instead on the poorest 20%, corresponding closely to the absolute standard
of $1.25 a day in 2010. If one defines the group of people who are potentially living at the floor
in 1981 as the poorest 20% then the estimate of E ( x 1 y ) falls to $0.37 a day, with a value of y *
for that year of $0.63 (only slightly higher than the estimate of E ( x 1 y ) using y * =$1.25). This
suggests far greater progress in raising the floor than the absolute approach, with its value almost
doubling over 30 years. The “relative floor” has remained a fairly constant % of the overall mean
(14% in 1981 and 13% in 2011). The bulk of the drop in the floor for 1981 using the relative
definition for the upper bound is due to the fact that the relative bound has almost halved; the
value of SPG/PG is not much different between the two approaches (0.53 in 1981 using the
absolute approach versus 0.42 using the relative approach).

5.

Estimating the consumption floor: Method 2
A national poverty line can be thought of as the sum of two components: an absolute

consumption floor plus a relative component that depends positively on the country’s mean
consumption. This suggests an alternative method of estimating the floor as the expected value
of the national poverty line at zero mean.
Figure 3 plots data on national poverty lines for developing countries. Regressing the
national line (Z) on the mean (M) from the closest available household survey one obtains:33
Z i  0 . 647  0 . 530 M i  ˆ i
( 0 . 288 )

( 0 . 064 )

R2=0.709, n=73

(7)

The implied consumption floor of $0.65 per day is not significantly different from the prior
estimate of $0.67 in Section 3, based on very different data.34 This level of agreement can be
interpreted as largely independent support for the assumption that y * =$1.25 in the first method
of estimating the consumption floor.
33

White standard errors in parentheses. I also tested an augmented model with a cubic function of the mean, but the
higher-order terms were individually and jointly insignificant.
34
The mean national line at the lowest national consumption is $1.22 a day.

16

The national lines were set at different dates. On adding a time trend to the above
regression one finds no significant drift in the consumption floor.35 However, with only one
observation of the poverty line per country this can only be considered a weak test. The results in
Table 1 are clearly more convincing on this point.
Another implication of (7) is notable. Given that the floor is found to be positive, the
national lines are weakly relative, as defined by Ravallion and Chen (2011). By implication,
when all incomes rise by a fixed proportion, the poverty rate falls, as distinct from the strongly
relative lines set at a constant proportion of the mean or median, as used in Western Europe.36

6.

The counting approach
The counting approach suggests that the gains to the poor of the developing world over

the last 30 years have reached many of the poorest. Figure 4 gives the cumulative distribution
functions (CDF’s) for 1981 and 2011.37 We see that there is first-order dominance, implying an
unambiguous reduction in poverty for all possible lines and all additive measures.38
There is a feature of Figure 4 that immediately suggests that there has been little gain in
the level of the floor. Figure 5 makes this clearer by giving the monetary gain at each percentile
implied by Figure 4, i.e., the absolute difference between the quantile functions, obtained by
inverting the CDFs.39 (These gains are simply the horizontal differences between the CDFs in
Figure 4.) Consistently with the lack of progress in raising the floor we see that the gains are
close to zero for the poorest, but rising to quite high levels. This is also consistent with what we
know about rising absolute inequality in the developing world (Ravallion, 2014).
A further insight form Figure 5 is that there are larger absolute gains for the second decile
from the bottom (though fairly flat between the 10th and 20th percentiles). Using the 20th
percentile as the cut-off point in the relative approach is thus picking up these gains. At a
sufficiently low cut-off, even the relative approach will show little gain in the floor.
35

The coefficient on the year in which the poverty line was set is 0.0008 (s.e.=0.0005).
Eurostat (2005) has produced such relative poverty measures across European countries and over time, as has the
influential Luxembourg Income Study (LIS), which started in the mid-1980s and uses poverty lines set at 40-60% of
the median in its summary statistics at country level.
37
The CDF is truncated above $20 a day to give greater detail at the lower end; however, there is dominance all the
way to the top.
38
On the implications of first-order dominance in this context see Atkinson (1987).
39
The empirical quantile function is used for 1981. For the purpose of creating the graph, the quantile function for
2011 was based on a 10th degree polynomial, which fitted extremely well (R2=0.998), although the top 2% were
trimmed from the GIC as these are considered less reliable.
36

17

To provide a simple measure of the incidence of ultra-poverty using the counting
approach, it is defined here as the share of the population living below $0.87 a day. This is the
upper bound of the 95% confidence interval for the estimated consumption floor in the
developing world, as described in Section 4. The use of the 95% confidence interval is
essentially arbitrary. I also give the main results for a line of $0.77 a day, one standard error
above the point estimate, and for a measure of poverty that gives higher weight to those living
closer to the floor. However, it should not be forgotten that the claim that poverty has fallen is
robust to the poverty line (Figure 4).
In the earliest survey rounds in PovcalNet, the incidence of ultra-poverty by the $0.87
line varies from zero to 89%. It has declined steadily over time in the developing world as a
whole (Figure 6) and for most countries; see Figure 7, comparing the earliest and latest surveys
for those countries in PovcalNet with two or more surveys. In the latest surveys the proportion
varies from zero to 75%. The number of people living in ultra-poverty fell from 1,317 (35.4%)
million to 423 million (7.1%) over this period. (Using the more stringent definition of $0.77 a
day, the percentage declined from 1,098 million (29.6%) to 308 million (5.2%) in 2011.) For the
developing world as a whole, the share of total poverty represented by the ultra-poor fell from
67% in 1981 to 42% in 2011.
Table 2 gives a regional breakdown for 2010 of the number of people living in ultrapoverty.40 Over half are in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), with a further 30% in South Asia. Almost
all (96%) are in Africa and Asia. Almost one third of the population of SSA lives below $0.87 a
day. There are six countries where a majority of the population is ultra-poor, namely (with % of
the population living below $0.87 in parentheses): Burundi (59%), Democratic Republic of the
Congo (75%), Liberia (64%), Madagascar (76%), Malawi (55%), and Zambia (62%). Outside
Africa, the country with the highest proportion of ultra-poor is Haiti (39%).
The bulk of the reduction in overall poverty rates (for $1.25 a day or $2.00) is
accountable to a lower incidence of ultra-poverty. Between 1981 and 2011 the $1.25 a day
poverty rate fell by 35.8% points; almost 80% of this decline (28.4% points) is accountable to the
decline in the ultra-poverty rate.

40

While the survey coverage is adequate for a “global” aggregate in 2011, the regional breakdown is more
questionable. 2010 is safer for this purpose.

18

The trend (regression coefficient on time) over 1981-2011 for the percentage of ultrapoor is -0.83% points per annum (with a standard error of 0.07%).41 This is lower than the trend
for the percentage below $1.25 a day of -1.13% (s.e.=0.04%), but the difference is not large, with
the implication that the bulk of the inter-temporal variance in the overall poverty rate is
accountable to progress against ultra-poverty; the R2 for the regression of the overall poverty rate
for $1.25 and the ultra-poverty rate for $0.87 is 0.97. Even more strikingly, progress against
ultra-poverty also accounts for the bulk of the progress against poverty judged by the $2.00 line.
The poverty rate for the latter line has an annual trend of -1.12% (s.e.=0.09%), almost identical
to that for the $1.25 line. For the $2.00 line, the R2 for the regression of the overall poverty rate
on the ultra-poverty rate for $0.87 is 0.91.
This pattern is also evident at country level. Over three-quarters (77.4%) of the variance
in annualized rates of poverty reduction using the $1.25 line is accountable to rates of progress
against ultra-poverty. Only 13.6% is accountable to changes in the density of those who were
poor but not ultra-poor; the covariance term accounts for 9.0%. Figure 8 plots the rate of change
in P0 for $1.25 a day across countries against the corresponding change in the ultra-poverty rate.
There is close to a 1-to-1 relationship; as the number of ultra-poor in a country falls, we also see
roughly similar exit rates from the ranks of the poor population as a whole. This pattern is
suggestive of a process of what can be called rank-preserving lifting out of poverty. It is as
though as one of the group of “poor but not ultra-poor” is lifted out of poverty this frees up space
for one of the ultra-poor, who moves up to take that spot on the ladder.

7.

Growth and the poorest
A stylized fact that has emerged from the literature on developing countries is that growth

in average living standards tends to come with lower incidence of absolute poverty.42 Typically
this has been demonstrated in the past by focusing on prevailing poverty lines for low income
countries, such as represented by the $1.25 a day line. However, the incidence of ultra-poverty is
no less responsive to growth in the mean. This is demonstrated in Table 3, which gives the
“least-squares elasticity”—the regression coefficient of the annualized proportionate rates of
poverty reduction between the earliest and latest survey rounds on the corresponding growth
41
42

For the $0.77 line the annual trend is -0.69% (s.e.=0.05).
See Ravallion (1995, 2001) and Dollar and Kraay (2002). Ferreira and Ravallion (2009) review the literature.

19

rates in the mean.43 Results are given for three estimators of the growth rate in the mean: that
based on the same surveys, the growth rate of private consumption from the national accounts
(NAS), and the simple mean of these. There are arguments one can make for and against each
estimator. The survey mean has the advantage that it is automatically for exactly the same time
as the survey used to measure poverty, while the NAS consumption is annual (for the year in
which the survey was done). However, there is a concern that measurement errors may bias the
estimate based on the survey mean growth rates; if the growth rate in the survey mean is overestimated then the reduction in the poverty rate will also tend to be underestimated. (The
direction of total bias is theoretically ambiguous given that there is also the usual attenuation bias
due to measurement error in a regressor.) Private consumption in the NAS for developing
countries is typically calculated as a residual at the commodity level (after deducting other
measured sources of domestic absorption) rather than being calibrated to surveys. Different price
indices are also typically relevant to the two series, although a correlation between the errors in
the price indices cannot be ruled out. So the problem of correlated measurement errors is less
severe using NAS growth rates, but it does not vanish. The third estimate simply splits the
difference between the two growth rates.
The main lesson from Table 3 is that it cannot be claimed that the growth elasticities are
lower (in absolute value) for the ultra-poor. Indeed, the NAS growth rates suggest even higher
elasticities for the ultra-poverty poverty rates.
By contrast, the consumption floor using the absolute approach has responded little to
economic growth. The least-squares elasticity of the country-specific consumption floors to the
survey mean is 0.254, with a standard error of 0.190 (n=78); the elasticity is not significantly
different from zero at the 10% level. Using instead the growth rates based on NAS consumption,
the least-squares elasticity is even lower at 0.041 (s.e.=0.207; n=69). As can be seen from Table
4, a significant relationship with the growth rate in the survey mean emerges when one controls
for the change in overall inequality as measured by the annualized change in the Gini index.
However, this is not robust to using the NAS growth rate instead (comparing columns 3 and 4 of
Table 4). Rising inequality remains a robust covariate of changes in the floor.
43

More precisely, this is the regression coefficient of ln( Pit / Pit  i ) /  i (where Pit is the poverty measure for

country i at date t and  i is the time interval since the previous survey) on ln( M it / M it  i ) /  i (where M it is the
mean for country i at date t).

20

8.

Conclusions
A clue to understanding why we hear very different answers to the question posed in the

title of this paper can be found in the difference between focusing on the counts of poor people
(following in the footsteps of Bowley and others) versus focusing on the level of living of the
poorest, in the spirit of Gandhi’s talisman or the Rawlsian difference principle. Both perspectives
are evident in past thinking and policy discussions. Both have been advocated as development
goals, although the counting approach, as implemented in various poverty measures, has long
monopolized the attention of economists and statisticians monitoring progress against poverty.
Drawing on the results from household surveys for developing countries spanning 19812011, the paper finds considerable progress against ultra-poverty using the counting approach;
indeed, the bulk of either the inter-temporal or the cross-country variance in rates of poverty
reduction for either $1.25 or $2.00 a day is accountable to progress for those living under $0.87
or even $0.77 a day. There is first-order dominance over the 30 years, implying an unambiguous
reduction in absolute poverty by the counting approach over all lines and all additive measures.
However, there has been very little absolute gain for the poorest. Using an absolute
approach to identifying the floor, the increase in the level of the floor seen over the last 30 years
or so has been small—far less than the growth in mean consumption. The modest rise in the
mean consumption of the poor has come with rising inequality (specifically, a rising variance
normalized by the mean poverty gap), leaving room for only a small gain in the level of living of
the poorest. The bulk of the developing world’s progress against poverty has been in reducing
the number of people living close to the consumption floor, rather than raising the level of that
floor. Growth in mean consumption has been far more effective in reducing the incidence of
poverty than raising the consumption floor. In this sense, it can be said that the poorest have
indeed been left behind.
Stronger indications of a rising floor are found if one adopts a relative approach to
defining the upper bound on consumption for those people who could conceivably be living at
the floor, and one sets the fixed percentage at a sufficiently high level. For example, focusing on
the poorest 20% suggests considerable progress in raising the expected value of the floor.
However, the paper has argued that an absolute approach makes more sense on the grounds that

21

one expects a poorer society to have more people living near the floor, as is found to be the case
empirically using the counting approach.
To anticipate one response, it might be argued that progress in lifting the floor is a
second-order issue, as long as fewer people live near the floor. That is implicit in the traditional
counting methods used to assess progress against poverty. However, proponents of this view
must surely take pause when one notes that for a long time, and across countries at very different
levels of development, social policies have often claimed that they aim to ensure a minimum
level of living above any biological consumption floor required for mere survival. Negative
income tax schemes and (formally-equivalent) basic-income guarantees financed by progressive
income taxes aim to raise society’s consumption floor above the biological minimum. And such
efforts are not confined to rich countries; indeed, the two largest anti-poverty programs in the
world today (in China and India) aim to raise the floor. While it may well be ill-advised to look
solely at the level of the floor in a given society, it can be acknowledged that this has normative
significance independently of attainments in reducing the numbers of people living near that
floor. The thesis of this paper is not that progress against poverty should be judged solely by the
level of the consumption floor, but only that the latter should no longer be ignored.
As a byproduct of addressing the empirical question posed in the title, the paper has
shown how the Rawlsian idea of assessing social progress according to the expected value of the
lowest level of living can be interpreted in terms of standard poverty measures. This approach
recognizes that there is both measurement error and transient consumption effects in the
observed data. If the probability of any observed consumption being the floor falls linearly up to
some critical value then the ratio of the corresponding squared poverty gap to the poverty gap—
two readily-available poverty measures—emerges as a key (inverse) indicator for assessing
progress. Our success in assuring that no-one is left behind is thus readily monitored from
existing data sources.

22

References
Aghion, Philippe, Eve Caroli and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa, 1999, “Inequality and Economic
Growth: The Perspectives of the New Growth Theories,” Journal of Economic Literature
37(4): 1615-1660.
Ahmed, Akhter, Ruth Vargas Hill, Lisa C. Smith, Doris M. Wiesmann, and Tim Frankenberger,
2007, The World’s Most Deprived. Washington DC: International Food Policy Research
Institute.
Atkinson, Anthony B., 1987, “On the Measurement of Poverty,” Econometrica 55: 749-764.
Azariadis, Costas, 1996, “The Economics of Poverty Traps: Part One. Complete Markets,”
Journal of Economic Growth 1: 449–496.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Andrew Newman, 1994, “Poverty, Incentives and Development,”
American Economic Review 84(2): 211-215.
Bardhan, Pranab, 2011, “Challenges for a Minimum Social Democracy in India,” Economic and
Political Weekly 46(10): 39-43.
Barrientos, Armando, 2013, Social Assistance in Developing Countries. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ben-David, Dan, 1998, Convergence Clubs and Subsistence Economies, Journal of Development
Economics 55: 153–159.
Blaug, Mark, 1962, Economic Theory in Retrospect, London: Heinemann Books.
Bowley, Arthur L., 1915, The Nature and Purpose of the Measurement of Social Phenomena.
London: P.S. King and Sons.
Chen, Shaohua, and Martin Ravallion, 2010, “The Developing World is Poorer than we Thought,
but no Less Successful in the Fight against Poverty,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
125(4): 1577-1625.
Dasgupta, Partha, 1993, An Inquiry into Well-Being and Destitution, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Dasgupta, Partha, and Debraj Ray, 1986, “Inequality as a Determinant of Malnutrition and
Unemployment”, Economic Journal 96: 1011-34.
Dollar, David, and Kraay, Aart, 2002, “Growth is Good for the Poor,” Journal of Economic
Growth 7(3): 195-225.
23

Dutta, Puja, Rinku Murgai, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle, 2014, Right-toWork? Assessing India’s Employment Guarantee Scheme in Bihar. World Bank.
Eurostat, 2005, “ Income Poverty and Social Exclusion in the EU25,” Statistics in Focus 03
2005, Office of Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg.
Freiman, Christopher, 2012, “Why Poverty Matters Most: Towards A Humanitarian Theory Of
Social Justice,” Utilitas 24(1): 26-40.
Friedman, Milton, 1962, Capital and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Foster, James, J. Greer, and Erik Thorbecke, 1984, “A Class of Decomposable Poverty
Measures,” Econometrica 52: 761-765.
Foster, James, Suman Seth, Michael Lokshin, and Zurab Sajaia, 2013, A Unified Approach to
Measuring Poverty and Inequality. Washington DC: World Bank.
Gandhi, Mahatma, 1958, The Last Phase, Volume II. Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House.
Hansen, Bruce E., 2000, “Sample Splitting and Threshold Estimation,” Econometrica 68:
575-603.
International Labor Organization, 2012, “R202:Social Protection Floors Recommendation,”
Recommendation concerning National Floors of Social Protection Adoption, Geneva,
101st ILC session (14 June 2012).
Kraay, Aart, and Claudio Raddatz, 2007, “Poverty Traps, Aid and Growth,” Journal of
Development Economics 82(2): 315-347.
Lewis, Arthur, 1954, “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor,” Manchester
School of Economic and Social Studies 22: 139-191.
Lipton, Michael, 1988, “The Poor and the Ultra-Poor: Some Interim Findings,” Discussion Paper
25, World Bank, Washington DC.
Lopez, Humberto, and Luis Servén, 2009, “Too Poor to Grow,” Policy Research Working Paper
5012, World Bank.
Malthus, Thomas Robert, 1806, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 1890 Edition, London:
Ward, Lock and Co.
Mirrlees, James, 1975, “A Pure Theory of Underdeveloped Economies,” in: L. G. Reynolds
(ed.), Agriculture in Development Theory, New Haven: Yale University Press.

24

Michelbach, Philip A., John T. Scott, Richard E. Matland, and Brian H. Bornstein, 2003, “Doing
Rawls Justice: An Experimental Study of Income Distribution Norms,” American
Journal of Political Science 47(3): 523–539.
Paine, Thomas, 1797, Agrarian Justice, 2004 edition published with Common Sense by Penguin.
Radelet, Steven, 2015, The Great Surge: The Unprecedented Economic and Political
Transformation of Developing Countries Around the World. Simon & Schuster.
Ravallion, Martin, 1995, “Growth and Poverty: Evidence for Developing Countries in the
1980s,” Economics Letters 48, 411-417.
__________, 2001, “Growth, Inequality and Poverty: Looking Beyond Averages.” World
Development 29(11): 1803-1815.
__________, 2012, “Why Don’t we See Poverty Convergence?” American Economic Review
102(1): 504-523.
__________, 2014, “Income Inequality in the Developing World,” Science 344, 851-5.
__________, 2015, The Economics of Poverty, New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ravallion, Martin, and Shaohua Chen, 2011, “Weakly Relative Poverty,” Review of Economics
and Statistics 93(4): 1251-1261.
__________, 2013, “More Relatively Poor People in a Less Absolutely Poor World,” Review of
Income and Wealth 59(1): 1-28.
Ravallion, Martin, Shaohua Chen and Prem Sangraula, 2009, “Dollar a Day Revisited,” World
Bank Economic Review 23(2):163-184.
Raventós, Daniel, 2007, Basic Income: The Material Conditions of Freedom, London: Pluto
Press.
Rawls, John, 1971, A Theory of Justice, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Sen, Amartya, 1976, “Poverty: An Ordinal Approach to Measurement,” Econometrica 46: 437446.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1976, “The Efficiency Wage Hypothesis, Surplus Labour and the Distribution
Of Income In L.D.Cs,” Oxford Economic Papers 28: 185-207.
United Nations, 2013, A New Global Partnership: Eradicate Poverty and Transform Economies
Through Sustainable Development. The Report of the High-Level Panel of Eminent
Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, United Nations.

25

Van Parijs, Philippe, 1995, Real Freedom for All: What (if anything) can Justify Capitalism?
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Watkins, Kevin, 2013, “Leaving No-one Behind: An Equity Agenda for the Post-2015 Goals,”
Overseas Development Institute, London.
World Bank, 2014, The State of Social Safety Nets 2014, Washington DC: World Bank.

26

Figure 1: Same reduction in the poverty count but different implications for the poorest
Cumulative % of
population

Poverty
line

Cumulative % of
population

Measure of
welfare

(a) Poorest left behind

Poverty
line

Measure of
welfare

(b) Same reduction in the incidence of poverty
but without leaving the poorest behind

27

Figure 2: Mean consumptions for the developing world
(a) Including overall mean
Mean consumption ($ per person per day, 2005 prices)
6

5

4
Overall mean
3

2
Mean for those living below $1.25

1

Expected value of the consumption floor (absolute approach)
0
1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

2012

(b) Blow up lower segment of panel (a)
Mean consumption ($ per person per day, 2005 prices)

$1.25

1.2
Mean poverty gap

1.0

0.8

Mean for those
living below $1.25
Contribution of inequality (variance normalized by mean poverty gap)
Expected value of
the consumption floor

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

28

2000

2004

2008

2012

Figure 3: National poverty lines plotted against the closest survey mean
National poverty line ($ per person per day)

14

Slope=0.53

12
10
8
6
4
2

Floor=$0.65
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

Mean ($ per person per day)

Figure 4: Cumulative distribution functions for the developing world 1981-2011
100
1981

Percent of the population

80
60

2011

40
20
0
-20

Difference (2011-1981)

-40
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Consumption or income per person ($ per day, 2005 prices)

29

20

Absolute gain 1981-2011 ($ per person per day)

Figure 5: Absolute gains by percentile 1981-2011
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Percentile

Figure 6: Percentage of the population of the developing world living below each line
80

Percentage living below each line

70
60
50
40
$2.00
$1.25
$1.00
$0.87
$0.77
$0.67
$0.50

30
20
10
0
1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

30

2000

2004

2008

2012

Figure 7: Changes in the incidence of ultra-poverty at country level
Latest=earliest

Ultra-poverty rate for latest survey (%)

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Ultra-poverty rate for the earliest survey (%)

Annualized % point change in the total poverty rate

Figure 8: Progress against ultra-poverty at country level translated into progress against
total poverty
Slope=1.058
(s.e.=0.058)

2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Annualized % point change in the ultra-poverty rate

31

2

Table 1: Estimated consumption floors the developing world
(1)
(2)
Estimated consumption floor
y =$1.25
*

1981
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2010
2011

y =$1.00
*

(3)

Means

Mean
consumption

0.59
0.64
0.66
0.67
0.66
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.68

(4)

Mean
consumption of
those living below
$1.25 a day
0.73
0.80
0.82
0.82
0.83
0.84
0.84
0.85
0.87
0.88
0.88
0.88

(5)
Contribution of
inequality (variance
normalized by the
mean gap)

0.52
2.70
0.14
0.56
2.80
0.15
0.56
2.97
0.16
0.57
3.05
0.15
0.56
3.11
0.16
0.56
3.18
0.16
0.57
3.19
0.16
0.57
3.48
0.17
0.56
4.03
0.18
0.56
4.66
0.18
0.54
5.00
0.19
0.53
5.23
0.20
Notes: All numbers are $ per person per day in 2005 prices using purchasing power parity rates for private

consumption. Source: Author’s calculations. Columns (1) and (2) use the estimates of PG and SPG from PovcalNet
and equation (4).

Table 2: Regional breakdown of the 500 million ultra-poor in 2010
Region
East Asia and Pacific
Eastern Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and North Africa
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Total
Source: Author’s calculations.

Number
(millions)
59.71
0.95
17.63
1.39
152.37
273.48
505.31

% of total
11.82
0.19
3.49
0.28
30.15
54.12
100.00

32

% of regional
population
2.97
0.20
3.02
0.42
9.33
32.04
8.58

Table 3: Growth elasticities of poverty reduction for various poverty lines
Poverty line

Growth rate based
on survey mean

Growth rate based
on NAS
consumption

Average of survey
mean and NAS
growth rates

$2.00

-1.681
(0.433; 98)

-1.494
(0.427; 87)

-1.817
(0.333; 87)

$1.25

-2.345
(0.628; 91)
-2.072
(0.841: 77)

-1.961
(0.494; 80)
-2.332
(0.541; 68)

-2.588
(0.402; 80)
-3.247
(0.481; 68)

-2.115
(0.881; 76)

-2.549
(0.565; 67)

-3.480
(0.520; 67)

$0.87
$0.77

Note: White standard errors in parentheses, followed by the number of observations.
All coefficients are significantly different from zero at the 1% level.
Source: Author’s calculations.

Table 4: Regressions for the rate of growth in the consumption floor across countries
Intercept
Growth rate in the survey
mean (annualized)
Growth rate in NAS
consumption (annualized)
Annualized change in the
Gini index
R2
SEE
Mean dep. var.
N

(1)
0.003
(0.006)
0.254
(0.190)
n.a.

(2)
0.005
(0.006)
n.a.

n.a.

0.041
(0.207)
n.a.

0.006
0.031
0.007
78

0.001
0.027
0.006
69

(3)
-0.010**
(0.004)
0.444***
(0.132)
n.a.
-0.033***
(0.006)
0.517
0.022
0.006
75

Note: White standard errors in parentheses. *** indicates significance at the 1% level; ** at 5%.
Source: Author’s calculations.

33

(4)
-0.001
(0.006)
n.a.
0.104
(0.214)
-0.020**
(0.010)
0.092
0.026
0.005
67

