                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WHY DID THE BANK OF
                      CANADA EMERGE IN 1935?




                         Michael Bordo

                         Angela Redish




                     Working Paper No. 2079




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #2079
                                              November 1986




                Why Did the Bank of Canada Emerge in 1935?




                                 ABSTRACT




Three possible explanations for the emergence of the Canadian central bank

in 1935 are examined: that it reflected the need of competitive banking

systems for a lender of the last resort; that it was necessary to anchor

the unregulated Canadian monetary system after the abandonment of the gold

standard in 1929; and that it was a response to political rather than purely

economic pressures. Evidence from a variety of sources (contemporary statements

to a Royal Comission, the correspondence of chartered bankers, newspaper

reports, academic writings and the estimation of time series econometric

models) rejects the first two hypotheses and supports the third.



Michael D.   Bordo                          Angela Redish
Department   of Economics                   Department of Economics
College of   Business Administration        University of British Columbia
University   of South CArolina              Vancouver, B.C. V6T lY2
Columbia, SC 29208                          Canada
                  Why Did the Bank of Canada Emeroe in 1935?

                                                Michael D. Bordo and Angela Redish

    Three possible explanations for the emergence of the Canadian central
    bank in 1935 are examined: that it reflected the need of competitive
    banking systems for a lender of last resort; that it was necessary to
    anchor the unregulated Canadian monetary system after the abandonment
    of the gold standard in 1929; and that it was a response to political
    rather than purely economic pressures. Evidence from a variety of
    sources (contemporary statements to a Royal Commission, the
    correspondence of chartered bankers, newspaper reports, academic
    writings and the estimation of time series econometric models) rejects
    the first two hypotheses and supports the third.

                                   I, Introduction


      The Bank of Canada began operations in March 1935, considerably later
than the central banks of most other Western industrial economies. This paper
examines the two questions suggested by this event, why did Canada not develop
a central bank earlier, and, that given, why did the central bank evolve at all?
      The current debate over regulatory reform of the banking system has led
to a re—examination of the need for government intervention in the monetary
sector. One of the central issues in this debate is the role of central banks, and
the historical evidence on the circumstances leading to their establishment is
crucial. On the one hand there are economists who argue that in every case
central banks were imposed by levenue seeking or power hungry governments
while, on the other hand, there are those who argue that central banks,
specifically in their role as lender of last resort, evolved naturally from a
                                                                                      2


fractional reserve banking system.'
       The relatively late appearance of central banking in Canada suggests that
her experience may shed some light on the debate. In this paper we examine
three competing hypotheses concerning the introduction of central banking in
Canada. The first is that the Bank evolved naturally as a lender of last resort to
the fractional reserve banking system. The second is that the bank was introduced
to provide an anchor for a largely unregulated monetary system that had just left
the certainties of the gold standard, and the final hypothesis is that the Bank's
emergence was prompted primarily by political factors independent of the
preceding two hypotheses.2 We find most support for the third alternative.
       Part II of the paper develops the natural evolution hypothesis and argues
that by 1935, the Canadian banking system had developed alternative institutions
to perform the functions traditionally associated with a central bank. Part III
argues that the Bank of Canada was considered by its framers to be a
complement to. not a substitute for, the gold standard, and supports this position
with econometric analysis. Part IV discusses the political forces favoring the
emergence of the Bank, and Part V briefly discusses the conclusions.

                         II: The Natural Evolution Hypothesis.


       The traditional approach to the origins of central banking views it as part
of the natural evolution of a modern banking system. A competitive banking
system, with bank money convertible into gold or some other dominant (outside)
money, will periodically face the problem of runs on individual banks reflecting
the public's fear for the solvency of a particular institution; because of the
inability of the non—bank public to distinguish between the liquidity and solvency
of related banks a liquidity crisis and a banking panic often will followS Goodhart
effectively argues that because of an information asymmetry, a central bank is
                                                                                       3



 necessary to act as lender of last resort, and cannot be operated on profit
 maximizing lines because of potential conflicts of interest between the
 competitive central -bank and other banks in the system)
        Goodhart's explanation for the evolution of central banking in England as
 well as other European countries is that the first central banks evolved from
 commercial banks which had the special privilege of being the government's bank,
 Because such banks generally had a sound reputation, because of the economies
 of pooling reserves through a correspondent banking system, because of their
 position as holder of the nation's central gold reserve, and because of their
 ability to provide extra cash by rediscounting, such banks evolved into bankers'
 banks and lenders of last resort in a liquidity crisis. Once such banks began to
 perform the role of lender of last resort, 'moral hazard' on the part of member
 banks (following a more risky strategy) provided a rationale for some form of
- supervision or legislation. Further Goodhart argues that the conflict between the
 public functions of such an institution and satisfying the shareholders made the
 transition from a competitive bank to a central bank lengthy and painful.
        The counter argument has been put most clearly by Vera Smith who rests
 the case on the fact that central banks did not, in historical fact, evolve naturally
 but were established as favors to the government of the day. Friedman and
 Schwartz, while agreeing with Smith, suggest that the case against some form of
 government role as a lender of last resort is inconclusive,' While private
  insurance schemes could handle bank insolvency, federal deposit insurance has
 been, necessary in the U.S. to allay incipient liquidity crises in the unit banking
 system.
        The structure of the Canadian banking system changed considerably between
 the emergence of the first chartered bank in 1822 and the 1930s, but this process
  of evolution did not result in the introduction of central banking.
                                                                                     4


         At the beginning of the twentieth century the Canadian banking system was
comprised of 36 competitive fractional reserve banks, each permitted to operate
branches nationwide, The banks required a government charter to commence
operations, and some minimum level of paid—up capital. There were no required
reserves but banks usually kept quite high levels of reserves since the refusal to
convert their notes and demand deposits into specie (or Dominion Notes see
below) would result in suspension or forfeit of the charter.
         The government's involvement in the monetary sector was through
regulation of financial institutions and the issue of convertible, and, in part
fiduciary, Dominion Notes. Dominion Notes were legal tender and were generally
issued in small denominations for hand—to—hand currency, (the government had a
monopoly over the issue of notes of $5 or less) and large denominations
(510,000+) used as reserves by the banks. The government held a fractional
reserve against its notes, up to a limit above which 100% reserves were required
to be held. (The limit rose from 59 million to $50 million between 1860 and
1930.)

         Although Canada had a competitive fractional reserve banking system
throughout the nineteenth century, no central bank evolved. However, virtually all
the elements of traditional central banking had emerged by the beginning of the
twentieth century, undertaken either by private institutions or directly by the
government.
         First, the Canadian banking system had developed an efficient (bank notes
generally traded at par throughout the country) and elastic note issue. The
Clearing House in Montreal was maintained by the Canadian Bankers' Association
(CBA). which in 1901 was recognized by the Bank Act as "an agency for the
supervision and control of certain activities of the banks."5 Second, the nationwide
branch system avoided the problem of seasonal liquidity crises so evident in the
                                                                                     5


United States after the Civil War, lessening the need for a lender of last resort.
      Third, the Bank of Montreal (founded in 1817) emerged very early as the
government's bank performing many central bank functions. However, the Bank of
Montreal never evolved into a full—fledged central bank as did the Bank of
England (or the government's bank in other countries) perhaps because of the
rivalry of other large Canadian banks (e.g. the Royal Bank). Fourth, the Canadian
banks kept most of their reserves on 'call' in the New York money market. Such
outside reserves were used on occasion to satisfy the public's demand for
liquidity, again precluding the need for a central bank. However, on two occasions,
1907 and 1914, these reserves proved inadequate to prevent a liquidity crisis and
the Government of Canada had to step in to provide adequate reserves
      Fifth, the Finance Act, passed in 1914 to facilitate wartime finance,
provided the chartered banks with a liberal rediscounting facility. This Act
included a clause that permitted the issue of unbacked Dominion Notes. By
pledging appropriate collateral (and this was broadly defined) banks could borrow
Dominion Notes from the Treasury Board. This clause, which was extended after
the Wartime emergency by the Amendment of 1923 provided a discount
window/lender of last resort for the Canadian banking system.

                   Ill, Providing a substitute for the gold standard.

      The key macro function for a central bank under the Classical gold
standard was to maintain convertibility into gold. In Canada, overissue by
individual banks was prevented through the operation of the clearing mechanism
while convertiblity for the system as a whole was maintained through the holding
of outside reserves. Discretionary monetary policy (for debt management purposes
and to finance the government's bonds) rarely conflicted with the gold standard
constraint and was carried out by the Government of Canada using the Bank of
                                                                                    6


Montreal as its fiscal agent. Thus, under the Classical gold standard which
prevailed before 1914, there seemed to be little need for a central bank for
Canada.'

       In 1926 Canada had returned to the gold standard which had been
abandonned in November 1914, In December 1928 Canada de facto suspended the
gold standard. The banks uCooperatedw with the government by suspending gold
exports on their own account and by raising the price of gold for U.S. banks.
Because Dominion notes were de facto inconvertible, the Canadian exchange rate
was no longer constrained at par. On the other hand, and in contrast to the
nineteenth century suspension of convertibility, internal convertibility was
maintained i.e. Canadian banks were still required to convert their notes into
Dominion notes on demand. The informal suspension continued (more or less)
until October 1931 when, following the British suspension of the gold standard, a
formal embargo was placed on gold exports, Consequently, one possible rationale
for the establishment of a central bank was to provide an anchor to the money
supply, the price level, and hence the exchange rate, in the absence of gold
convertiblity, that is, to prevent unregulated private banks acting as profit
maximizers from expanding their money issues without limit,'
     There is considerable evidence that this hypothesis is at best incomplete.
We have argued elsewhere that the suspension of the gold standard did not
create an explosion of the price level as a consequence of profit maximizing
banks expanding their money issues, as suggested by traditional models of
inflationary finance, because expectations by the banks that the gold standard
would be resumed at some traditional par constrained the issue of bank money.'
This view is supported by the almost identical deflationary behaviour of the
Canadian and the U.S. price level during the period 1929 to 1933, and the
tendency of the exchange rate to stay close to par for three years after Canada
                                                                                     7


had left the gold standard•
       In addition, the qualitative evidence of statements by contemporaries
suggests that they did not see the central bank as an alternative to the
international gold standard, but rather as a necessary institution, in a gold
standard world. Evidence of the opinions of the various interest groups is
available in the records of the Macmillan Commission. Established by an
Order—in—Council (P.C,1562) on July 31, 1933, the five—man Macmillan Commission,
investigated the desirability and potential structure of a central bank in Canada.
The Commission conducted hearings across Canada before reporting on September
27, 1933, in favor of the establishment of a central bank, with two dissenting
opinions.
      The evidence presented to the Commission shows that it was widely
believed that the suspension of the gold standard was temporary. Jackson Dodds,
speaking for the CBA, stated: "It is logical to assume that the gold standard
(perhaps with modifications) will be resumed in due time by the great trading
nations and that the Dominion would naturally desire to follow suit." While Frank
Knox, a leading academic economist, stated:
     It may be assumed that sooner or later the major trading countries of
     the world wilt have to come to some agreement as to a common
     monetary standard and that they will stabilize their several currencys
     with respect to each other probably by making them convertible once
     more into gold. Supposing this to have taken place Canada's monetary
     policy is clearly to join such a group,'°
      The debate about the need for a central bank therefore focussed on the
need for central banking in a gold standard world, and the argument that the
automatic gold standard of the pre—1914 era had been replaced by a managed
gold standard. Macmillan's Report stated his position: "The gold standard was
                                                                                    8



restored in a world which called for continuous direction and co—operation on the
part of the various national authorities".'1 Indeed the dissenting commissioners felt
strongly enough that, while they accepted that at some future date a central bank
might be appropriate, they felt that it should wait until the international gold
standard was re—established. Macmillan, on the other hand, argued that the present
was a particularly advantageous time to establish the bank, as it would not be
subject to the day to day discipline of the gold standard until the central
bankers had developed some experience.
      An empirical analysis of the impact of the establishment of the Bank of
Canada on key macro variables such as the price level, exchange rates and
interest rates can provide indirect evidence on the reasons for the Bank's
emergence. The hypothesis that the bank was necessary to substitute for the gold
standard implies that the introduction of a central bank with the power to control
the money supply would lead to very different price level behaviour than under a
regime where monetary variables were determined by a private banking system.
      In the absence of sufficient data to estimate a structural model of the
macroeconomy that would permit identification of the channels and magnitude of
the Bank's impact, time series models are used to examine the Bank's effect on
the macroeconomy. The impact of the Bank's formation on the level of the
money stock itself is difficult to gauge as the definition of such variables as
currency in the hands of the public and reserves changed the day the Bank began
operations. The nature of the demand for reserves was altered by the introduction
of a required reserve ratio, and the high—powered money component of currency
in the hands of the public changed from Dominion Notes in circulation to Bank
of Canada notes in active circulation." Thus, though the impact of the Bank's
emergence on monetary variables is of great interest, our serious doubts about
the consistency of the measurement of high—powered money lead us to restrict
                                                                                     9


our analysis to the behaviour of such nominal variables as the price level and
exchange rate.
        We estimate univariate models of the price level and the exchange rateS
(data on Canadian interest rates are not available). We also estimate two
multivariate models of the price level, in which the independent variables are the
U.S. price level, and the money stock — variables which economic theory suggests
would affect the price level. In each case, the impact of the formation of the
Bank is tested by an analysis of the stability of the regression and by an
examination of the regression residuals.
        A univariate model of the Canadian price level was estimated using
monthly seasonally adjusted price data.' Using Box Jenkins methods the data
generating process was identified as an ARIMA (1.1,0) suggesting the following
estimating equation:
                           —       = a '—1 —              ft
where       is a white noise error term. The estimated value of a was 0.48 with a
  statistic of 6.98.
        The objective of the estimation was to examine whether the evolution of
the price series changed after the introduction of the Bank of Canada. The first
test was to examine the structural stability of the equation. Three potential
structural breaks were examined: January 1929, when 'Canada suspended gold
convertibility; March 1933 when the U.S. suspended gold convertibility; and March
1935. If the Bank of Canada had created a new monetary regime the equation
would have a structural break in 1935. Chow tests for the three periods showed
that the null hypothesis of no break should be accepted for each of the three
periods.
        An alternative method of determining the stability of the regression is to
examine the regression residuals, and to find those residuals that have a
                                                                                    10


disproportionate influence on the estimated model. Figure la presents the
"studentized" residuals for the model." If the formation of the Bank of Canada
altered the monetary regime, then the month when the Bank began business, or
when the Bill establishing the Bank was passed (June 1934) would have a
studentized residual greater than 1.97 in absolute value. In the equation for the
entire period, four residuals were significant: July 1929, July, August 1933 and
September 1939. The first date marks the peak of the business cycle in the late
twenties; the months of 1933 are part of the brief hiatus from March 1933 to
January 1934 when the gold price of the U.S. dollar fluctuated; the last date
marks the beginning of World War II. The absence of a significant residual in
March 1935 (or in June 1934) provides evidence that the Bank of Canada had
little effect on macroeconomic variables.
        Similar analysis was conducted for the behaviour of the exchange rate
between the Canadian dollar and the U.S. dollar. The data again did not reject the
hypothesis that the equation was stable throughout the period. The results of the
influence tests are shown in Figure lb. All the significant residuals (other than
that for September 1939) lie within the period, from September 1931 to November
1933, when the normal relationship between the pound and the U.S. dollar was
disrupted, while there is no evidence of a change in the relationship in March
1935.

        The third model is a multivariate model including lagged and
contemporaneous U.S. price level terms as well as lagged Canadian price level
terms as determinants of the Canadian price level. Since the Canadian dollar was
very close to par with the U.S. dollar for the period July 1926 to September
1939, (with the exception of the period October 1931 to March 1933) we would
expect Canadian prices to be strongly correlated with U.S. prices. Furthermore,
since Canada had many of the features of a small open economy, we would
                                                                                      11



expect the world price level to be exogenous for the Canadian economy. The
independent variables of the estimating equation were the contemporaneous U.S.
price level and six lags of the Canadian price level and of the U.S. price level•"
The Chow tests suggested a structural break only in March 1933 and the analysis
of the residuals (Figure lc) again showed no significant residual in March 1935.
       Finally a multivariate model in which the current price level depends on
lagged prices, and lagged and contemporaneous money stock was estimated
separately with Ml and M2. The same methodology was used to determine lag
length as in the previous model, and twelve lagged values of the dependent
variable and six of the money stock variable were included When the M2
definition of money was used, the results were quite similar to those of the
other models. The only structural break occurred in March 1933, and again there
was no significant residual in March 1935 (Figure le).
      When the Ml definition of money was employed, no structural break was
found in January 1929 or March 1933, although a structural break         found in
March 1935. We suspect that this break reflects the change in reporting techniques
of the currency—in—the—hands—of_the_public component of high powered money
discussed above. We therefore re—estimated the model using as the monetary
variable Ml less the high—powered currency component, In this model the
hypothesis of structural stability could not be rejected. The studentized residuals
are similar to those for M2 (see Figure ld).
      Despite the one anomalous significant residual in the Ml model, this
battery of tests largely supports the conclusion that the introduction of the Bank
of Canada did not alter the money supply process in Canada, and did not affect
the evolution of the key nominal variables in the economy.
      The annual reports of the Governor of the Bank (1935—39) suggest that this
result was not unintentional. In the first annual report the Governor described the
                                                                                      12


functions of the Bank, and how they were being implemented." The five functions
listed were: to manage domestic credit; to manage the exchange rate; to advise
the government; to. co—operate with other central banks, and to manage the Bank
rate. The Bank, however, took a rather agnostic approach to these activities, After
admitting that since the Canadian dollar was inconvertible, the Bank could control
the level of domestic credit, the Governor argued that the objective of such
control was the level of income, which "can grow and does grow without any
definite connection between such growth and a growth in bank deposits or notes
in circulation" (p. 12).
      With respect to the exchange rate, the Governor noted that "the Canadian
dollar has exhibited a remarkable tendency, when not at parity with the pound or
U.S. dollar to take up an intermediate position" (p. 13). But he took no credit for
the level of the exchange rate and rather attributed it to institutional
arrangements: "The existence of so many Canadian bonds payable in 2 or 3
currencies .,.. has had a tendency to restrict fluctuations" (p. 13). Finally, with
respect to the Bank rate "It is quite out of touch with Treasury Bill rates, but
this fact is not at present of any significance" (p. 16).
      The governor's report reflects more concern with the housekeeping details
of the transfer to the Bank of various activities previously managed by the
government (the issue of currency, and the management of the government debt)
than with macroeconomic objectives. This is consistent with our econometric
analysis which finds that the formation of the Bank had virtually no
macroeconomic impact.

                                IV. The Political Forces,

      Canada's central bank was not intended to replace the gold standard, and it
was not considered a necessary part of a fractional reserve banking system. The
                                                                                     13



emergence of the Bank of Canada, we believe, reflected a conjuncture of political
imperatives. Domestically, in an environment where traditional trust in the
beneficial nature of the market system was eroding, and a spirit of nationalism
was rising, political pressure was mounting to halt the deflation which was
frequently blamed on the concentrated banking industry. Internationally, monetary
co—operation was said to depend on a system of central banks,
      The demand for inflation, while clearly important, is rather ambiguous, The
popular demand is succinctly expressed in an article in Maclean's Magazine
     The point which our bankers seem to miss is that what the Canadian
     people want in a central bank is not to supply the other banks with
     rediscount facilities which they already have or to save us from future
     panics, [as, it is previously noted, U.S. experience shows they don't] but
     they do want an institution that will effectually control the whole of
     the money and credit of the nation, now under the control of the other
     banks and which will somehow be able to make that money and credit
     available in sufficient volume wherever legitimately needed, and on
     terms much more fair and equitable than at present."
The ambiguity arises because there was no stated desire to abandon the gold
standard. In addition, the deflation and failure to depreciate the Canadian dollar
were clearly phenomena not opposed by the Canadian government and it should
have been clear that a central bank would not diverge from such a policy. The
government had frequently stated that it would not depreciate the dollar although
it had attempted a monetary expansion in late 1932 by forcing the banks to
borrow under the Finance Act. The new borrowing was primarily used to pay off
older borrowings and had little inflationary impact. The government continued to
refuse to undertake the direct inflationary policies of either increasing the fiat
limit on Dominion Notes or reducing the gold backing of notes beneath the limit,
                                                                                    14


      The demand for inflation was often not separated from attacks on the
monopoly power of the banking system. In 1930 tflere were only ten banks and
of these three owned 75% of industry assets. The CBA provided a forum for
explicit collusion and the collusion was admitted on occasion in such areas as
western branch closures," In the Parliament, opposition members complained that
"farmers were innocent victims of the policy of deflation instituted by the
banks "'
      These attacks came at the same time as more general attacks on the
efficacy of the market system. Historian Donald Creighton noted that A fairly
large and increasing number of Canadians were rapidly reaching the conclusion
that positive action by the state must remedy the admitted weakness of
economic liberalism"" The political manifestation of this sentiment was the CCF
(Co—operative Commonwealth Federation), a socialist party, created in 1932 which
had by 1934 become the official opposition in the Provincial governments of
Ontario and Saskatchewan. A central platform of the CCF was the nationalization
of all financial institutions. Schemes for increased government intervention also
appeared from the right — the Social Credit party founded on the doctrines of
Major Douglas, and the Bloc Populaire, a proto—fascist party, in Quebec.
      There were, in addition, more subtle political pressures. The Canadian
government had been a party to the International Financial Conference in Brussels
in 1920 which had issued a statement urging all countries without a central bank
to establish one. More recently the World Monetary and Economic Conference in
1933 had stated that all developed countries without a central bank should create
them to facilitate monetary co—operation and recovery. In an article analyzing the
need for a central bank, Queen's University economists had stressed the need for
a central bank to send representatives to world monetary conferences; "There are
few countries .,. more vitally interested in international cooperation in the
                                                                                      15



    monetary and economic fields than Canada and yet we lack any institution which
    would permit effective participation in such cooperation"."
          The establishment of the Bank was also part of a more general programme
    to create sovereign institutions. It was not until 1931 that Canada's independence
    from Britain was solidified by the Statute of Westminster, which gave her
    Dominion status, and authority over her own external affairs,1' In laying the
    foundation for a national airline, Prime Minister Bennett remarked, "The Americans
    can fly on their side of the line but we are quite capable of doing all the flying
    in or over Canada"." The Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission was also
    established in 1932. Speaking in December 1933, Bennett stated that he had
    decided in December 1931, after Britain left gold, to establish a central bank:
         I learned to my surprise that there was no direct means of settling
         international balances between Canada and London, that the only medium
         was New York and the value of the Canadian dollar would have to be
         determined in Wall Street. I made up my mind then and there that this
         country was going to have a central bank because there must be some
         financial institution that can with authority do business for the whole
         of the Dominion with the other nations of the World. If Canada was to
         be financially independent there had to be a means of deermining
         balances, of settling international accounts; and a central bank would
         furnish this,'
          Whether or not Bennett was speaking with hindsight, there is considerable
    evidence that the decision to introduce a central bank was made before the
•   Macmillan Commission handed down its Report. Bryce states that W.C. Clark
    "agreed to become deputy minister of finance [in late 1932] only when he had
    found out that the Prime Minister was prepared to accept in principle the
    establishment of a central bank for Canada."25 Indeed, the appointment of Lord
                                                                                    16


Macmillan (a staunch advocate of central banking) as head -of the Commission
left little doubt- about the outcome of the investigation. The President of the CBA
writing in August to a colleague stated "Confidentially, I think it was decided
before Lord Macmillan left London that some kind of a central organization
should be established in Canada"," One week after the MacMillan Commission
handed down its Report, P.M. Bennett announöed that he would introduce a Bill to
establish a central bank, "to regulate credit and currency in the best interests of
the economic life of the nation, to control and protect the external value of the
national monetary unit and to mitigate by its influence fluctuations in the general
level of production, trade, prices and employment",

                                    V: Conclusion,


      Examination of the available evidence has led us to reject the hypotheses
that the Bank of Canada's emergence merely reflected evolutionary necessity or
the- need to anchor a monetary system cast adrift by the suspension of the gold
standard, The qualitative evidence suggests that the emergence of the Bank
reflected political, rather than economic, imperatives. Domestically, the government
needed to be seen to take some active measures to respond to the Depression.
and the reduced faith in the omnipotence of the market system, coupled with
public hostility towards the banking system, meant that the introduction of a
central bank was politically popular, Internationally, foreign governments and
international organizations were urging nations to create central banks to facilitate
international monetary co—operation. It was these factors rather than strict
economic efficiency that prompted the establishment of the Canadian central bank,
                                                                                    17


         The authors are Professor, Department of Economics, University of South
Carolina, and Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, University of British
Columbia, respectively. They wish to thank Greg Bloss and Shirley Haun for
research assistance, and the Bank of Nova Scotia Archives for access to their
material. Helpful comments on an earlier draft were supplied by Lance Davis,
Steve Easton, Steve Ferris, Debra Glassman, Charles Goodhart, Mark Rush, Anna
Schwartz, Ron Shearer, Charlie Stuart, Dean Taylor, J, Van Fensterrnaker, Ken White
and participants at the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Use of Quantitative
Methods in Canadian Economic History. The usual disclaimer applies.

          See V. Smith, The Rationale for Central Banking. (London, 1936) and
Hayek, F, Denationalization of Money, (London, 1976) for the view that
governments imposed central banks, and Goodhart, C.A.E, "The Evolution of Central
Banks: A Natural Development?" (London. 1985) for the natural evolution
hypothesis.
         2 The traditional explanation given for the establishment of the Bank of
Canada in the 1930's is the failure of the prevailing set of monetary
arrangements to increase the money supply during the Great Depression. See for
example, S.R. Noble, "The Monetary Experience of Canada during the Depression,"
in AD, Gayer, ed., The Lessons of Monetary Experience (New York, 1937).
          Goodhart, "The Natural Evolution".
          Smith, The Rationale and Milton Friedman and Anna ,J, Schwartz, "Has
Goverment any role in Money?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 17, (1986), pp.
37—62,

          G.S. Watts, "The Origins and Background of Central Banking in Canada"
Bank of Canada Review, (1972), p. 18,
          D. Chisholm, "La Banque due Canada était—elle necessaire?," L'actualité

économipue, 59 (1983), pp. 55 1—574, argues that the Bank of Canada was equally
                                                                                     18


unnecessary in the 19305, since the government of Canada had shown that it
could manage the Canadian currency both before and after the suspension of free
gold convertibility.
            See Milton Friedman, A Program for Monetary Stability, (New York, 1959).
For the counter argument that competing banks would provide a determinant price
level, see B. Klein, "The Competitive Supply of Money," Journal of Money Credit
and Banking, 6 (1974). pp. 423—53.
            M, Bordo and A. Redish, "The Supply of inconvertible Money in the
Absence of a Central Bank: Canada's Interwar Experience" rnimeo, University of
British Columbia.
            Royal Commission on Banking and Currency: Evidence, (henceforth RCBC),
p. 3225,

         1 RCBC, p. 3063,
         ' Report, p. 59. This view found support from both bankers and academics.
See, for example, the evidence of Gregory, (RCBC, p. 2995) and MacLeod, (RCBC,
p.50).

         12 The active circulation of Bank of Canada notes in March 1935 was
double the Dominion Notes in the hands of the public in February 1935, which we
attribute primarily to a change in measurement rather than a doubling of currency
holdings,
         13 The data sources are as follows: Canadian wholesale price index Prices
and Price Indexes, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, Canada: the exchange rate —
monthly average noon buying rate for the Canadian dollar in New York from, U.S.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Federal Reserve Bulletin; U.S.
wholesale price index — Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the U.S.,
Washington; Ml and M2 — caluclated from the returns published in the Canada
Gazette (available from the authors on request), All data were seasonally adjusted
                                                                                   19


using the SAS X— ii program.

       ' One interpretation of the "studentized" residuals is as follows: If the
regression were rerun with a dummy variable for the ith observation, the
statistic on the coefficient of the dummy variable, would be the same as the
"studentized" residual for that observation. See D,A. Beisley, E. Kuh and RE.
Welsch, Repression Diagnostics, Q%lew York, 1980), p. 20.
      ' The lag lengths were determined by the method of F. Mishkin, A
Rational Expectations Approach to Macroeconometrics, (Chicago, 1983). p. 22.
      1' Bank of Canada, Annual Report of the Governor of the Bank of Canada
(Ottawa. 1935). Page numbers in the text refer to this Report.
         Maclean's Magazine, 1 July 1933.
      1 Vancouver Province, 30 December 1935.
      " M. Stokes, The Bank of Canada, (Toronto, 1939), p. 62.
      20 D. Creighton, Canada's First Century (Toronto, 1970), p. 215.
      ' "The Proposal for a Central Bank" Queens Quarterly 40, (1933), 439.
      22 We would like to thank historian Fred Armstrong at the University of
Western Ontario for pointing out this argument,
      23 Cited in D, Creighton, Canada's First Century, p. 215.
         Cited in Stokes, Bank of Canada. p. 65,
      25 RB, Bryce, Maturing in Hard Times, (Montreal, 1986), p. 82.
      26 Letter from J.MacLeod to Maclnnes 25/8/33. Archives of the Bank of
Nova Scotia. B.N.S. docs Sec.#8, File 3, Earlier in August a newspaper report
stated that Eastern financial circles were taking it for granted that a central bank
would be created and that the banks would lose their rights to note issue.
Vancouver       11 August 1933.
        I   •       m   aIw               I;n
                                                     t
                               S
                                    Ill
                                    a

                                    z
                                    S
                               0    Il•
                               pa   a
                               S
                                    'I
                                    I"

                                                         CI)
                               C
                                                         -I
                               0                         C
                               0
                                                         a
                                                         m
                                          cC
                                                         z-1
                              C
                              'a
                              I'J
                                                         Nm
                                          -ccz           m
                                                               m
                              C                 'I
                              (.3
                              a                          m
                                                         2?
                                                         a
                              C                          C
                              0
                              S


                                                         Cl)
                              C
                              a




S                             S
a                             a-
0   0           0             0
