NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHARTERS WITHOUT LOTTERIES:
TESTING TAKEOVERS IN NEW ORLEANS AND BOSTON
Atila Abdulkadiro÷lu
Joshua D. Angrist
Peter D. Hull
Parag A. Pathak
Working Paper 20792
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20792
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014
Our thanks to Raymond Cwiertniewicz, Alvin David, Gabriela Fighetti, and Jill Zimmerman from
the Recovery School District; to Kamal Chavda and the Boston Public Schools; and to Scott Given,
Ryan Knight and the staff at UP Education Network for graciously sharing data and answering our
many questions. We’re grateful to Alonso Bucarey, Stephanie Cheng, Olivia Kim, Elizabeth Setren,
Mayara Silva, Daisy Sun, and Danielle Wedde for exceptional research assistance and to MIT SEII
program manager Annice Correia for invaluable administrative support. Data from the Recovery School
District were made available to us through the Institute for Innovation in Public School Choice. We
gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Institute for Education Sciences (under Award R305A120269),
from the National Science Foundation (under award SES-1426541), and from the Laura and John Arnold
Foundation. Thanks also go to seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the
Stanford Graduate School of Business, and the Fall 2014 NBER Economics of Education Meeting
for helpful comments. Joshua Angrist’s daughter teaches at UP Academy Charter School of Boston.
The views expressed here are those of the authors alone. The views expressed here are those of the
authors alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research
or those of personnel at the schools, school districts, or government agencies connected with this work.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20792.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Atila Abdulkadiro÷lu, Joshua D. Angrist, Peter D. Hull, and Parag A. Pathak. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Charters Without Lotteries: Testing Takeovers in New Orleans and Boston
Atila Abdulkadiro÷lu, Joshua D. Angrist, Peter D. Hull, and Parag A. Pathak
NBER Working Paper No. 20792
December 2014, Revised February 2014
JEL No. C21,C26,C31,I21,I22,I28,J24
ABSTRACT
Lottery estimates suggest oversubscribed urban charter schools boost student achievement markedly.
But these estimates needn’t capture treatment effects for students who haven’t applied to charter schools
or for students attending charters for which demand is weak. This paper reports estimates of the effect
of charter school attendance on middle-schoolers in charter takeovers in New Orleans and Boston.
Takeovers are traditional public schools that close and then re-open as charter schools. Students enrolled
in the schools designated for closure are eligible for “grandfathering” into the new schools; that is,
they are guaranteed seats. We use this fact to construct instrumental variables estimates of the effects
of passive charter attendance: the grandfathering instrument compares students at schools designated
for takeover with students who appear similar at baseline and who were attending similar schools not
yet closed, while adjusting for possible violations of the exclusion restriction in such comparisons.
Estimates for a large sample of takeover schools in the New Orleans Recovery School District show
substantial gains from takeover enrollment. In Boston, where we can compare grandfathering and
lottery estimates for a middle school, grandfathered students see achievement gains at least as large
as the gains for students assigned seats in lotteries. Larger reading gains for grandfathering compliers
are explained by a worse non-charter fallback.

Atila Abdulkadiro÷lu
Duke University
Department of Economics
Durham, NC 27708
atila.abdulkadiroglu@duke.edu
Joshua D. Angrist
Department of Economics, E17-226
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
angrist@mit.edu

Peter D. Hull
Department of Economics,
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
hull@mit.edu
Parag A. Pathak
Department of Economics, E17-240
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
ppathak@mit.edu

No child’s chance in life should be determined by the luck of a lottery
– President Obama (quoted in The Boston Globe, March 13, 2011)

1

Introduction

The question of how best to improve large urban school districts remains a touchstone in the debate
over American school reform. The role of charter schools – publicly funded schools operated outside
the public sector – is especially controversial. Nationwide, charter school enrollment grew from under
one percent in 2000 to over four percent in 2011. Charter expansion has since continued apace: the
National Alliance for Public Charter schools reports a net increase of 381 charter schools operating
between Fall 2011 and Fall 2012, with a charter enrollment gain of 13.5 percent. Growth has been
especially strong in large urban districts such as Boston, Los Angeles, Oakland, Newark, New York,
and Philadelphia, where many students are poor and most are nonwhite. The schools in these districts
are often described as low-performing, with low standardized test scores, high truancy rates, and high
dropout rates.1
In the 2014-15 school year, the New Orleans Recovery School District (RSD) became America’s
first all-charter public school district. RSD emerged from a 2003 effort to improve underperforming
public schools in New Orleans, home to some of the worst schools in the country. State legislation
known as Act 9 allowed the Louisiana Department of Education (LDE) to take control of, manage, and
outsource the operation of schools deemed low-performing based on measures related to achievement,
attendance, and graduation rates. As a result of Act 9, New Orleans public schools that came under
state control became part of RSD, while other schools remained under the authority of the Orleans
Parish School Board (OPSB).2
Hurricane Katrina, which decimated New Orleans public schools in August 2005 along with the
rest of the city’s infrastructure, was a watershed event in the history of RSD. Among other disruptions
caused by the hurricane, many public schools closed and enrollment plummeted.3 The scramble to
reopen New Orleans schools prompted further legislative action in November of 2005. Louisiana’s Act
35 allowed RSD to assume control of 114 low-performing New Orleans schools, leaving OPSB with
authority over only 17 of the schools it ran before Katrina.
1

See NCES (2013) for national enrollment statistics by school type and NACPS (2013a) for statistics on charter growth.
The latter report notes 531 new charters schools opened and 150 charter schools closed. CREDO (2013a) compares the
demographic characteristics of traditional public and charter school students; NACPS (2013b) gives statistics on charter
shares by district.
2
Cowen (2011c) gives a history of RSD.
3
See Vigdor (2007), Groen and Polivka (2008), Sacerdote (2012), Imberman et al. (2012), and Deryugina et al. (2014)
for analyses of the effects of Katrina on outcomes related to education and the labor market.

1

In the following years, as enrollment grew from the immediate post-Katrina trough, both RSD
and OPSB converted increasing numbers of low-performing schools to charters. By Fall 2008, when
combined RSD and OPSB enrollment had reached 36,000 (just over half of pre-Katrina OPSB enrollment), the much-reduced OPSB district had 73% of its students in charters, while the RSD charter
share hit 49%. Since 2008, RSD charter growth has accelerated, and September 2014 saw the closure
of the few remaining direct-run traditional public schools in RSD (OPSB continues to operate a mix
of traditional and charter schools). The 2008 school year also marked the beginning of a period of
relative stability in RSD enrollment, leadership, and finances, along with district-wide improvements
in achievement. RSD achievement gains – in both direct-run and charter schools – can be seen in
Figure 1, which compares post-2008 achievement trends in RSD, OPSB, and the rest of Louisiana.
Average achievement for traditional and RSD charter students runs mostly below the statewide and
OPSB averages, but the gap was much reduced by 2014.
An important and distinctive feature of New Orleans’ charter expansion is the fact that most of
the RSD charter schools that have opened since 2008 are takeovers. A charter takeover occurs when an
existing public school, including its facilities and staff, come under charter management. Importantly,
takeovers guarantee seats for incumbent students, “grandfathering” these students into the new school.
By contrast, most charter schools in other districts open as startups, that is, new schools (sometimes
in existing school buildings), with no seats guaranteed by virtue of previous enrollment.
Boston’s experiment with charter takeovers has unfolded with less urgency than New Orleans’,
but the forces behind it are similar. At the end of the 2010-2011 school year, nine schools in the
Boston Public School (BPS) district were closed for persistently low performance. In an effort to turn
two of these schools around, the UP Academy Charter School of Boston replaced the former Gavin
middle school, while Boston Green Academy (BGA) replaced the former Odyssey high school, both
in Fall 2011. These in-district charter schools, known in the state bureaucracy as Type-III Horace
Mann schools, mark a new approach to charter authorization and school autonomy in Massachusetts.
The Boston School Committee authorizes in-district charter schools and funds them through the BPS
general budget like their predecessors. In-district charter teachers are also members of the Boston
Teachers Union. Outside of pay and benefits, however, terms of the relevant collective bargaining
agreements are waived and these schools are free to operate according to their charters. Boston’s
in-district charters opened with new school leaders and new teaching staff, employed on an essentially
at-will basis, while guaranteeing seats to students formerly at Gavin and Odyssey.4
4

The charter schools studied in our earlier work using lotteries (Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2011) are known as “Commonwealth charters.” Commonwealth Charters are authorized by the state as startups and operate as independent school
districts.

2

This paper evaluates the causal effect of RSD and Boston takeover schools on student achievement
with an instrumental variables (IV) strategy that exploits the grandfathering provisions used to fill
takeover seats. Grandfathering offers the opportunity to answer new questions about urban school
reform. The growing set of estimates exploiting charter school admissions lotteries, while consistently
showing large gains for students at urban charters, necessarily captures causal effects only for charter
applicants, a self-selected population that may be especially likely to see gains from the charter treatment.5 By contrast, grandfathered enrollment in charter takeovers is essentially passive: an existing
population is guaranteed seats in the new school. Takeover experiments therefore identify causal effects on students who haven’t actively sought a charter seat. Grandfathering into takeover charter also
identifies charter attendance effects for schools with lotteries that aren’t over-subscribed. The grandfathering experiment also allows us to study the effect of charters with unusable or undersubscribed
lotteries if these schools were once takeovers.
Our econometric strategy uses grandfathering eligibility indicators to instrument takeover attendance in samples of public middle school students. The grandfathering identification strategy, while
appealing on substantive grounds, raises two implementation issues. First, attendance at schools slated
for closure (we refer to these as legacy schools) may have a direct effect on student achievement independent of subsequent matriculation at the takeover school. The trend in student achievement at closing
schools in RSD suggests such violations of the exclusion restriction are indeed a concern. We therefore
develop an estimation scheme that allows for legacy school enrollment effects in grandfathering-based
IV strategies. A second issue is the heterogeneous nature of the takeover counterfactual, which mixes
students at traditional public schools with students who enroll at non-takeover charters. This is of
particular concern in RSD, which saw an increasing share of non-takeover charter enrollment over the
study period. A simple two-stage least squares (2SLS) procedure addresses the problem of a mixed
non-takeover counterfactual.
The empirical results reported here should be of immediate policy interest. The proliferation of
traditional public schools that have been closed and reconstituted as charter schools reflects a federal
push to encourage states to “...require significant changes in schools that are chronically underperforming and aren’t getting better” (Duncan, 2010). The FY2011 federal budget operationalized this goal
by adding three billion dollars to around $500 million previously appropriated for School Improvement
5

Lottery estimates are reported in, e.g., Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011), Angrist et al. (2012), Angrist et al. (2013),
Dobbie and Fryer (2011), Dobbie and Fryer (2013), Hoxby et al. (2009), and Tuttle et al. (2013). Ravitch (2010) (pp.
141-144) and Rothstein (2011) challenge the external validity of charter treatment effects estimated using lotteries. See
also Rothstein’s account of high scores at KIPP: “They select from the top of the ability distribution those lower-class
children with innate intelligence, well-motivated parents, or their own personal drives, and give these children educations
they can use to succeed in life.” (Rothstein, 2004, p. 82.)

3

Grants (SIGs). Federal SIGs, which offer up to two million dollars annually per qualifying school, support three restructuring models, one of which is the restart model, described as follows in (USDOE,
2009):
A restart model is one in which [a local education agency] converts a school or closes
and reopens a school under a charter school operator, a charter management organization
(CMO), or an education management organization (EMO) that has been selected through
a rigorous review process. A restart model must enroll, within the grades it serves, any
former student who wishes to attend the school.
The RSD and BPS charters studied here, which we refer to as “takeovers,” qualify for federal support
as “restarts.”
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Following a brief background discussion in Section 2,
Section 3 explains the grandfathering identification strategy and shows how to accommodate possible
violations of the exclusion restriction in our instrumental variables framework. Section 4 presents a
detailed econometric analysis of takeovers in New Orleans RSD, and interprets these results against
the backdrop of rising charter enrollment. Section 5 deploys the grandfathering research design in
Boston, comparing grandfathering and lottery estimates of achievement effects at UP Academy. We
show here that the unusually large reading gains seen for UP’s grandfathering compliers are explained
by the weak non-charter outcomes experienced by these students. The final section summarizes our
findings and briefly considers implications for policy.

2

Background

2.1

Takeovers in New Orleans RSD

The RSD takeover explosion is documented in Figure 2. Of the RSD charters that have opened
since Fall 2008 and were operating in Spring 2014 (excluding alternative schools that serve special
populations), 21 are takeovers while 13 are startups. Even by the standards of the heated debate over
school reform, the proliferation of charter takeovers in New Orleans and elsewhere has proven to be
especially controversial.6 At the same time, the perception that RSD’s takeover policy has been fruitful
6

See, for example, Darling-Hammond (2012), who writes “In the new vision for ESEA, these schools, once identified,
will be subjected to school ’turnaround’ models that require the schools to be closed, turned into charters, reconstituted
... These approaches have a dubious track record. Many reconstitutions–where staff are fired and replaced–have resulted
in a less qualified teaching staff and lower achievement after the reform.” A February 2014 civil rights complaint lodged
with the US Department of Education’s Office of Civil Rights alleges closure of the final five traditional public schools in
RSD has hurt the mostly African American students who attended these schools, a complaint that is now under review
(Drellinger, 2014).

4

has prompted ongoing explorations of similar approaches in Michigan and Tennessee.
Appendix Table A1 lists the 18 New Orleans RSD schools that experienced what the district calls
a full charter takeover between the Fall 2008 and Fall 2013. Full takeovers convert all grades in
the legacy school in a single academic year; the takeover school grandfathers legacy students in the
relevant grades, and typically opens in the legacy school building.7 Alternatives to the full takeover
model include principal-led conversions and school mergers. We focus on full takeovers because this
intervention is broad and well-defined, with a clearly identified grandfathering cohort at the relevant
legacy school. Five of the full takeovers we identify are conversions of existing charter schools and
are therefore omitted from our study, which focuses on charter effects for passive students who would
typically not seek charter seats. The two high schools in the table are also omitted; our analysis focuses
on schools with middle school grades (in RSD, these are almost all K-8 schools) because this is where
takeovers are most common and because the legacy school scores used here to adjust for violations of
the exclusion restriction are readily available for middle schoolers.8 The decision to effect a takeover
at low-performing RSD schools was driven in part by test scores and in part by the availability of a
charter operator who met RSD qualifications for school management.9 Table A1 shows that the 11
legacy schools in our study were taken over by six charter management organizations (CMOs), with the
Crescent City and ReNEW CMOs each operating multiple schools. In two cases in 2013, two legacy
schools were merged into a single takeover school. Table A1 also shows that 7 out of 9 study takeover
schools were operated by CMOs that describe themselves as embracing No Excuses pedagogy.10
The No Excuses model for urban education – sometimes also called “high expectations” – is characterized by extensive use of tutoring and targeted remedial support, reliance on data and teacher
feedback, a curriculum focused on basic skills, high expectations from students and staff, and an
emphasis on discipline and comportment.
RSD’s charter schools function outside the collective bargaining agreement between OPSB and the
United Teachers of New Orleans union that represents teachers at non-charter OPSB schools and a few
7
With the advent of OneApp in 2012, grandfathering-eligible students who wanted a takeover seat needed only indicate
their desire to return to their current school on RSD’s common application.
8
Louisiana allows five types of charters, classified according to whether the school is authorized by the local school
board or the LDE, whether the school is new or a conversion, and whether the school is in RSD. RSD’s Type 5 charter
schools, the focus of our study, are authorized and overseen by the LDE. The takeover/startup distinction is less clear
in OPSB than in RSD. Of the 14 charters operating in OPSB in Fall 2013, three are startups and 11 were created in
the immediate Katrina aftermath. Although these “Katrina takeovers” were tied to the closure of particular traditional
schools, and admissions policies at the new schools reference preferences for those who attended the schools they replaced,
for the most part they do not appear to have guaranteed seats to these students. In contrast with RSD charters, four
OPSB charters have selective admissions policies.
9
Operators of the schools in our study typically applied for their Type 5 charters early in the legacy year, with some
indicating a preference for specific school buildings. RSD decisions to implement a takeover were typically announced in
December of the legacy year, with the charter operator announced between January and May.
10
An online appendix table lists our sources for this classification.

5

OPSB charters (Cowen, 2011c). Appendix Table A2 compares teacher characteristics at RSD direct-run
and charter schools. Teachers at RSD charters tend to be younger, have less experience, and earn lower
base salaries than those at direct-run schools. Class sizes at takeover and legacy schools are similar and
close to those seen at other charter and direct-run public schools. Per pupil expenditure is somewhat
lower at RSD charter schools, though this may reflect compositional differences in the student body
and the experience distribution among teaching staff. The PPE contrast between takeover and legacy
schools shows only a small gap.11

2.2

UP from Gavin Middle School

Our Boston analysis focuses on the UP Academy Charter School of Boston, the middle school in the pair
of original Boston in-district charters. The UP Education Network (formerly “Unlocking Potential”) is
rapidly expanding, having recently assumed responsibility for management of two schools in Boston’s
Dorchester neighborhood (one elementary and one K-8), and opened two (non-charter) middle schools
in Lawrence, Massachusetts. Our middle school focus necessarily excludes BGA, Boston’s in-district
charter high school. In this context, it’s worth noting that BGA is more of an in-district conversion
than a takeover, since it was initially staffed by BPS teachers and administrators from elsewhere in
the district.12
Boston’s in-district model arose in the wake of a 2010 Massachusetts law that allowed BPS to
open up to four charter schools without union approval. The in-district model was meant to quickly
improve schools with persistently low performance.13 As in RSD, the birth of an in-district charter
reflects both the district’s desire to address low school performance and the presence of a willing
operator: UP Education Network was selected as a in-district operator partly because it was ready
to grandfather all Gavin students (Toness, 2010). Gavin students were automatically admitted to UP
Boston, though a simple application was required (UP staff visited Gavin students’ homes to encourage
application).14
11
RSD schools, both direct-run and charter, are funded from local and state taxes using a formula that allocates
funding by enrollment. Federal grants (such as Title I funds) flow to direct-run schools through RSD and to charters
through their CMOs (Cowen, 2011a). Unlike direct-run schools, charter schools can save unspent funds from one year
for use in another (Cowen, 2011b).
12
BGA’s founding headmaster and chairman of the board came from Boston Fenway High School, a Pilot School (see
Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011) for an evaluation of pilot schools). Concerns about poor record-keeping and continued low
performance at the school recently prompted the state commissioner of education to recommend that BGA be put on
probation for the remainder of its charter (Vaznis, 2014).
13
Gavin and Odyssey were ranked at the bottom of a list of low-performing schools in 2010, by some measures the
worst on the list. Yet for various reasons, these schools didn’t qualify for state designation as “Level 4,” a decision that
would have made these schools candidates for a number of alternative interventions being used elsewhere in the district.
In response to our queries, BPS administrators emphasized that in-district charter conversion was one of the strategies
available to the district for schools designated Level 3.
14
Some high needs special education students at Gavin were grandfathered into the Richard Murphy school, which

6

Unlike other charter schools in Boston, which operate as independent districts and are funded by
inter-district transfers, UP spending appears in the BPS budget. Former Gavin teachers were free
to apply for positions at UP, and a handful did so, but their positions were not grandfathered and
none were ultimately hired to work at UP (Knight, 2013). UP administrators and staff are part of
the collective bargaining units representing other BPS workers, but the school functions in a looser
framework established in memoranda between UP and the district. UP is required to pay collectively
bargained wage rates (or more), but school leaders and UP administrators make personnel decisions
freely, as in a non-union workplace.
UP’s teachers in our sample period are much younger than was the Gavin staff: 60 percent of UP’s
teachers are no older than 28, as can be seen in column 8 of Table A2. This is unusually youthful
even by the standards of Boston’s other charter schools. UP class sizes are smaller and per-pupil
expenditure is somewhat lower than was the case at Gavin school. Like most of our RSD schools, UP’s
charter aligns itself with the No Excuses model.15 The UP school day is two hours longer than the
Gavin day had been and UP teachers are expected to report for work each year on August 1.

2.3

Related Research

Dee (2012) uses the test proficiency cutoffs that determine qualification for federal SIG funding to frame
a regression discontinuity study of the causal effects of SIG awards. Dee’s estimates suggest that SIGfunded interventions improve performance for students at treated schools. His companion differencein-differences analysis points to the intermediate federal turnaround model as the most effective, while
estimates for the remaining two SIG strategies, including restarts, are not significantly different from
zero. It’s worth noting, however, that very few California schools opted for the more radical restart
intervention, and Dee’s estimates for the restart treatment are correspondingly imprecise.
Houston’s pioneering Apollo 20 program revamped educational practices along No Excuses’ lines
in 20 of Houston’s lowest performing schools, while replacing most school leaders and half of the
teaching staff in these schools; a similar effort was undertaken on a smaller scale in Denver. The
insertion of charter school best practices in existing public schools provides a natural alternative to the
takeover model studied here, and qualifies for the same sort of federal support. Fryer (2014)’s clusteroperates a satellite program in the former Gavin building (BPS (2013), pp. 6 and 146). These cases notwithstanding, the
overall UP enrollment take-up rate for grandfathered special education students is close to that for other grandfathered
students. Our IV strategy treats all grandfathered students the same, and estimates conditioning on baseline special
education status are qualitatively similar to those for the full samples, though often imprecise.
15
UP’s charter application states “all stakeholders should not make or accept excuses for anything less than excellence,”
and describes key No Excuses practices as part of their educational programming (UP Academy, 2010). More recent
school documents emphasize a culture of “high expectations.” (See, for example, http://upeducationnetwork.org/
all-about-up/).

7

randomized trial and quasi-experimental analyses of the Apollo makeovers show statistically significant
gains in math of between one-fifth and one-sixth of a standard deviation, with little effect on reading.
Fryer (2014)’s quasi-experimental analysis uses baseline enrollment zones to construct instruments
for exposure to treatment. Our grandfathering strategy similarly uses a baseline condition to isolate
exogenous variation, but the approach here incorporates matching on baseline school characteristics
to eliminate covariate differences associated with the grandfathering instrument. Our IV identification
strategy also allows for violations of the exclusion restriction that may compromise naive grandfathering
estimates.
In a recent report, CREDO (2013b) uses a variety of comparison methods to evaluate the effects
of attending three RSD takeover charters. The CREDO study presents a fine-grained analysis that
distinguishes many types of students based on their baseline and post-takeover enrollment status,
comparing, for example, students who move into and who exit from schools slated for charter conversion.
This analysis generates a complicated picture of mixed positive and negative effects, though these
sorts of comparisons do not appear to fit into a causal framework except under stronger conditional
independence assumptions than those invoked here.
Somewhat further afield, Epple et al. (2013) outline a structural model of school choice in a large
urban district with schools slated for closure, estimating the model using lagged endogenous variables
as instruments. Finally, as noted in the introduction, our work is closely related to the growing body
of research using charter lotteries to identify causal effects of charter school attendance.

3
3.1

Grandfathering Identification
The RSD Comparison Group

Our grandfathering research design uses a combination of matching and regression to mitigate omitted
variables bias in comparisons of grandfathering-eligible and ineligible students. To see how the matched
comparison group is constructed, consider the set of 6th graders enrolling at an RSD school slated for
takeover at year’s end: 6th grade legacy school enrollment entitles this group to 7th grade seats in
the takeover charter. Since legacy and takeover schools in RSD typically enroll grades K-8, there
are few non-legacy 6th graders who share a 5th grade school with the grandfathering-eligible group.
We therefore look for a comparison group in the population of 6th graders not enrolled at the legacy
school, but who attended schools similar to that attended by legacy school students in 5th grade (we
refer to these 5th grade schools as baseline schools). Specifically, baseline schools are matched if they

8

have school performance scores (SPS) in the same five-point bin.16 In addition to baseline schools, we
construct the RSD comparison sample by matching grandfathering-eligible and ineligible students on
race, sex, baseline year, baseline special education status, and baseline subsidized lunch eligibility.
In practice, the RSD grandfathering experiment involves multiple grades, schools, and years. The
relationship between legacy grades, baseline grades, and takeover grades in each RSD grandfathering
scenario is described in Table 1. Because the earliest baseline information available is from 3rd grade,
our RSD sample covers legacy school enrollment in grades 4-7 and takeover charter enrollment in grades
5-8. Potential takeover exposure thus ranges from one year (for students in 7th grade in the legacy
year) to four years (for students in 4th grade in the legacy year), or more if grades are repeated. A
given matching cell may contain students who were eligible for grandfathering into multiple takeover
charters. The grandfathering instrument indicates eligibility at any of the 9 takeover schools we study.
When pooling across grades, we retain students in the first year they become or are matched to a
grandfathering-eligible student. The number of grandfathering-eligible students enrolled in a legacy
school in the fall of the year prior to takeover averages roughly 70 students per school and is about onethird the size of the matched comparison group (Appendix Table A3 reports the number of observations
contributed by each RSD legacy school).
Our primary analysis outcomes in RSD are Math and English Language Arts (ELA) standardized
test scores, measured by the Louisiana Educational Assessment Program (LEAP) in 4th and 8th
grade and the Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program (iLEAP) in grades 5-7, from
Spring 2011 (the first exposure Spring of the first takeovers in our sample) through 2014.17 The Data
Appendix details the construction of our analysis files from raw student enrollment, demographic, and
outcome data. For the purposes of statistical analyses, scores are standardized to the population of
RSD test-takers in the relevant subject, grade, and year (excluding students in alternative programs).
Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for the RSD analysis sample and for broader samples of RSD
students with the same distribution of baseline grades and years. As can be seen in the first two
columns of the table, almost all RSD and RSD charter-bound students (those enrolled in an RSD
charter school in the grades following baseline) are black, and most are poor enough to qualify for
a subsidized school lunch. RSD charter-bound students have baseline scores near the overall district
16

SPS scores are used for accountability purposes within RSD. Until academic year 2011-2012 (the last baseline year for
our sample of RSD takeovers), SPS scores ranged from 0 to 200, and have since transitioned to a 0-150 scale. Matches are
stable when smaller bins are used, but bins wider than about 10 points generate a coarse match with many low-scoring
schools grouped together.
17
LEAP and iLEAP include multiple-choice and open-answer questions. LEAP scores are used for determining gradeprogression according to Louisiana state guidelines. The iLEAP test combines a test of academic standards and a
norm-referenced component from the Iowa Test of Basic Skills (ITBS) through 2012-2013. The 2013-2014 iLEAP tests
no longer contain the ITBS portion.

9

mean (which is zero by construction). By contrast, students who enroll in takeover charters and those
eligible for grandfathering have much lower baseline test scores. For example, the average baseline math
score of grandfathering-eligible students in our analysis sample is around 0.27σ below the corresponding
RSD population average. This marks an important contrast with baseline achievement in samples of
lottery applicants at many oversubscribed charter schools, a group that tends to be positively selected
on baseline characteristics.18
The RSD comparison group appears to be well-matched to the RSD grandfathering cohort. This
is documented in column 5 of Table 2, which reports regression-adjusted differences in variables not
used for matching between grandfathering-eligible students and the matched comparison group in our
analysis sample. The balance coefficients come from a model that includes a full set of matching-cell
fixed effects, with no further controls. These estimates show no statistically significant differences in
the limited English proficiency rates or in baseline scores (balance here is mostly achieved by controlling
for baseline school SPS bins).
Appendix Table A4 reports follow-up rates and gauges differential attrition in the RSD analysis
sample. Follow-up scores are available for almost three-quarters of students in the first two years
following a takeover. The follow-up rate declines markedly in years three and four, reflecting RSD’s
highly mobile low-income population, a pattern seen in other urban high-poverty districts. Importantly,
however, the likelihood an RSD student contributes an outcome score to the analysis sample is unrelated
to his or her grandfathering eligibility status, and, as shown in column 6 of Table 2, baseline covariates
remain balanced in the analysis subsample for which we can measure outcomes.

3.2

RSD Grandfathering Graphics

We motivate the grandfathering identification strategy for RSD with a graphical comparison of achievement trends in the grandfathering-eligible and matched comparison samples. Provided that scores in
the eligible cohort and the comparison group move in parallel in the pre-takeover period, differences in
score growth between eligible and ineligible students in the post-takeover period offer compelling evidence of a takeover treatment effect. As in Table 2, we regression-adjust these trends by matching-cell
fixed effects, with no further controls.
The upper panels of Figures 3 and 4 show remarkably similar pre-takeover trajectories for the math
and ELA scores of grandfathering-eligible and ineligible students. The data plotted here are standardized to samples of students at RSD’s direct-run schools, so that achievement trends are cast relative to
18

In the middle school sample analyzed in Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011), for example, the baseline math gap between
charter applicants and Boston students is around 0.36σ.

10

this group. Consistent with RSD’s focus on low-performing schools when assigning takeovers, relative
achievement at legacy schools declines in the grade before takeover, though the broader comparison
group trend is essentially flat (for ELA) or generally increasing (for math). Importantly, the pretakeover dip (reminiscent of the pre-treatment earnings dip documented by Ashenfelter (1978) for
applicants to training programs) is mirrored in the matched comparison group.
Matching effectively eliminates baseline differences by grandfathering status, so that simple posttreatment comparisons seem likely to reveal causal effects. We nevertheless present difference-indifferences (DD) style comparisons of achievement growth, a natural econometric starting point. These
comparisons appear in the lower panels of Figures 3 and 4, which plot achievement growth in the
grandfathering-eligible and ineligible subsamples relative to the baseline grade. Pre-baseline growth
differences by grandfathering status are centered around zero, while achievement contrasts after the
legacy year strongly favor the grandfathered cohort. Since around 78% of grandfathering-eligible
students matriculated at a takeover charter (a figure that appears in Table 4, below), this pattern
suggests takeover enrollment significantly boosted achievement.
Figures 3b and 4b show remarkable parallelism in pre-takeover score trends up to, but not including,
the year of legacy enrollment. The negative and significant (for math) DD contrast in the legacy year
signals a possible causal effect of legacy enrollment per se, regardless of whether legacy attendance leads
to subsequent enrollment in the takeover charter. This is an unsurprising but potentially important
finding: legacy schools were slated for closure in part because of extraordinarily low and even declining
achievement, a fact that may have had lasting consequences for their students. Our grandfathering
instrumental variables strategy therefore allows for direct effects of legacy school attendance when
using legacy enrollment to instrument takeover attendance.

3.3

Econometric Framework

Our grandfathering IV estimator contrasts legacy-to-post-takeover achievement growth by grandfathering status. To interpret this procedure, consider a group of legacy school students and their matched
comparison counterparts with covariate values falling in a single matching stratum. Achievement for
each student is observed in two grades: at the end of the legacy grade, immediately prior to the takeover
(grade l) and after the takeover (grade g). The grandfathering-eligible group is mostly enrolled in the
takeover school in grade g, while few in the comparison group are. A dummy variable denoted by Z
– the grandfathering instrument – indicates legacy school enrollment in grade l (observed at the start
of the school year) while the variable D indicates takeover school enrollment at any time in grade g.
Achievement in the two grades is denoted Y l and Y g , observed at the conclusion of the school year.

11

Legacy school enrollment in grade l potentially affects grade g achievement through two causal
channels: by increasing the likelihood of takeover attendance in grade g and by adding a year’s exposure to the legacy school in grade l, an event that may have lasting consequences if learning is
g
cumulative. Potential outcomes in grade g are therefore double-indexed. Specifically, we write Yzd

to indicate the grade g outcome that would be observed when Z = z and D = d. Potential outcomes in grade l, written Yzl , are indexed against Z alone, since grade l predates takeover exposure.
Using the potential treatments notation introduced by Imbens and Angrist (1994), legacy enrollment
shifts takeover exposure from D0 to D1 . In this setup, observed outcomes are determined by potential
outcomes and by the instrument as follows:
Y l = Y0l + Z(Y1l − Y0l ),
D = D0 + Z(D1 − D0 ),
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
Y g = Y00
+ Z(Y10
− Y00
) + D(Y01
− Y00
+ Z(Y11
− Y10
− (Y01
− Y00
)))
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
))),
− Y00
− (Y01
− Y10
= Y00
+ Z(Y10
− Y00
) + (D0 + Z(D1 − D0 ))(Y01
− Y00
+ Z(Y11

where the last line uses the expression for D to obtain a representation for observed Y g as a function
of potential outcomes, potential treatments, and the instrument, Z.
Potential outcomes and treatments are assumed to satisfy the following assumptions:
g
g
g
g
Assumption 1 (Independence) {Y0l , Y1l , Y00
, Y01
, Y10
, Y11
, D0 , D1 } ⊥
⊥ Z.

Assumption 2 (Monotonicity) P r(D1 ≥ D0 ) = 1.
Assumption 3 (First-stage) E[D1 − D0 ] > 0.
Assumption 1 – Independence – asserts that the grandfathering instrument is as good as randomly
assigned with respect to potential outcomes and treatment take-up (implicitly, within matching strata).
Table 2 and Figures 3 and 4, which show that matching eliminates covariate and baseline score differences in our RSD analysis sample, support this. Monotonicity says that legacy enrollment either
induces takeover enrollment or has no effect for all individuals in the analysis sample. Assumption 3
requires legacy enrollment to induce takeover enrollment, at least for some.
As in the Angrist et al. (1996) framework for identification of local average treatment effects (LATE)
with possible violations of the exclusion restriction, Assumptions 1-3 allow for possible direct effects
of legacy exposure on grade g outcomes. Such effects arise if
g
g
Y1d
6= Y0d
,

12

when D is fixed at d. In other words, maintaining the assumption that legacy enrollment is as good
as randomly assigned, we’ve allowed for violations of the exclusion restriction associated with use of Z
as an instrument for D. In view of the low achievement seen at the legacy school, and the close link
between legacy attendance and the grandfathering instrument, the possibility of such violations seems
inherent in the grandfathering research design.
Rather than defend a conventional exclusion restriction in this setting, we replace it with a closely
related but weaker restriction on potential achievement gains. This allows for direct additive effects of
legacy enrollment that are free to vary within the LATE subpopulations of always-takers, never-takers,
and compliers:
g
g
− Y0l |T ], where T = aD0 + n(1 − D1 ) +
Assumption 4 (Gains Exclusion) E[Y1d
− Y1l |T ] = E[Y0d

c(D1 − D0 ) identifies always-takers (a), never-takers (n), and compliers (c).
Assumption 4 requires that expected potential achievement gains be the same for those who do and
g
g
don’t attend the legacy school in grade l, once takeover enrollment is fixed. This allows Y1d
6= Y0d
, while
g
g
− Y0l
− Y1l = Y0d
also weakening the canonical exclusion restriction applied to gains, which says that Y1d

for everyone, rather than just on average.
We can interpret Assumption 4 as implied by an additive structure for expected potential outcomes
in each grade:
E[Yzl |T = s] = α1s + zγs

(1)

g
E[Yzd
|T = s] = α2s + zγs + dβs .

(2)

The parameters α1s and α2s in these expressions are subgroup-specific potential outcome means with
both the legacy- and takeover-enrollment indicators switched off; γs is an additive legacy school enrollment effect, common to grades l and g; and βs is the causal effect of takeover attendance for LATE
subgroup s. This additive model rules out interactions between legacy and takeover attendance, while
allowing legacy effects to be persistent across grades.
The appendix shows that under Assumptions 1-4, a Wald-type IV estimand applied to achievement
gains captures the average causal effects of takeover attendance on compliers’ grade g achievement as
follows:
Theorem 1 Under Assumptions 1-4,
E[Y g − Y l |Z = 1] − E[Y g − Y l |Z = 0]
g
g
g
g
= E[Y11
− Y10
|D1 > D0 ] = E[Y01
− Y00
|D1 > D0 ].
E[D|Z = 1] − E[D|Z = 0]
Proof: See appendix.
13

This theorem identifies average causal effects of takeover exposure on test score levels, notwithstanding
violations of the exclusion restriction due to legacy school enrollment (in the notation of equations (1)
and (2), the theorem identifies βc ).
We use Theorem 1 in two ways: to capture causal effects of takeover enrollment in the year following
a takeover and to capture causal effects of an ordered treatment that counts years of takeover exposure.
The latter use is supported by a corollary detailed in the appendix, which shows how our IV estimand
for an ordered treatment can be interpreted as a weighted average of incremental average causal effects.
To explore the robustness of our conclusions to Assumption 4, the econometric appendix also discusses
models and estimates that allow legacy school effects in the takeover grade to only be partially carried
over to the legacy grade.
Motivated by these theoretical results, we estimate the causal effects of takeover attendance with
a second-stage estimating equation that can be written
(3)

Yitg − Yil = α0 Xit +

X

κj dij + βDit + ηit ,

j

where Yitg is student i’s score in year t in grade g and Yil is i’s score in the last grade in which he or
she was potentially enrolled in the legacy school. The treatment variable here, Dit , counts the number
of years student i spent at the takeover school as of year t, up to and including the grade enrolled in
that year (Dit is Bernoulli for tests taken in the first year of takeover operation).
The first stage equation that accompanies this second stage is
(4)

Dit = δ 0 Xit +

X

µj dij + πZi + νit ,

j

where Zi is the excluded instrument, an indicator of legacy enrollment in the fall of the legacy school’s
final year in operation, and π is the associated first stage coefficient. As with the models used to investigate covariate balance, equations (3) and (4) control for matching cell fixed effects. In particular,
because the comparison sample consists of an exact match on race, sex, baseline special education status, baseline subsidized lunch eligibility, baseline school, baseline year, and the legacy grade, equations
(3) and (4) include dummies for each of these cells, denoted dij for cell j. The empirical first- and
second-stage models also include dummies for English proficiency and year-of-test (denoted by the vector Xit , with coefficients α and δ). Finally, although baseline score controls appear to be uncorrelated
with grandfathering exposure in RSD, Xit includes these score controls to boost precision.

14

4

Charters without Lotteries in New Orleans RSD

4.1

Grandfathering Results

Attendance at RSD takeover charters is estimated to increase math and ELA scores by an average of
0.21σ and 0.14σ, respectively, per year enrolled. These IV estimates, reported in the last column of
Table 3, are generated by a first stage of about 1.1 years of takeover exposure (first stage estimates
are reported in column 3). The associated standard errors are on the order of 0.04.19 Analyses that
disaggregate by outcome grade and by years of potential takeover exposure show that takeover effects
are larger in 7th and 8th grade than earlier, and are larger in the first two years of takeover exposure
than later. The first stage effect of grandfathering eligibility on first-exposure-year enrollment, reported
at the top of panel B, reveals that grandfathering boosted initial takeover enrollment rates by about
66 percentage points.
The IV estimates generated by the grandfathering design exceed (and, in many cases, are significantly different from) the corresponding OLS estimates reported in column 2 of Table 3. This suggests
that uninstrumented comparisons by takeover enrollment status, such as those reported in CREDO
(2013a), reflect substantial negative selection bias. It’s also worth noting that IV estimates that fail
to adjust for legacy enrollment, such as those reported in Fryer (2014), would appear to be biased
downwards. Fitting versions of equations equations (3) and (4) to post-treatment levels rather than
gains generates math and ELA effects of 0.16σ and 0.11σ, respectively. Differences between these
estimates and those for gains are consistent with the negative legacy-year treatment effects suggested
by Figures 3 and 4. Appendix Table A7 reports legacy year treatment effects and estimates of models
that weaken Assumption A4 to allow for partial pass-through of legacy effects. See the econometric
appendix for details.

4.2

Interpreting RSD Takeover Effects

The RSD grandfathering identification strategy compares students that mostly attend takeover charters with a grandfathering-ineligible comparison group that went to various sorts of schools. Most
students in the comparison group began middle school at one of RSD’s direct-run public schools. But
the distribution of takeover alternatives evolved as RSD closed its direct-run schools and as students
changed schools for reasons other than closure, entering charters through lotteries instead of by grandfathering. Estimates of RSD takeover effects therefore reflect a growing share of charter-to-charter
comparisons. If all RSD charters boost student achievement, such comparisons mask a higher overall
19

Estimates of effects on science and social science are similar, and are reported in the online appendix.

15

charter treatment effect.
Table 4 describes the grandfathering attendance counterfactual in detail, focusing on the distinction between the charters that define the takeover treatment for purposes of Table 3 (defined as “study
takeovers”), other takeover schools (including charter-to-charter conversions), non-takeover RSD charters, and direct-run RSD schools. Specifically, the first two columns show the distribution of school
types by grandfathering status, while column 3 describes the types of schools attended by untreated
compliers. These complier attendance counterfactuals were constructed by estimating causal effects of
the takeover enrollment dummy, D, on school sector indicators, W . Associated with each W are potential attendance outcomes, W0 and W1 , describing school choices in non-treated and treated states
(that is, potential school type when D = 0 and D = 1). Column 3 of Table 4 reports estimates
of E[W0 |D1 > D0 ], the distribution of school types among compliers when they do not enroll in a
takeover (these were estimated using the weighting procedure derived by Abadie (2003)).20 By definition, treated compliers enroll in a takeover school when they’re grandfathering-eligible; column 4 in
the table is included as a reminder of this fact.
The first stage for enrollment in a study takeover contrasts a 78 percent first-year takeover enrollment rate for those grandfathered (reported in column 2 of Table 4) with an 8.9 percent comparison
group enrollment rate (reported in column 1 of Table 4).21 The first-year increase in (study) takeover
enrollment reflects a substantial reduction in rates of attendance at non-takeover charters (compare 33
with 15) and, especially, a sharp reduction in attendance at direct-run schools (compare 51 with 3.4).
The counterfactual attendance distribution in column 3 shows that 32 percent of untreated compliers
enrolled initially in a non-takeover charter school, while 60 percent attended a direct-run school.
Not surprisingly, both the takeover first stage and the proportion of the comparison group in directrun schools falls over time. The (study) takeover first stage in the third year of exposure is around 0.48
(0.754-0.277), while the counterfactual direct-run enrollment share falls to about 0.27. The balance
of third-year non-treated complier enrollment was in other RSD charter schools. Reflecting RSD’s
accelerating charter transformation, the other-charter enrollment rate for compliers in our sample
exceeded 86 percent after four years of exposure.
The growing share of the RSD comparison sample enrolled in charter schools dilutes estimated
takeover effects if other charter schools generate similar gains. This motivates a 2SLS model with two
endogenous variables, one tracking study takeover attendance and one tracking attendance at other
E[Z|X]−Z
The weights in this case are given by κ0 (X) = (1 − D) E[Z|X](1−E|Z|X])
. We estimate E[Z|X] using probit with the
same covariate specification used to construct the estimates in Table 3. See Table 1 in Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2014a) for
a similar analysis of school choice in a sample of applicants to Boston and New York exam schools.
21
The discrepancy between these estimates and the first stage in Table 3 is due to the omission (from estimates in
Table 4) of controls for matching strata and other covariates.
20

16

sorts of charters. The model with two types of treatments can be written
Yitg − Yil = α0 Xit +

(5)

X

κj dij + βD Dit + βC Cit + ηit ,

j

where Cit counts the number of years of attendance in charters other than those covered by Dit prior
to testing. Equation (5) is identified by adding interactions between the grandfathering instrument
and covariates to the instrument list (specifically, interactions with baseline year, special education
status, and SPS five-point bins). These interactions generate a first stage for Cit because students
with differing characteristics (covariate values) are more or less likely to wind up in non-takeover
charters in the event they aren’t grandfathered.
Removing other charters from the counterfactual outcome distribution with the aid of equation (5)
nearly doubles the estimated takeover effect on math scores. This can be seen in the contrast between
the estimates in columns 1 and 3 of Table 5. Column 1 repeats the takeover effect for the all-grades
sample shown in Table 3, while column 3 reports 2SLS estimates of βD and βC . The takeover estimate
for math in the latter specification rises to 0.36σ, while the other RSD charter effect is 0.32σ. These
results are remarkably similar to the estimates of middle school math effects for Boston charter lottery
applicants reported in Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011). On the other hand, the other-charter ELA effect
in column 3 is close to zero. Consequently, the takeover effect on ELA scores remains near 0.14σ with
or without a second endogenous variable to capture other-charter attendance effects.
The estimates in column 3 of Table 5 suggest takeover and other charters have similar effects
on math scores. We can therefore construct more precise estimates of this common charter effect
by estimating a version of equation (5) that replaces βD Dit + βC Cit with βA Ait , where the variable
Ait = Dit + Cit counts years of attendance at any RSD charter. The resulting estimates of βA , reported
in columns 4 and 5 of Table 5 for just-identified and over-identified specifications (that is, without and
with covariate interactions in the instrument list), indeed show a precision gain, with standard errors
falling from 0.073 and 0.152 in column 3 to 0.059 in column 5. The pooled specification for ELA
generates a similar reduction in standard errors. It should be noted, however, that the divergence
in estimated takeover and other-charter effects in column 3 make the pooled ELA results harder to
interpret.22
22

The common-effects model produces a weighted average of βD and βC , but the weighting scheme in this case need
not be convex. The fact that the estimates in columns 4 and 5 exceed those in columns 1 and 3 reflect the negative
weight this scheme assigns to the other-charter effect.

17

5

Measuring UP in Boston

Estimates from RSD suggest charter takeover attendance increased middle school achievement sharply.
At the same time, RSD’s transformation to an all-charter district complicates the interpretation of RSD
takeover effects. The 2011 takeover of Gavin middle school affords another opportunity to measure
charter takeover effects with the grandfathering research design, in this case against a more homogeneous and stable backdrop. The availability of over-subscribed admission lotteries at UP also allows a
direct comparison of results from lottery and grandfathering research designs.

5.1

The UP Comparison Group

As in the analysis of RSD, we use a combination of regression and matching to reduce omitted variables
bias in grandfathering comparisons. Middle schoolers grandfathered into UP were enrolled at Gavin
in 6th or 7th grade in the fall of 2010. Because both Gavin and UP serve grades 6-8, we match
each grandfathered student to non-Gavin students who attended the same school in 5th grade. The
Gavin comparison group consists of non-Gavin students matched on 5th grade school, and on race,
sex, 5th grade special education status, and 5th grade subsidized lunch eligibility (the Boston column
of Table 1 describes the timing of the grandfathering research design for UP). Each grandfathered
student is again matched to one or more comparison students. The resulting analysis sample contains
290 grandfathering-eligible Gavin students, with 913 students in the comparison group; a total of 1,147
of these have baseline score data.23
On-track 6th and 7th graders at Gavin transitioned to 7th and 8th grade when UP opened in Fall
2011. Achievement outcomes come from 7th and 8th grade Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment
System (MCAS) tests given in Spring 2012-2014. For the purposes of statistical analyses, MCAS scores
were standardized to the population of BPS and Boston charter students from the relevant subject
and year, excluding students in alternative schools.
Most BPS 5th graders are black or Hispanic, a fact documented in the first two columns of Table 6,
which describes the population of Boston 5th graders in years covered by the UP analysis sample along
with the subsample of Boston students headed for a charter middle school in grades 6-8. Like other
charter students, those at UP or who were grandfathering-eligible are even more likely to be black,
while Hispanics are under-represented in the charter-bound and grandfather-eligible groups. Almost
all UP and grandfathering-eligible students qualify for a subsidized lunch. In contrast with the positive
selection seen in the wider sample of charter-bound students in Table 6, UP students and those eligible
23
As can be seen in Table 1, baseline information in the Boston sample comes from 5th grade for students whose legacy
grade was 7th as well as for those whose legacy grade was 6th.

18

for grandfathering into UP in the analysis sample have baseline scores well below those of students in
the general BPS population.
The extent to which matching on baseline characteristics produces balanced grandfathering comparisons is explored in the last three columns of Table 6. The estimates in column 5 are from models
that control only for matching cells; these show significant grandfathering gaps in baseline scores. The
differences in column 5 suggest the comparison group here is not as well-matched as for RSD. Importantly, however, the difference in baseline scores can be eliminated by conditioning on a further lagged
score. The power of lagged score controls to produce balanced comparisons is illustrated in column 6
of the table, which shows the results of including fourth grade (pre-baseline) scores in the model used
to construct the balance estimates. The addition of these controls eliminates the grandfathering gap
in 5th grade scores. In other words, lagged score controls neutralize differences in measured achievement in a subsequent pre-takeover grade. All estimates of UP takeover effects thus control linearly for
baseline achievement.
Follow-up scores are available for 80-90 percent of our grandfathering-eligible and matched comparison groups, a somewhat higher follow-up rate than for RSD over the same horizon. One year
out, differences in follow-up between the grandfathered and comparison groups are small and not significantly different from zero when estimated with lagged baseline score controls, a result shown in
Appendix Table A4. Follow-up differences are somewhat more pronounced for the cohort seen two
years out, though these differences are still only marginally significant. This modest difference in
follow-up rates seems unlikely to account for the large score advantage our analysis uncovers for the
grandfathered group.

5.2

UP Grandfathering DD

Achievement in the Gavin grandfathering cohort and the matched comparison group move largely
in parallel in pre-takeover grades, diverging thereafter. This is apparent in Figures 5 and 6, which
plot achievement paths in the same format used for RSD in Figures 3 and 4. 95% confidence bands
for difference-in-differences comparisons are plotted with dotted lines in the bottom panel of these
figures. The solid lines compare score growth in the grandfathered and comparison groups, relative to
scores from the year preceding the last year of legacy enrollment. These DD estimates show marked
and statistically significant differences in score growth in post-treatment years, with no significant
differences earlier.
Interestingly, and in contrast with RSD, the Gavin experiment generates a positive DD estimate
for legacy-year math scores (of about one tenth of a standard deviation). This result is marginally

19

significant at best and may therefore be a chance finding. Taken at face value, however, this modest
gain may reflect an effort by Gavin staff to improve outcomes in advance of–and perhaps in response
to–the threat of school closure.

5.3

UP Estimates

The UP enrollment change induced by grandfathering Gavin students boosted middle school math and
ELA scores by an average of 0.3σ − 0.4σ per year. This can be seen in the pooled IV estimates of
equation (3) reported at the top of Table 7. The first stage that generates these results is just over
one, meaning grandfathering eligibility generated an additional year at UP, on average, an estimate
shown in column 3 of the table.
The first stage estimate for the cohort that took the 7th grade MCAS reveals the proportion of
grandfathered 6th graders who remained at UP; this estimate, shown in the set of results by grade of
test reported in panel A of Table 7, is around 80 percent. Math estimates by grade tested are similar
across grades, but the ELA estimate for 7th graders, indicating a score gain of almost two-thirds of
a standard deviation, is more than double that for 8th graders. Such large gains in reading skills are
rarely seen in research on school reform.
Panel B of Table 7 reports results disaggregated by potential years of exposure to UP, contrasting
estimates for the cohort that attended for at most one year, a Bernoulli treatment, with estimates for
those exposed for up to two years. The average causal effect of a year at UP on students’ ELA scores
falls after the second year of exposure, from 0.5σ to 0.27σ. Given the exceptionally large first-year ELA
impact this seems unsurprising, and is consistent with Figure 6’s difference-in-differences evidence for
ELA, which shows a post-takeover achievement jump, followed by a plateau.24

5.4

UP Lottery Estimates

Since Fall 2012, UP Academy, like other Boston charters, has filled its 6th grade seats through open
lotteries, with priority going to current BPS students. Earlier, UP used lotteries to allocate seats not
taken by grandfathering-eligible students. A natural benchmark for the Gavin grandfathering strategy
is the causal effect of charter attendance on UP students who participated in the lotteries used to fill
the 7th grade seats not taken by former Gavin students in Fall 2011, and to fill all 6th grade seats then
and since (few students apply for 8th grade seats at UP).
Our UP lottery sample includes applicants who applied for 6th grade seats in the school years
24
UP results without differencing post-takeover and legacy-grade scores are similar to those reported in Table 7, at
0.43σ for math and 0.24σ for ELA.

20

beginning in Fall 2011 and Fall 2012, the first two years of UP operation, when we also measure
outcomes for grandfathered cohorts. We also look at smaller number of lottery applicants for 7th
grade seats in 2011. Lotteries for other entry grades through Fall 2013 were not oversubscribed by
first-round, non-sibling BPS applicants. Outcome data are from 6th-8th grade tests, taken in Spring
2012-2014. Baseline scores for the lottery sample are from 5th grade for applicants for 6th grade seats
and from 6th grade for applicants for 7th grade seats. As with the grandfathering estimates, the lottery
sample is limited to students who attended a BPS elementary school in the baseline grade. Appendix
Table A5 gives an account of our UP applicant data processing procedures.
Appendix Table A6 describes the UP lottery sample and documents baseline covariate balance by
win/loss status. We construct two indicators for lotteried admission: an initial offer dummy indicates
that a student was given an offer to attend on lottery night, while a waitlist offer indicator is switched
on for students with the best randomly-ordered waitlist ranks (specifically, the waitlist instrument
indicates applicants with lottery numbers below the highest number offered a seat in the relevant
application cohort through September). This table also compares lottery applicants with the sample
eligible for grandfathering into UP and with a general Boston sample that includes students in the same
baseline grades and years attending BPS schools plus Boston charters (excluding those at alternative
schools). In comparison to the Boston population, Black students are somewhat over-represented and
Hispanic students under-represented among UP lottery applicants. Poverty rates, special education
status, and limited English proficiency rates for lottery applicants are much like those seen elsewhere
in Boston. Consistent with random assignment of lottery offers, the balance coefficients in columns 5-6
of Table A6 show UP lottery winners and losers are similar. Likewise, we see little evidence of excess
loss to follow-up in the loser group.
Importantly, while UP lottery applicants’ share many characteristics with the majority of Boston
students in the same grade, and their baseline scores are not very different from the overall Boston
mean, lottery applicants’ baseline achievement far exceeds that in the grandfathering sample, which has
baseline scores roughly a quarter of standard deviation below those for Boston. UP lottery applicants
are also less likely than the grandfathered cohort to be poor enough to qualify for a subsidized lunch.
The lottery IV framework looks much like that described by equations (3) and (4) for grandfathering
instruments, with three modifications. First, there’s no matched comparison sample. Rather, the
estimation sample consists of all lottery applicants, while the empirical models adjust for year and
grade of application (that is, lottery “risk sets”) instead of matching cell fixed effects. Second, the
dependent variable is the level of Yitg and not the gain relative to a legacy year. Finally, we use two

21

lottery instruments. The lottery estimating equations can therefore be written
Yitg = α0 Xit +

(6)

X

κj dij + βDit + ηit

j

Dit = δ 0 Xit +

(7)

X

µj dij + π1 Z1i + π2 Z2i + νit ,

j

where Z1i and Z2i are the initial and waitlist offer instruments, dummies dij indicate lottery risk sets,
and Xit is a vector of additional controls. The endogenous variable in this context counts years enrolled
at UP between lottery application and outcome test date.25
The first stage effect of an immediate offer, close to 0.8 for the full sample, exceeds the first stage
for waitlist offers, which is just under 0.6. These estimates appear at the top of columns 3 and 4
in Table 8. Looking at first stage effects in the first year of possible exposure to UP, we see that
immediate and waitlist offers boost UP enrollment rates by 0.52 and 0.4, respectively. These estimates
appear in the first row of panel B in Table 8. UP lottery applicants offered a seat in 6th and 7th
grade admissions lotteries earned higher math and ELA scores as a result. Pooled 6th-8th grade 2SLS
estimates, reported at the top of the last column of Table 8, show statistically significant average
per-year score gains of 0.27σ in math and 0.12σ in ELA. Estimates by grade tested, reported below
the pooled estimates, suggest these gains are largest in 6th grade, where they reach 0.35σ in math and
0.21σ in ELA. Likewise, disaggregation by exposure time generates larger average effects after one year
than after year two.
The results in Tables 7 and 8 suggest that the benefits of UP enrollment for those enrolled there
by virtue of grandfathering are at least as large as for UP students who won their seats in a lottery.
The contrast in ELA estimates also favors grandfathering when we compare students who had equal
exposure to UP: after one year, gains for the lottery cohort are 0.37σ in math and 0.22σ in ELA, while
gains after one year for those grandfathered into UP come to 0.33σ in math and 0.5σ in ELA in 7th
and 8th grade. Gains for the grandfathered cohort after two years of potential exposure are estimated
to be 0.32σ in math and 0.27σ in ELA. This can be compared with estimated gains of 0.24σ in math
and 0.08σ in ELA for similarly-exposed lottery cohorts.
As in our analysis of RSD takeover effects, an important consideration in this context is the type of
school attended by compliers not enrolling in UP. Differences in counterfactual school selection might
account for the somewhat smaller achievement gains seen for lottery compliers. Perhaps an especially
large fraction of those not offered seats in UP lotteries wound up at other high-performing Boston
25

In addition to lottery risk sets (application year and grade), our lottery analysis controls for student race, sex, special
education status, limited English proficiency, subsidized lunch status, baseline test scores, and outcome year and grade
effects. As with the grandfathering specification, additional baseline controls yield more precise, though qualitatively
similar, estimates.

22

charters, thereby diluting lottery-generated treatment effects.
Roughly 86 percent of untreated compliers in the grandfathering research design enrolled in a
traditional BPS school, with 7 percent winding up in another Boston charter. This can be seen in
Table 9, which details UP first stages and counterfactual school choices in the same format as Table 4
(likewise computed using the weighting formula in Abadie (2003)). By way of comparison, the lottery
design leaves 94 percent of untreated compliers in a traditional BPS school, with only 6 percent in other
charters. Counterfactual enrollment rates for both designs appear in column 3 of the table. The low
proportion attending other charters, and the even smaller proportion at other charters among lottery
compliers, imply that the excess of grandfathering over lottery estimates of UP attendance effects is
not explained by a diluted counterfactual in the lottery control group.

5.5

Explaining the Grandfathering Advantage at UP

What accounts for the large ELA gains experienced by UP’s grandfathering compliers relative to
those experienced by UP’s lottery compliers? Differences in average causal effects are necessarily
generated by differences in average potential outcomes in treated and untreated states. We explain
the grandfathering/lottery contrast in takeover impact by comparing marginal means of counterfactual
outcomes in the relevant compliant subpopulations.
As a preliminary for this comparison, note that the 2SLS procedure producing the lottery estimates reported in Table 8 is founded on the presumption that lottery instruments satisfy a traditional
exclusion restriction. This restriction can be expressed formally by writing
g
g
≡ Ydg ,
= Y0d
Y1d

where Yzd is a potential outcome indexed against lottery offers (Z) and (Bernoulli) enrollment at UP
(D). Abadie (2002) shows that in a LATE framework with potential outcomes Y1g and Y0g satisfying
independence, first-stage, monotonicity, and exclusion restrictions, a simple 2SLS procedure identifies
E[Y1g |D1 > D0 ] and E[Y0g |D1 > D0 ]. We implement this procedure for lottery instruments by using
2SLS to estimate equations of the form:
(8)

Yitg (1 − Di ) = α00 Xit +

X

κ0j dij + β0 (1 − Di ) + η0it

j

(9)

Yitg Di = α10 Xit +

X

κ1j dij + β1 Di + η1it ,

j

where Xit is the vector of covariates used to construct the estimates in Table 8. The parameters β1
and β0 describe outcome means for treated and untreated compliers, that is, E[Y1g |D1 > D0 ] and

23

E[Y0g |D1 > D0 ] (in this case, averages weighted over matching strata).26
In contrast with lottery potential outcomes Ydg , the grandfathering counterpart of marginal mean
g
potential outcomes for lottery compliers involves doubly-indexed Yzd
. Because lottery compliers have

no experience of the legacy school that induces enrollment for grandfathering compliers, we focus
g
g
here on identification of the average of Y01
and Y00
, that is, the potential outcomes experienced when

students go to a takeover school without also attending a legacy school.
Identification of marginal means for grandfathering compliers is further complicated by use of a
differenced dependent variable in the grandfathering models, that is, Yitg − Yil instead of Yitg on the
left-hand side. The principal econometric challenge in this context is the move from counterfactual
g
g
average gains, E[Y01
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ] and E[Y00
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ] for grandfathering compliers to coung
g
|D1 > D0 ], so that the latter can be compared
|D1 > D0 ] and E[Y00
terfactual average levels, E[Y01

with E[Y1g |D1 > D0 ] and E[Y0g |D1 > D0 ] for lottery compliers. A simple solution for this problem is
outlined in the econometric appendix.
The fruits of our analysis of marginal mean potential outcomes appear in Table 10, starting with
treatment effects for the effects of UP attendance in the first year of exposure in columns 1 and 2. These
estimates, which match those reported in panel B of Tables 7 and 8, show roughly equal grandfathering
and lottery estimates for math (of about 0.35σ), along with grandfathering estimates for ELA that
are markedly larger than the corresponding lottery estimates. The grandfathering-lottery gap here is
a statistically significant 0.28σ.
An important difference between lottery and grandfathering compliers is apparent in columns 7 and
8 of Table 10: in both subjects, lottery compliers have average untreated outcome means slightly above
those for the reference population, while the untreated outcomes means for grandfathering compliers
are about −0.15σ below the reference average. The UP treatment effect in math pushes both groups
g
of compliers in parallel: the common gain of 0.35σ leaves E[Y01
|D1 > D0 ] for grandfathering compliers

and E[Y1g |D1 > D0 ] for lottery compliers about as far apart as in the untreated state.
In a clear contrast to the math results, the bottom of Table 10 reveals roughly equal treated-state
g
ELA scores for grandfathering and lottery compliers: the difference in estimates of E[Y01
|D1 > D0 ]

for grandfathering compliers and E[Y1g |D1 > D0 ] for lottery compliers is only 0.05σ and well short
of statistical significance. At the same time, UP grandfathering compliers start almost a quarter
of standard deviation below their lottery counterparts. Specifically, the difference in estimates of
26

The 2SLS procedure used here offers an alternative to the semiparametric Abadie (2003) weighting scheme used to
construct the complier counterfactual enrollment outcomes reported in Tables 4 and 9. We prefer the 2SLS procedure
in this case so that the estimates of (8) and (9) will match the over-identified 2SLS estimates in Table 8 that mark our
starting point. 2SLS estimation also simplifies the computation of standard errors. In practice, weighting and 2SLS
generate very similar results.

24

g
E[Y00
|D1 > D0 ] for grandfathering compliers and E[Y0g |D1 > D0 ] for lottery compliers is around

−0.23. Thus, the UP ELA treatment effect of nearly half a standard deviation for grandfathering
compliers reflects the fact that UP pushes this group’s reading level from well below that of lottery
compliers to effective parity. In this sense, “low Y0 ” explains large ELA effects for the grandfathered
group. At the same time, the absence of a differential impact for math (with an equally low starting
point for grandfathering compliers) shows that a poor non-charter counterfactual is not a sufficient
condition for exceptionally large charter achievement gains.

6

Summary and Conclusions

Charter school takeovers in the New Orleans Recovery School District appear to have generated substantial achievement gains for a highly disadvantaged student population that enrolled in these schools
passively. Our analysis uncovers even larger effects for students grandfathered in to Boston’s first
in-district charter middle school, UP Academy. These results contribute to a growing body of evidence
showing large positive effects of No Excuses charter schools on a range of outcomes.
Our econometric framework addresses important methodological issues that arise in the grandfathering research design. First, while legacy school enrollment provides a valuable source of exogenous
variation in charter exposure, the grandfathering IV strategy should adjust for violations of the exclusion restriction due to legacy exposure itself. Second, in an environment with schools of many
types, charter treatment effects may be diluted by charter attendance in the control group. A simple
2SLS procedure allowing for multiple treatment channels generates an easier-to-interpret counterfactual. In practice, cleaning up the non-charter counterfactual substantially boosts our estimates of RSD
takeover effects on math, from about 0.21σ to 0.36σ, while leaving the smaller ELA estimates largely
unchanged. Finally, we show how an unusually large reading gain for UP’s grandfathering compliers
can be explained by exceptionally low achievement in the counterfactual state. The grandfathering research design can be applied to other incumbency-based interventions, not necessarily involving charter
schools, so these solutions should be useful elsewhere as well.
The strong results for RSD and the comparison of estimates from grandfathering and lottery-based
research designs for Boston’s UP Academy weigh against the view that urban charter lottery applicants
enjoy an unusually large and therefore unrepresentative benefit from charter attendance because they’re
highly motivated or uniquely primed to benefit from the education these schools offer. Boston and
RSD takeovers generate gains for their passively enrolled students that are broadly similar to, and
sometimes even larger than, the lottery estimates reported in Angrist et al. (2013) for a sample of

25

Massachusetts urban charters. The achievement gains generated by takeover enrollment also appear
to exceed those seen in the Apollo experiment, which introduced No Excuses practices into traditional
public schools, without implementing a full takeover (these results are detailed in Fryer (2014)).
Our findings echo those of Walters (2014) in highlighting the importance of charter access. In a
pioneering effort to streamline charter admissions and broaden school choice, RSD introduced a districtwide school assignment scheme known as OneApp in 2012. OneApp combined all RSD schools, directrun and charter, using the tools of market design to increase access and improve school-to-student
matching (Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2014b). Denver, the District of Columbia, and Newark use similarly
unified enrollment systems (Ash, 2013). Other districts, however, including OPSB, have resisted attempts to centralize school assignment in general and to integrate charter and direct-run assignment
in particular. The results reported here suggest the possibility of substantial gains from centralized
school assignment mechanisms, like OneApp, that promote charter attendance among students who
might not otherwise choose to apply.

26

.2

.3

.4

Percent at basic or above
.5
.6
.7
.8

.9

1

Figure 1a: Math scores in RSD and elsewhere

2008

2010

2012

2014

Spring year
RSD charter

RSD direct-run

OPSB

Louisiana

.2

.3

.4

Percent at basic or above
.5
.6
.7
.8

.9

1

Figure 1b: ELA scores in RSD and elsewhere

2008

2010

2012

2014

Spring year
RSD charter

RSD direct-run

OPSB

Louisiana

Notes: These figures plot the average percentage of RSD, OPSB, and Louisiana students that achieve basic or
above status on LEAP/iLEAP math (Figure 1a) or ELA (Figure 1b) exams in 5th-8th grades. Scores for OPSB
and Louisiana are from https://www.louisianabelieves.com/resources/library/test-results. Statistics plotted are
unweighted averages across grades for each year, and are computed separately for students enrolled in RSD
charter and RSD direct-run schools.

27

0

5

Number of schools
10

15

20

Figure 2: Charter school expansion in RSD

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Spring year
All Takeovers

Full Takeovers

Startups

Notes: This figure plots the number of New Orleans Recover School District charter schools (serving any
grades) created between academic years 2008-09 and 2013-14 (excluding alternative schools). Takeovers
are charter schools tied to closure of a legacy school, with seats reserved in the new school for legacy
school students. Full takeovers are takeover schools (excluding charter mergers and principal-led
conversions) that grandfather all grades at the legacy school in a single academic year. Startup schools are
those not directly tied to a legacy school, with all seats filled in the first year through open enrollment.

28

.5

Figure 3a: Math scores in the RSD grandfathering sample
Post-charter takeover

-.1

0

Standardized LEAP/iLEAP score
.1
.2
.3
.4

Pre-charter takeover

-3

-2

-1
(Baseline grade)

0
(Last legacy grade)

2

1

Grade relative to takeover
Grandfathering-eligible

Grandfathering-ineligible

.4

Figure 3b: Grandfathering DD for math
Post-charter takeover

-.4

-.3

Standardized LEAP/iLEAP score
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

.3

Pre-charter takeover

-3

-2

-1
0
(Baseline grade)
(Last legacy grade)
Grade relative to takeover
GF-eligible - GF-ineligible, relative to baseline

1

2

95% CI

Notes: Figure 3a plots average LEAP/iLEAP math scores of students in the RSD legacy middle school matched
sample. Figure 3b plots achievement growth relative to the baseline grade. Estimates in both figures control for
matching cell fixed effects. Scores are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one within each year
and grade in the set of direct-run schools in New Orleans RSD.

29

.5

Figure 4a: ELA scores in the RSD grandfathering sample
Post-charter takeover

-.1

0

Standardized LEAP/iLEAP score
.1
.2
.3
.4

Pre-charter takeover

-3

-2

-1
(Baseline grade)

0
(Last legacy grade)

1

2

Grade relative to takeover
Grandfathering-eligible

Grandfathering-ineligible

.4

Figure 4b: Grandfathering DD for ELA
Post-charter takeover

-.4

-.3

Standardized LEAP/iLEAP score
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

.3

Pre-charter takeover

-3

-2

-1
0
(Baseline grade)
(Last legacy grade)
Grade relative to takeover
GF-eligible - GF-ineligible, relative to baseline

1

2

95% CI

Notes: Figure 4a plots average LEAP/iLEAP ELA scores of students in the RSD legacy middle school matched
sample. Figure 4b plots achievement growth relative to the baseline grade. Estimates in both figures control for
matching cell fixed effects. Scores are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one within each year
and grade in the set of direct-run schools in New Orleans RSD.

30

.6

Figure 5a: Math scores for the UP grandfathering sample
Post-UP takeover

-.4

-.3

-.2

Standardized MCAS score
.1 .2
.3
-.1 0

.4

.5

Pre-UP takeover

-3

-2

-1
(Baseline grade)

0
(Last legacy grade)

1

2

Grade relative to takeover
Grandfathering-eligible

Grandfathering-ineligible

Figure 5b: Grandfathering DD for math
Post-UP takeover

-.4

-.2

Standardized MCAS score
0
.2
.4
.6

.8

1

Pre-UP takeover

-3

-2

-1
(Baseline grade)

0
(Last legacy grade)

1

2

Grade relative to takeover
GF-eligible - GF-ineligible, relative to matching grade

95% CI

Notes: Figure 5a plots average MCAS math scores of students in the Gavin Middle School matched sample.
Figure 5b plots achievement growth relative to the baseline grade. Estimates in both figures control for matching
cell fixed effects. Scores are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one within each year and
grade in BPS. For 7th grade legacy students, baseline grade scores are from 5th grade and last legacy grade
scores are from 7th grade.

31

.6

Figure 6a: ELA Scores for the UP grandfathering sample
Post-UP takeover

-.4

-.3

-.2

Standardized MCAS score
-.1 0
.1 .2
.3

.4

.5

Pre-UP takeover

-3

-2

-1
(Baseline grade)

0
(Last legacy grade)

1

2

Grade relative to takeover
Grandfathering-eligible

Grandfathering-ineligible

Figure 6b: Grandfathering DD for ELA
Post-UP takeover

-.4

-.2

Standardized MCAS score
0
.2
.4
.6

.8

1

Pre-UP takeover

-3

-2

-1
(Baseline grade)

0
(Last legacy grade)

1

2

Grade relative to takeover
GF-eligible - GF-ineligible, relative to matching grade

95% CI

Notes: Figure 6a plots average MCAS ELA scores of students in the Gavin Middle School matched sample.
Figure 6b plots achievement growth relative to the baseline grade. Estimates in both figures control for matching
cell fixed effects. Scores are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one within each year and
grade in BPS. For 7th grade legacy students, baseline grade scores are from 5th grade and last legacy grade
scores are from 7th grade.

32

Table 1: Timing in the grandfathering research design
RSD

Boston

Baseline (matching) grade

3

4

5

6

5

5

Legacy enrollment grade

4

5

6

7

6

7

First takeover grade
Second takeover grade
Third takeover grade
Fourth takeover grade

5
6
7
8

6
7
8

7
8

8

7
8

8

Legacy enrollment years (schools)

2009-10 (5)
2010-11 (1)
2011-12 (1)
2012-13 (4)

2010-11 (1)

Notes: This table summarizes grade-based timing for matching, grandfathering eligibility, and takeover outcomes
in the RSD and Boston analysis samples. Grandfathering eligibility is determined by enrollment in the fall of the
legacy enrollment year, while matching uses information from the baseline grade. Outcomes are from the spring
of the corresponding school year of each takeover grade. The number of grandfathered schools in each academic
year are in parentheses.

33

Table 2: RSD descriptive statistics and grandfathering balance
Sample means
RSD
Analysis sample
RSD
Charter-bound
Takeover charter
Grandfatheringstudents
RSD students
students
eligible students
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.026
0.024
0.018
0.029

Hispanic

Balance coefficients
Analysis sample

First exposure
year sample

(5)
--

(6)
--

Black

0.964

0.971

0.994

0.982

--

--

White

0.019

0.017

0.008

0.016

--

--

Asian

0.008

0.008

0.001

0.009

--

--

Female

0.477

0.475

0.489

0.501

--

--

Special education

0.069

0.066

0.071

0.093

--

--

Free/reduced price lunch

0.913

0.926

0.955

0.919

--

--

Limited English proficient

0.017

0.016

0.013

0.020

14,554

11,358

1,040

763

0.000
(0.001)
3,503

-0.001
(0.001)
2,572

0.001

0.023

-0.320

-0.266

12,945

10,557

1,038

760

-0.019
(0.048)
3,500

-0.042
(0.052)
2,570

0.004

0.027

-0.303

-0.261

12,947

10,557

1,040

762

-0.009
(0.048)
3,502

-0.032
(0.055)
2,572

0.008

0.020

-0.218

-0.208

12,910

10,534

1,033

758

-0.039
(0.050)
3,487

-0.071
(0.059)
2,562

0.003

0.022

-0.236

-0.219

12,905

10,530

1,032

758

-0.027
(0.047)
3,480

-0.016
(0.056)
2,561

N
Baseline math score
N
Baseline ELA score
N
Baseline science score
N
Baseline social science score
N

Notes: This table reports sample means and coefficients from regressions of the variable in each row on a grandfathering eligibility dummy indicating
enrollment in an RSD takeover legacy school in the fall of the academic year prior to takeover. All regressions include matching cell fixed effects (cells are
defined by race, sex, special education status, subsidized lunch eligibility, baseline grade and year, and baseline school SPS scores in five-point bins). The
sample in columns 3-6 is restricted to students enrolled in an RSD direct-run school at baseline. Column 1 reports means for a sample of RSD students in the
same baseline years as the analysis sample, while column 2 is restricted to those students that enroll in an RSD charter school in grades following the baseline.
Column 3 reports means for students that enroll in a takeover charter in potential takeover grades, while column 4 describes students enrolled in a legacy
school. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

34

All grades

5th & 6th grades

7th & 8th grades

First exposure year
(5th-8th grades)

Second exposure year
(6th-8th grades)

Third & fourth exposure year
(7th & 8th grades)

Table 3: Grandfathering IV estimates of RSD takeover attendance effects
Comparison
2SLS estimates
group mean
OLS
First stage
Attendance effect
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Math
0.123***
1.073***
0.212***
-0.089
(N: 5,625)
(0.020)
(0.052)
(0.038)
ELA
0.082***
1.075***
0.143***
-0.092
(N: 5,621)
(0.018)
(0.052)
(0.039)

Math
(N: 2,579)
ELA
(N: 2,579)
Math
(N: 3,046)
ELA
(N: 3,042)

-0.091

Math
(N: 2,553)
ELA
(N: 2,553)
Math
(N: 1,664)
ELA
(N: 1,664)
Math
(N: 1,408)
ELA
(N: 1,404)

-0.105

A. By grade
0.099***
(0.035)
0.023
(0.033)
0.133***
(0.020)
0.104***
(0.019)

-0.116
-0.086
-0.071

-0.103
-0.151
-0.124
0.015
-0.033

0.738***
(0.041)
0.745***
(0.042)
1.355***
(0.070)
1.352***
(0.070)

0.165**
(0.068)
0.101
(0.070)
0.231***
(0.037)
0.171***
(0.036)

B. By potential exposure
0.200***
0.659***
(0.044)
(0.023)
0.099**
0.659***
(0.043)
(0.023)
0.168***
1.148***
(0.031)
(0.061)
0.101***
1.158***
(0.028)
(0.061)
0.097***
1.698***
(0.022)
(0.131)
0.077***
1.698***
(0.020)
(0.132)

0.230***
(0.069)
0.197***
(0.068)
0.332***
(0.058)
0.158***
(0.051)
0.117***
(0.042)
0.094**
(0.043)

Notes: This table reports OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effects of RSD takeover charter enrollment on 5th-8th grade LEAP/iLEAP math and
ELA test scores using the grandfathering eligibility instrument. The sample in columns 2-4 includes RSD direct-run school students matched to a
pre-takeover year legacy school student. The endogenous regressor counts the number of years enrolled at a takeover charter prior to testing. All
models control for matching strata, limited English proficiency, baseline test scores, and year/grade effects. Robust standard errors, clustered by
student, are reported in parentheses. Means in column 1 are outcome grade scores for grandfathering-ineligible matched students.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

35

Table 4: School choice in the RSD analysis sample
All students
Compliers
Z=0
Z=1
Z=0
Z=1
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. First exposure year
Enrolled in study takeover
0.089
0.780
-1.000
… in other RSD takeover
0.072
0.032
0.087
-… in non-takeover RSD charter
0.331
0.154
0.316
-… in RSD direct-run
0.508
0.034
0.597
-N
2,027
531
B. Second exposure year
0.714
-0.016
0.142
0.223
0.393
0.047
0.465
318

1.000
----

N

0.206
0.105
0.395
0.294
1,349

C. Third exposure year
0.754
-0.031
0.218
0.188
0.517
0.026
0.265
191

1.000
----

N

0.277
0.112
0.450
0.161
795

D. Fourth exposure year
0.646
-0.051
0.030
0.291
0.864
0.013
0.106
79

1.000
----

N

0.316
0.167
0.485
0.032
342

Enrolled in study takeover
… in other RSD takeover
… in non-takeover RSD charter
… in RSD direct-run

Enrolled in study takeover
… in other RSD takeover
… in non-takeover RSD charter
… in RSD direct-run

Enrolled in study takeover
… in other RSD takeover
… in non-takeover RSD charter
… in RSD direct-run

Notes: This table describes school enrollment in the RSD analysis sample. Columns 1-2 characterize enrollment for
grandfathering eligible (Z=1) and ineligible (Z=0) students, while columns 3-4 show the same for grandfathering
compliers. Other RSD takeover charters include charter-to-charter conversions, principal-led conversions, and mergers.
Non-takeover RSD charters include startup charters created since the 2008-2009 academic year, and charters operating in
the RSD as of 2007-2008. Complier means are estimated by the method outlined in Abadie (2003), using a probit
specification for E[Z|X] and the same controls as were used to construct the estimates in Table 3.

36

Table 5: Grandfathering IV estimates of RSD charter attendance effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Math (N:5,625)
Takeover charter
0.212***
0.217***
0.357***
(0.038)
(0.037)
(0.073)
[425.7]
[3323.0]
[632.7]
Other RSD charter
0.324**
(0.152)
[47.1]
Any RSD charter
0.385***
(0.071)
[223.4]
1
31
31
1
Instruments

Takeover charter

0.143***
(0.039)
[424.7]

0.154***
(0.037)
[3319.8]

Other RSD charter

1

31

0.371***
(0.059)
[464.9]
31

B. ELA (N:5,621)
0.125
(0.081)
[620.6]
-0.069
(0.174)
[46.3]

Any RSD charter

Instruments

(5)

31

0.257***
(0.072)
[228.0]
1

0.214***
(0.059)
[486.5]
31

Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates of the effects of study takeover and other RSD charter enrollment on 5th-8th
grade LEAP/iLEAP math and ELA test scores. The sample includes RSD direct-run school students matched to a pretakeover year legacy school student as described in Table 2. The endogenous regressors count the number of years
enrolled in RSD charters prior to testing. The instrument for columns 1 and 4 is grandfathering eligibility. For columns
2, 3, and 4, grandfathering eligibility was interacted with baseline year, special education status, and SPS bin cells. All
models control for matching strata, limited English proficiency, baseline test scores, and year/grade effects. Robust
standard errors, clustered by student, are reported in parentheses. Angrist-Pischke multivariate first-stage F statistics
are reported in brackets.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

37

38

0.226

Special education

N

N

7,923

0.012

8,049

0.008

8,506

1,515

0.175

1,518

0.173

1,552

0.130

0.751

0.188

0.502

0.023

0.152

0.519

Charter-bound
Boston students
(2)
0.273

208

-0.273

210

-0.286

225

0.342

0.951

0.267

0.489

0.089

0.124

0.511

(3)
0.240

UP students

254

-0.235

258

-0.253

290

0.307

0.928

0.317

0.483

0.100

0.152

0.469

Grandfatheringeligible students
(4)
0.241

Analysis sample

-0.177***
(0.065)
1,105

-0.117*
(0.070)
1,142

0.045
(0.032)
1,203

--

--

--

--

--

--

-0.012
(0.053)
1,036

-0.040
(0.053)
1,037

0.034
(0.033)
1,060

--

--

--

--

--

--

-0.014
(0.054)
982

-0.032
(0.055)
983

0.026
(0.033)
998

--

--

--

--

--

--

Balance coefficients
First exposure
Analysis sample
year sample
No score
Pre-baseline
Pre-baseline
controls
score controls score controls
(5)
(6)
(7)
----

Notes: This table reports sample means and coefficients from regressions of the variable in each row on a grandfathering eligibility dummy indicating enrollment in
Gavin Middle School in 6th or 7th grade in the fall of 2010. All regressions include matching cell fixed effects (cells are defined by race, sex, special education status,
subsidized lunch eligibility, and 5th grade school and year). Regressions in columns 6 and 7 also control for 4th grade MCAS scores. The sample in columns 3-7 is
restricted to students enrolled at a BPS school at baseline. Column 1 reports means for a sample of Boston students in the same baseline years as the analysis sample,
while column 2 is restricted to students from the Boston sample who enroll in a Boston charter school in grades 6-8. Column 3 reports means for students in the analysis
sample who enroll at UP in grades 7 and 8, while column 4 describes students enrolled at Gavin Middle School in the fall of 2010. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Baseline ELA score

Baseline math score

N

0.233

0.483

Female

Limited English proficient

0.072

Asian

0.804

0.135

White

Free/reduced price lunch

0.407

Black

Hispanic

Boston
students
(1)
0.346

Boston

Table 6: UP descriptive statistics and grandfathering balance
Sample means

All grades

7th grade

8th grade

First exposure year
(7th & 8th grades)

Second exposure year
(8th grade)

Table 7: Grandfathering IV estimates of UP attendance effects
2SLS estimates
Comparison group
mean
OLS
First stage
Attendance effect
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Math
-0.233
0.400***
1.051***
0.321***
(N: 1,543)
(0.032)
(0.040)
(0.039)
ELA
-0.214
0.296***
1.040***
0.394***
(N: 1,539)
(0.035)
(0.041)
(0.044)

Math
(N: 531)
ELA
(N: 528)
Math
(N: 1,012)
ELA
(N: 1,011)

Math
(N: 1,028)
ELA
(N: 1,025)
Math
(N: 515)
ELA
(N: 514)

A. By grade
0.399***
(0.063)
0.581***
(0.073)
0.397***
(0.033)
0.244***
(0.037)

-0.247

0.807***
(0.036)
0.803***
(0.037)
1.196***
(0.052)
1.184***
(0.052)

0.317***
(0.068)
0.646***
(0.082)
0.327***
(0.038)
0.287***
(0.044)

B. By potential exposure
0.365***
0.822***
(0.047)
(0.025)
0.475***
0.809***
(0.055)
(0.026)
0.408***
1.541***
(0.038)
(0.087)
0.221***
1.543***
(0.042)
(0.087)

0.325***
(0.048)
0.495***
(0.060)
0.324***
(0.044)
0.271***
(0.049)

-0.260
-0.226
-0.190

-0.214
-0.195
-0.272
-0.252

Notes: This table reports OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effects of UP enrollment on 7th and 8th grade MCAS math and ELA test
scores using the grandfathering eligibility instrument. The sample in columns 2-4 includes BPS students matched to a 2010-11 6th or
7th grade Gavin Middle School student. The endogenous regressor counts the number of years enrolled at UP prior to testing. All
models control for matching strata, limited English proficiency, baseline test scores, and year/grade effects. Robust standard errors,
clustered by student, are reported in parentheses. Means in column 1 are outcome grade scores for grandfathering-ineligible matched
students.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

39

Table 8: Lottery IV estimates of UP attendance effects

All grades

6th grade

7th & 8th grades

First exposure year
(6th & 7th grades)

Second & third exposure year
(7th & 8th grades)

Math
(N: 2,202)
ELA
(N: 2,205)

Math
(N: 838)
ELA
(N: 839)
Math
(N: 1,364)
ELA
(N: 1,366)

Math
(N: 881)
ELA
(N: 882)
Math
(N: 1,321)
ELA
(N: 1,323)

Comparison
group mean
(1)
0.059
0.103

0.064
0.062
0.057
0.126

0.056
0.058
0.061
0.129

OLS
(2)
0.301***
(0.022)
0.148***
(0.020)

0.334***
(0.045)
0.234***
(0.045)
0.296***
(0.021)
0.133***
(0.020)

2SLS estimates
First stage
Immediate offer
Waitlist offer
(3)
(4)
0.760***
0.562***
(0.063)
(0.067)
0.759***
0.562***
(0.063)
(0.067)
A. By grade
0.505***
(0.035)
0.505***
(0.035)
0.919***
(0.085)
0.918***
(0.085)

B. By potential exposure
0.347***
0.519***
(0.044)
(0.034)
0.239***
0.521***
(0.044)
(0.034)
0.294***
0.921***
(0.021)
(0.088)
0.131***
0.918***
(0.020)
(0.088)

Attendance effect
(5)
0.270***
(0.056)
0.118**
(0.051)

0.407***
(0.040)
0.407***
(0.040)
0.653***
(0.088)
0.653***
(0.088)

0.350***
(0.090)
0.214**
(0.091)
0.248***
(0.054)
0.088*
(0.047)

0.397***
(0.038)
0.394***
(0.038)
0.665***
(0.091)
0.668***
(0.091)

0.365***
(0.086)
0.220**
(0.088)
0.242***
(0.054)
0.083*
(0.047)

Notes: This table reports OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effects of UP enrollment on 6th-8th grade MCAS test scores using 6th and 7th grade lottery
offer instruments. The sample in columns 2-4 includes Boston students entering 6th grade in the 2011-12 and 2012-13 academic years and 7th grade in
the 2011-12 academic year with baseline demographic information. The endogenous regressor counts the number of years enrolled at UP prior to testing.
The instruments are immediate and waitlist offer dummies. Immediate offer is equal to one when a student is offered a seat immediately following the
lottery in March, while waitlist offer is equal to one for students offered seats later, up through the end of September. All models control for cohort
dummies and student race, sex, special education status, limited English proficiency, subsidized lunch status, baseline test scores, and year/grade effects.
Robust standard errors, clustered by student, are reported in parentheses. Means in column 1 are outcome grade scores for applicants not given an
immediate or waitlist offer.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

40

Table 9: School choice in the UP analysis samples
All students
Compliers
Z=0
Z=1
Z=0
Z=1
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Grandfathering
Enrolled in UP
0.012
0.794
-1.000
…in other Boston charter
0.063
0.009
0.070
-…in BPS
0.837
0.137
0.856
-…in other Massachusetts
0.087
0.060
0.075
-N
804
233
B. Lottery
Enrolled in UP
…in other Boston charter
…in BPS
…in other Massachusetts
N

0.040
0.179
0.748
0.033
425

0.514
0.157
0.307
0.022
453

-0.057
0.937
0.006

1.000
----

Notes: This table describes school enrollment in the first exposure year for students in the UP grandfathering and
lottery analysis samples. Columns 1-2 in panel A characterize enrollment for grandfathering-eligible (Z=1) and
grandfathering-ineligible (Z=0) students, while columns 3-4 show the same for grandfathering compliers. Columns
1-2 in panel B characterize enrollment for "ever offered" (Z=1) and not offered (Z=0) students, while columns 3-4
show the same for lottery offer compliers. Ever offered lottery applicants are those who received either an
immediate or a waitlist offer. Complier means in panels A and B are estimated by the method outlined in Abadie
(2003), using a probit specification for E[Z|X] and the same controls as were used to construct the estimates in
Tables 7 and 8.

41

Math
N

Table 10: UP grandfathering and lottery comparison
Treatment Effect
Treated outcome
Untreated outcome
GF
Lottery
GF G1
GF Y1
Lottery Y1
GF G0
GF Y0
Lottery Y0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.325***
0.365***
0.347***
0.176***
0.423***
0.021
-0.149***
0.057
(0.048)
(0.086)
(0.037)
(0.050)
(0.050)
(0.033)
(0.045)
(0.077)
1,028
881

GF-Lottery gap

ELA
N
GF-Lottery gap

-0.040
(0.099)
0.495***
(0.060)
1,025

0.220**
(0.088)
882

-0.247***
(0.070)
0.494***
(0.046)

0.343***
(0.057)

0.275***
(0.106)

0.293***
(0.053)

0.050
(0.077)

-0.207**
(0.089)
-0.001
(0.042)

-0.153***
(0.049)

0.073
(0.076)

-0.225**
(0.090)

Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates of LATEs and average potential outcomes for grandfathering and lottery compliers in the UP analysis
samples. The estimates in columns 1 and 2 match the first exposure year results in Tables 7 and 8. Complier treatment effects and average
potential outcomes reported in columns 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 8 are estimated by 2SLS. Column 3 shows the estimated E[Yg 01 - Yl 0 | D1 > D0] for
grandfathering compliers, while column 4 adds an estimate of E[Yl 0 | D0=0] (-0.17 for math and -0.15 for ELA) to generate an estimate of
E[Yg 01 | D1 > D0]. Similarly, column 6 reports an estimate of E[Yg 00 - Yl 0 | D1 > D0] for grandfathering compliers, and column 7 adds the
estimate of E[Yl 0 | D0=0] to generate an estimate of E[Yg 00 | D1 > D0]. Robust standard errors, clustered by student, are reported in parentheses.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

42

References
Abadie, A. (2002): “Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Effects in Instrumental Variables
Models,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97.
——— (2003): “Semiparametric Instrumental Variable Estimation of Treatment Response Models,”
Journal of Econometrics, 113.
Abdulkadiroğlu, A., J. Angrist, S. Dynarski, T. J. Kane, and P. Pathak (2011): “Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters and Pilots,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 126, 699–748.
Abdulkadiroğlu, A., J. Angrist, and P. Pathak (2014a): “The Elite Illusion: Achievement
Effects at Boston and New York Exam Schools,” Econometrica, 82(1), 137–196.
Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, and A. E. Roth (2014b): “Designing the New Orleans
School Match: TTC vs. DA,” Working Paper, MIT.
Angrist, J. D. (1998): “Estimating the Labor Market Impact of Voluntary Military Service Using
Social Security Data on Military Applicants,” Econometrica, 66(2), 249–288.
Angrist, J. D., S. M. Dynarski, T. J. Kane, P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2012): “Who
Benefits from KIPP?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 31, 837–860.
Angrist, J. D., G. Imbens, and D. Rubin (1996): “Identification of Causal Effects Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(434), 444–455.
Angrist, J. D. and G. W. Imbens (1995): “Two-stage Least Squares Estimation of Average Causal
Effects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90, 431–442.
Angrist, J. D., P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2013): “Explaining Charter School Effectiveness,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 1–27.
Ash, K. (2013): “Charters Adopt Common Application Systems.” Available at http://www.edweek.
org/ew/articles/2013/09/25/05charter_ep.h33.html. Last accessed: December 17, 2014.
Ashenfelter, O. (1978): “Estimating the effect of training programs on earnings,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 60, 47–57.

43

BPS (2013): “BPS Five-Year Capital Facilities Master Plan, Fiscal Years 2014 - 2018, Volume II
- School Building Overviews,” Available at http://www.bostonpublicschools.org/cms/lib07/
MA01906464/Centricity/Domain/111/capital_facility_master_plan_fy2014-2018_volume_2_
final.pdf, Last Accessed February 4, 2015.
Chamberlain, G. (1984): “Panel data,” in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by Z. Griliches and M. D.
Intriligator, Elsevier, vol. 2, chap. 22, 1247–1318, 1 ed.
Cowen (2011a): “Public School Funding in Louisiana,” Available at http://www.coweninstitute.
com/wp-content/uploads/2010/03/SPELA-Funding-and-ARRA.pdf. Last Accessed November 11,
2014.
———

(2011b):

nances,”

“The

Available

State
at

of

Public

Education

in

New

Orleans:

School

Fi-

http://www.coweninstitute.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/

SPENO-Finances-Appendix-Final-5April11.pdf. Last Accessed November 11, 2014.
——— (2011c):

“Transforming Public Education in New Orleans:

The Recovery School Dis-

trict 2003-2011,” Available at http://www.coweninstitute.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/
History-of-the-RSD-Report-2011.pdf. Last Accessed: October 10, 2014.
CREDO (2013a): “National Charter School Study,” Center for Research on Education Outcomes.
Available at https://credo.stanford.edu/documents/NCSS%202013%20Final%20Draft.pdf. Last
Accessed: October 10, 2014.
——— (2013b): “New Schools for New Orleans, Year 2 Report,” Center for Research on Education
Outcomes. Available at http://credo.stanford.edu/pdfs/NSNOYear2Report.pdf. Last Accessed:
October 10, 2014.
Darling-Hammond, L. (2012): “Darling-Hammond: Why is Congress redlining our schools?” Available at http://www.thenation.com/article/165575/why-congress-redlining-our-schools.
Last accessed: December 17, 2014.
Dee, T. (2012): “School Turnarounds: Evidence from the 2009 Stimulus,” NBER Working Paper, No.
17990.
Deryugina, T., L. Kawano, and S. Levitt (2014): “The Economic Impact of Hurricane Katrina
on its Victims: Evidence from Individual Tax Returns,” NBER Working Paper No. 20713.

44

Dobbie, W. and R. G. Fryer (2011): “Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase Achievement
Among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 3, 158–187.
——— (2013): “Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective Schools: Evidence from New York City,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 58–75.
Drellinger, D. (2014): “U.S. Education Department Opens Civil Rights Investigation of New Orleans Public School Closures,” The Times-Picayune, September 24. Available at http://www.nola.
com/education/index.ssf/2014/09/us_education_department_opens.html. Last Accessed: October 10, 2014.
Duncan, A. (2010): “Secretary Duncan Message to School Boards.” Available at https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=DlmyBh3dTUYl. Last accessed: November 30, 2014.
Epple, D., A. Jha, and H. Sieg (2013): “The Superintendent’s Dilemma: Managing School District
Capacity as Parents Vote with Their Feet,” Working Paper. Available at http://web.stanford.
edu/~akshayaj/school_choice_20_2_13.pdf, Last Accessed: October 10, 2014.
Fryer, R. G. (2014): “Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional Public Schools: Evidence from Field Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1355–1407.
Groen, J. A. and A. E. Polivka (2008): “The Effect of Hurricane Katrina on the Labor Market
Outcomes of Evacuees,” The American Economic Review, 98, 43–48.
Hoxby, C. M., S. Murarka, and J. Kang (2009): “How New York City’s charter schools affect
achievement,” New York City Charter Schools Evaluation Project, Cambridge, MA.
Hull, P. D. (2014): “IsoLATEing: Identifying Heterogeneous Effects of Multiple Treatments,” Working Paper. Available at http://www.mit.edu/~hull/isoLATE_12162014.pdf.
Imbens, G. W. and J. D. Angrist (1994): “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects,” Econometrica, 62(2), 467–475.
Imberman, S. A., A. D. Kugler, and B. I. Sacerdote (2012): “Katrina’s children: Evidence
on the structure of peer effects from hurricane evacuees,” The American Economic Review, 102,
2048–2082.
Knight, R. (2013): Interview at UP Academy Boston, November.

45

NACPS (2013a): “Back to School Tallies: Estimated Number of Public Charter Schools and Students, 2012-2013.” Available at http://www.publiccharters.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/
NAPCS-2012-13-New-and-Closed-Charter-Schools_20130114T161322.pdf. Last accessed: October 10, 2014.
——— (2013b): “A Growing Movement: America’s Largest Charter School Communities.” Available at
http://www.publiccharters.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/Market-Share-Report-2013.
pdf. Last accessed: October 10, 2014.
NCES (2013): “Digest of Education Statistics, Table 216.20: Number and enrollment of public elementary and secondary schools, by school level, type, and charter and magnet status: Selected years,
1990-91 through 2011-12.” Available at http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_
216.20.asp. Last accessed: December 17, 2014.
Ravitch, D. (2010): The Death and Life of the Great American School System: How Testing and
Choice Are Undermining Education, New York: Basic Books.
Rothstein, R. (2004): Class and Schools: Using Social, Economic, and Educational Reform to Close
the Black-White Achievement Gap, New York: Teachers College Press.
——— (2011):

“Grading the Education Reformers,” Slate. Available at http://www.slate.

com/articles/arts/books/2011/08/grading_the_education_reformers.html. Last Accessed:
November 30, 2014.
Sacerdote, B. (2012): “When the Saints go Marching Out: Long-Term Outcomes for Student Evacuees from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4, 109–
135.
Toness, B. V. (2010): “Charter School Will Do Things the Hard Way,” 90.9WBUR. Available at
http://www.wbur.org/2010/12/09/charter-challenges. Last accessed: October 17, 2014.
Tuttle, C. C., B. Gill, P. Gleason, V. Knechtel, I. Nichols-Barrer, and A. Resch (2013):
“KIPP Middle Schools: Impacts on Achievement and Other Outcomes,” Princeton: Mathematica
Policy Research.
UP Academy (2010): “Application for a Massachusetts Horace Mann III Public Charter School: UP
Academy Charter School of Boston,” Submitted November 8, 2010. Available at http://www.doe.
mass.edu/charter/finalists/10/UPApp.doc. Last accessed April 16, 2014.

46

USDOE (2009): “Guidance on School Improvement Grants Under Section 1003(g) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.” Available at http://www2.ed.gov/programs/sif/
guidance-20091218.doc. Last Accessed: October 10, 2014.
Vaznis,
Globe,

J. (2014):
October

“Education chief backs probation for charter school,”
15.

Available

at

The Boston

http://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/2014/10/15/

state-education-chief-backs-probation-for-brighton-indistrict-charter-school/
b7fCiu9xcBVJjoMR8oGIhK/story.html. Last Accessed: November 9, 2014.
Vigdor, J. L. (2007): “The Katrina Effect: Was There a Bright Side to the Evacuation of Greater
New Orleans?” The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 7.
Walters, C. R. (2014): “The Demand for Effective Charter Schools,” UC-Berkeley Mimeo.

47

A

Econometric Appendix

Theorem 1. Under Assumptions 1-4,
E[Y g − Y l |Z = 1] − E[Y g − Y l |Z = 0]
g
g
g
g
= E[Y11
− Y10
|D1 > D0 ] = E[Y01
− Y00
|D1 > D0 ].
E[D|Z = 1] − E[D|Z = 0]
Proof: Using monotonicity (Assumption 2) to partition the Z = 1 and Z = 0 populations into
second-period subpopulations of always-takers, never-takers, and compliers, we have:
E[Y g − Y l |Z = 1] − E[Y g − Y l |Z = 0] =E[Y g − Y l |D0 = 1, Z = 1]P (D0 = 1|Z = 1)
+ E[Y g − Y l |D1 = 0, Z = 1]P (D1 = 0|Z = 1)
+ E[Y g − Y l |D1 > D0 , Z = 1]P (D1 > D0 |Z = 1)
− E[Y g − Y l |D0 = 1, Z = 0]P (D0 = 1|Z = 0)
− E[Y g − Y l |D1 = 0, Z = 0]P (D1 = 0|Z = 0)
− E[Y g − Y l |D1 > D0 , Z = 0]P (D1 > D0 |Z = 0),


g
g
− Y01 |D0 = 1] P (D0 = 1)
− Y1l |D0 = 1] − E[Y01
= E[Y11


g
g
+ E[Y10
− Y1l |D1 = 0] − E[Y00
− Y0l |D1 = 0] P (D1 = 0)


g
g
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ] P (D1 > D0 ),
+ E[Y11
− Y1l |D1 > D0 ] − E[Y00

(10)

where the second equality follows from independence (Assumption 1).
As a consequence of Assumption 4, we have:
(11)

g
g
E[Y11
− Y1l |D0 = 1] =E[Y01
− Y0l |D0 = 1]

(12)

g
g
E[Y11
− Y1l |D1 > D0 ] =E[Y01
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ]

and that
(13)

g
g
E[Y00
− Y0l |D1 = 0] =E[Y10
− Y1l |D1 = 0]

(14)

g
g
E[Y00
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ] =E[Y10
− Y1l |D1 > D0 ]

Equations (11) and (13) imply that the first two terms in equation (10) are zero. Equation (14) and
the fact that, by independence and monotonicity, E[D|Z = 1] − E[D|Z = 0] = P (D1 > D0 ) imply
further that
E[Y g − Y l |Z = 1] − E[Y g − Y l |Z = 0]
g
g
= E[Y11
− Y1l |D1 > D0 ] − E[Y10
− Y1l |D1 > D0 ]
E[D|Z = 1] − E[D|Z = 0]
g
g
= E[Y11
− Y10
|D1 > D0 ].

48

From (12), it follows similarly that
E[Y g − Y l |Z = 1] − E[Y g − Y l |Z = 0]
g
g
= E[Y01
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ] − E[Y00
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ]
E[D|Z = 1] − E[D|Z = 0]
g
g
= E[Y01
− Y00
|D1 > D0 ]


We assume throughout that Assumptions 1-4 hold conditional on a set of mutually-exclusive and
exhaustive matching cell dummies, dj . These covariates add a layer of cross-cell averaging to the
within-cell average-causal-effects interpretation of the 2SLS estimand. With matching-cell fixed effects
as the only controls, the covariate parameterization is saturated. Therefore, as shown by Abadie
(2003), a 2SLS regression of Y g − Y l on D and {dj } that instruments D by Z identifies the treatment
coefficient in a regression of Y g − Y l on {dj } and D for compliers (this follows from the linearity of the
propensity score in a saturated model). Moreover, Angrist (1998) shows that, in general, a regression
of this sort (saturated controls with a single additive treatment effect) generates a weighted-average
of cell-specific treatment-control comparisons, with weights proportional to the within-cell variance of
treatment. Thus, the IV estimand for this specification can be written as a variance-weighted average
of cell-specific LATEs.
In practice, the grandfathering estimates reported here come from models that include additive
controls for baseline covariates and year-of-test controls, as well as a full set of matching-cell fixed
effects.

When the additional controls are independent of Z within cells, the weighted average

interpretation of a IV estimand with fully interacted controls is unchanged, while we can expect
estimates of models that include additional controls to be more precise.

Extension of Theorem 1 to an Ordered Treatment
¯ Assumption 1 is modified to accommodate
Suppose treatment, D, takes on values in the set {0, 1, ..., d}.
this ordered treatment, below:
g
g
Assumption 10 (Independence) {Y0l , Y1l , Y00
, ..., Y0gd¯, Y10
, ..., Y1gd¯, D0 , D1 } ⊥
⊥ Z.

We similarly modify Assumption 4:
g
g
¯
Assumption 40 (Strong Gains Exclusion) P (Y1d
− Y1l = Y0d
− Y0l ) = 1 for d ∈ {0, 1, ..., d}.

49

Under Assumptions 10 , 2, 3, and 40 we can use Theorem 1 in Angrist and Imbens (1995) to show
¯

g
g
d
E[Y g − Y l |Z = 1] − E[Y g − Y l |Z = 0] X E[(Y1d − Y1l ) − (Y1d−1 − Y1l )|D1 ≥ d > D0 ]P (D1 ≥ d > D0 )
=
Pd¯
E[D|Z = 1] − E[D|Z = 0]
d=1
d=1 P (D1 ≥ d > D0 )
g
g
d¯
X
E[Y1d
− Y1d−1
|D1 ≥ d > D0 ]P (D1 ≥ d > D0 )
=
.
Pd¯
P
(D
≥
d
>
D
)
1
0
d=1
d=1

Likewise,
¯

g
g
d
E[Y g − Y l |Z = 1] − E[Y g − Y l |Z = 0] X E[(Y0d − Y0l ) − (Y0d−1 − Y0l )|D1 ≥ d > D0 ]P (D1 ≥ d > D0 )
=
Pd¯
E[D|Z = 1] − E[D|Z = 0]
d=1
d=1 P (D1 ≥ d > D0 )
g
g
d¯
X
E[Y0d
− Y0d−1
|D1 ≥ d > D0 ]P (D1 ≥ d > D0 )
=
.
Pd¯
d=1
d=1 P (D1 ≥ d > D0 )

As for our interpretation of the Bernoulli treatment estimand, the assumptions behind this interpretation of the ordered estimand are assumed to hold within matching cells, and our IV estimates of
ordered treatment effects come from models that include a full set of matching-cell fixed effects. These
models also include a set of additive controls that should be unrelated to the instruments conditional
on matching controls. Angrist and Imbens (1995) show that the IV estimand in models with an ordered
treatment, saturated covariate controls, and a saturated first stage (that is the first stage interacts Z
with {dj }) can be written as an average causal effect of a one-unit increase in treatment intensity for
ordered-treatment compliers. In practice, we omit interactions Z with {dj } from the first stage, except
where these are required to identify models with multiple endogenous regressors. As can be seen by
comparing the estimates in columns 1 and 2 of Table 5, the omission of higher-order terms from the
instrument list is of little empirical consequence for models with a single treatment effect.

Weakening Assumption 4
We modify the potential outcomes model described by equations (1) and (2) to allow legacy enrollment
to change legacy-year and later potential outcomes to differing degrees. To keep the presentation
compact, we assume away variation in conditional mean functions across compliant subpopulations.
Specifically, we assume here that
(15)
(16)

E[Yzl |X, Z] = E[Yzl |X] = α1 (X) + zγ(X)
g
g
E[Yzd
|X, Z] = E[Yzd
|X] = α2 (X) + λzγ(X) + dβ,

where λ is a parameter assumed to lie in the unit interval. Covariates are required to identify the
model when λ is unknown, so (15) and (16) are specified with additive covariate effects included (for

50

the purposes of this discussion, matching cell dummies are subsumed in the covariate vector, X).
As in Chamberlain’s (1984) panel models with unobserved individual effects scaled by an unknown
time-varying factor loading, models with λ 6= 1 are identified by quasi-differencing, then moving the
lagged score term (legacy-grade scores, in this case) to the right hand side and treating this term as
endogenous. The extra instruments needed to identify this model come from interacting Z with X.
This leads us to omit covariate interactions from the specification of the treatment effect.27

Theorem 2. Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold for a Bernoulli covariate, x, and that the conditional
mean functions for potential outcomes satisfy (15) and (16) when X is replaced with x. Suppose also
that the first stage varies with x, so that P (D1 > D0 |x = 0) 6= P (D1 > D0 |x = 1). Then the IV
estimand for a regression of Y g on the pair (Y l , D), treated as endogenous and instrumented with
(Z, Zx), while controlling for exogenous x, identifies the parameters λ and β in equation (16).
g
. Equations (15) and (16) therefore imply
Proof. Note that Y l = YZl and Y g = YZD

E[Y l |Z, x] = α1 (x) + γ(x)Z
E[Y g |Z, x] = α2 (x) + λγ(x)Z + βE[D|Z, x]
for j = 0, 1. From here, we get the reduced form
(17)

E[Y g |Z, x] = [α2 (x) − λα1 (x)] + λE[Y l |Z, x] + βE[D|Z, x].

This completes the proof since (17) is the reduced form for the 2SLS procedure described in the


theorem.

In practice, our 2SLS models for RSD use 30 interactions of the grandfathering instrument with
baseline year, SPED status, and SPS bins instead of the single interaction used to establish the theorem
(for UP, we have over 60 interactions with baseline year, SPED status, and baseline school). Assuming
away treatment effect variation with X, the over-identified model should produce a more efficient
estimate of the parameters than the just-identified estimand.
Appendix Table A7 reports key parameter estimates from the setup described in Theorem 2. Consistent with differences-in-differences Figures 3 and 4, legacy year effects in RSD are estimated at about
−.09 for math and −.03 for ELA. The contrast between 2SLS estimates for RSD allowing λ to be a free
parameter identified by Theorem 2 and estimates under gains exclusion (λ = 1) appears in columns
2 and 3 of the table. Although λ is estimated to be about a half, the differences in treatment effects
27

See Hull (2014) for a more general approach to identifying treatment effects under parameterized violations of the
exclusion restriction.

51

here are modest and not significantly different from zero. As suggested by differences-in-differences
Figures 5 and 6, the legacy year treatment effect for those grandfathered into UP is positive for math
and negative for ELA. These estimates are reported in columns 5 and 6 of Table A7. In this case, λ
is estimated to be about .63 for math and about .4 for ELA. Allowing λ to be free changes the math
takeover effect little, but generates a marginally significant decline in the estimated ELA effect, from .4
to about .31. This decline leaves the comparison of lottery and grandfathering estimates qualitatively
unchanged.

Estimation of Average Potential Outcomes
Our estimates of potential outcome means for lottery compliers come from an application of theoretical
results in in Abadie (2002). To extend this to grandfathering instruments, let W 1 ≡ D(Y g − Y l ) and
expand the within-stratum reduced form regression of W on Z as follows:
E[W 1 |Z = 1] − E[W 1 |Z = 0] =E[D(Y g − Y l )|D0 = 1, Z = 1]P (D0 = 1|Z = 1)
+ E[D(Y g − Y l )|D1 = 0, Z = 1]P (D1 = 0|Z = 1)
+ E[D(Y g − Y l )|D1 > D0 , Z = 1]P (D1 > D0 |Z = 1)
− E[D(Y g − Y l )|D0 = 1, Z = 0]P (D0 = 1|Z = 0)
− E[D(Y g − Y l )|D1 = 0, Z = 0]P (D1 = 0|Z = 0)
− E[D(Y g − Y l )|D1 > D0 , Z = 0]P (D1 > D0 |Z = 0),


g
g
− Y01 |D0 = 1] P (D0 = 1)
− Y1l |D0 = 1] − E[Y01
= E[Y11
g
+ E[Y11
− Y1l |D1 > D0 ]P (D1 > D0 )
g
=E[Y11
− Y1l |D1 > D0 ]P (D1 > D0 )
g
=E[Y01
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ]P (D1 > D0 ).

The first equality in this expansion follows by monotonicity; the second by independence; the third and
fourth by gains exclusion (Assumption 4). As always, the first stage regression of D on Z identifies
P (D1 > D0 ). We’ve therefore shown that the IV estimand that puts W 1 on the left hand side
g
and instruments D with Z estimates E[Y01
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ]. Likewise, swapping W 1 with W 0 ≡
g
(1 − D)(Y g − Y l ) in this 2SLS estimand recovers E[Y00
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ] when 1 − D is taken as the
g
endogenous variable. It remains, however, to construct an estimand for the complier mean of Y01
and
g
of Y00
.
g
g
g
g
To identify E[Y01
|D1 > D0 ] and E[Y00
|D1 > D0 ] from E[Y01
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ] and E[Y00
− Y0l |D1 >

D0 ], we need to know E[Y0l |D1 > D0 ]. Unfortunately, Y0l is a potential outcome indexed against Z,
52

that is, legacy enrollment, while compliance is a condition determined by takeover enrollment. This
rules out identification of the average Y0l for compliers based on exclusion of Z. We therefore assume
instead that the mean of Y0l is the same for grandfathering compliers and for never-takers:
Assumption 5 E[Y0l |D1 > D0 ] = E[Y0l |D1 = D0 = 0] .
Because never-takers are rare relative to compliers (compare the first stage of around .69 in Table
5 with the proportion of never takers, 1 − E[D|Z = 1] = P [D1 = 0] = .22]), modest violations of
Assumption 5 should be of little empirical consequence.
Using Assumption 5 to construct the missing mean of Y0l for compliers, we have,
E[Y l |D = 0, Z = 0] =E[Y0l |D0 = 0]
=E[Y0l |D1 > D0 ],
where the first equality follows by Independence and the second from the fact that those with D0 = 0
are either never-takers or compliers and from Assumption 5. We can therefore estimate E[Y0l |D1 > D0 ]
g
g
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ]
− Y0l |D1 > D0 ] and E[Y00
by an estimate of E[Y l |D = 0, Z = 0]. Adding this to E[Y01

produces the desired mean outcomes.

53

B

Data Appendix

B.1

New Orleans RSD

The New Orleans RSD grandfathering analysis file is constructed from student enrollment, demographic, and outcome data provided by RSD for school years 2007-2008 through 2013-2014. Enrollment
and demographic data include information on all students enrolled in the New Orleans RSD. 4th and
8th grade test score outcomes are from the Louisiana Educational Assessment Program (LEAP); all
other outcome grades measure achievement by the integrated LEAP (iLEAP) exam.
Student enrollment and demographics
RSD enrollment data include a June (end-of-year) file for school years 2007-2008 through 2012-2013,
and an October file for school years 2011-2012 through 2013-2014. For school year 2013-2014, an
additional February file is available. Each enrollment file is a snapshot of the enrollment records at
each New Orleans RSD school, and contains information on the first and last dates of attendance of
each student in each school and grade over the academic year up to the given month. Enrollment
files also include a unique student identifier, the “student ID.” We use information on student names
and dates of birth to confirm consistency of student IDs across enrollment files. After resolving any
inconsistencies, student IDs are used to match students to LEAP/iLEAP test score files.
Enrollment files contain information on student sex, race, special education status, limited English
proficiency status, subsidized lunch eligibility, and school attended.28 We construct a panel dataset
capturing demographic and enrollment information for every student in each grade, keeping information from the first calendar year spent in each grade and recording the number of times a grade
is subsequently repeated. A student is counted as attending a takeover charter if she enrolls in one
for any amount of time. If a student attends multiple non-takeover charter schools within the same
year and grade, she is counted as enrolled in the longest-attended school. Attendance duration ties
are broken by giving preference to the most recent enrollment. All other attendance ties are broken
randomly. Students classified as special education, limited English proficient, or eligible for a free- or
reduced-price lunch in any record within a grade retain that designation for that grade.
28
Race is coded as black, white, asian, hispanic, and other. In RSD these are not mutually-exclusive categories. Race
and gender are grade-invariant characteristics, while SPED, LEP, and free/reduced price lunch status are grade-specific.

54

LEAP/iLEAP
The LEAP/iLEAP outcomes of interest are math, English Language Arts (ELA), sciences, and social
sciences test scores for grades 5 through 8. Tests at the end of the legacy grade and at the end of the
baseline matching grade are also used to calculate test score gains and as controls, respectively. The
grade configuration of legacy and baseline tests is summarized in Table 1.
Each observation in the LEAP/iLEAP data files corresponds to a student’s test results in a particular subject, grade, and year. For each grade, we use scores from the first attempt at a given
subject test. The raw test score variables are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation
one within a subject-grade-year in the New Orleans RSD. The standardization excludes scores from
students enrolled in alternative schools.
School Performance Scores
School performance scores (“SPS”) for school years 2007-2008 through 2011-2012 are used to construct
matching cells for New Orleans RSD grandfathered students. These scores are obtained from http:
//www.louisianabelieves.com/resources/library/performance-scores.
During the analysis sample years, SPS scores ranged from 0 to 200, where a score below 75 corresponded to an “F” letter grade, and a score above 120 corresponded to an “A” letter grade. Matched
cells are constructed by splitting the 0 to 200 range into 5-point bins.
Grandfathering eligibility and matching
The grandfathering eligibility instrument is based on fall enrollment. For the New Orleans RSD,
the instrument is coded by the enrollment designation procedure described above, using attendance
data up to October 31. Students that leave a legacy school prior to October 31 are not considered
grandfathering-eligible.
For each legacy school, grandfathering-eligible students are those enrolled in grades 4-7 in the fall
immediately prior to takeover. These students are matched to grandfathering-ineligible students that
share the sex, race, special education status, subsidized lunch eligibility, and SPS 5-point bin of the
grandfathered student in their baseline grade and year. Students who are eligible for grandfathering
into a takeover charter in multiple grades or who are matched to such a student are retained in the
first grade by which they enter the analysis sample.
Appendix Table A3 describes the construction of the RSD grandfathering sample. We identify a
total of 1,657 grandfathering-eligible students across all legacy grades of the 11 schools in our analysis. Excluding students without baseline information and those not enrolled in a direct-run school
55

at baseline reduces this sample to 1,019. Matching these students and retaining the first grade observation produces our analysis sample of 763 grandfathering-eligible and 2,410 grandfathering-ineligible
students.

B.2

Boston

Our analysis of the UP Charter School of Boston uses student enrollment, demographic, and outcome
data provided by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education for school
years 2007-2008 through 2013-2014. We construct two analysis files, one for the UP grandfathering
analysis and one for the UP lottery analysis. Boston enrollment and demographic data come from
the Student Information Management System (SIMS), a centralized database that covers all public
school students in Massachusetts. Test score outcomes are from the Massachusetts Comprehensive
Assessment System (MCAS). For the lottery sample, lists of first-time applicants and lottery winners
are provided by UP.
Student enrollment and demographics
SIMS data include an end-of-year file and an October file for each school year. As with RSD, each
observation in the SIMS refers to a student in a grade of a school in a year. While length of attendance
is recorded, the data do not contain exact dates of enrollment. The SIMS also includes a unique student
identifier, known as the SASID, which is used to match students to MCAS test score files.
SIMS variables used in our analysis include student sex, race, special education status, limited
English proficiency status, subsidized lunch eligibility, and school attended.29 We construct a panel
dataset capturing demographic and enrollment information for every Massachusetts public school student enrolled in each grade, keeping information from the first calendar year spent in each grade and
recording the number of repeated attempts. A student is counted as attending UP if she enrolls for any
amount of time. If a student attends multiple schools within the same year and grade, she is counted
as enrolled in the longest-attended school. All other attendance ties are broken randomly. Students
classified as special education, limited English proficient, or eligible for a free- or reduced-price lunch
in any record within a grade retain that designation.
MCAS
The MCAS outcomes of interest are math and ELA test scores in 7th and 8th grade for the UP
grandfathering analysis sample, and in grades 6-8 for the UP lottery sample. For the grandfathering
29

Race is coded as black, white, asian, hispanic and other, and is mutually-exclusive.

56

analysis, tests at the end of the legacy grade and at the end of the baseline matching grade are also
used to calculate test score gains and as controls, respectively. The grade configuration of legacy and
baseline tests is summarized in Table 1. For the lottery analysis, baseline tests (from 5th or 6th grade,
depending on the application grade) are used as controls.
Each observation in the MCAS data files corresponds to a student’s test results in a particular
subject, grade, and year. For each grade, we use scores from the first attempt at a given subject
test. The raw test score variables are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one
within a subject-grade-year in Boston. The standardization excludes scores from students enrolled in
alternative schools.
Grandfathering eligibility and matching
The grandfathering instrument is based on fall semester enrollment. For UP the instrument is coded
by the enrollment designation procedure described above using data from the October 2010 SIMS.
Grandfathering-eligible students are those enrolled in 6th and 7th grade at Gavin middle school, and
are matched to grandfathering-ineligible students that share the sex, race, special education status,
subsidized lunch eligibility, and 5th grade school and year.
We identify a total of 334 students eligible for grandfathering into UP (Appendix Table A3).
Excluding students without baseline information and those not enrolled in BPS at baseline reduces
this sample to 290. These grandfathering-eligible students and their 913 ineligible matches constitutes
our Boston grandfathering analysis sample.
Lottery sample
We obtained a list of students applying to UP in Spring 2011 through Spring 2013 for entry in grades
6-8 from school officials. The raw lottery records include each applicant’s name, date of birth, contact
information, lottery priority group, and lottery number. Three of these admission cohorts were found
to have been oversubscribed by first-time applicants: 6th and 7th grade entry in Spring 2011, and 6th
grade entry in Spring 2012. Appendix Table A5 describes these cohorts: from a total of 1,418 student
names we find 1,015 first-time, non-sibling BPS students whose admission to UP was determined solely
by lottery number.
We use student lottery numbers to construct two indicator variables for whether applicants were
eligible to receive an offer to attend UP. The immediate offer instrument indicates admission offers
made on the day of the lottery in March. The waitlist offer instrument indicates that a student has a
lottery number better than the student with the worst lottery number who was offered admission to
57

UP from the waitlist by the end of September. Overall immediate and waitlist offer rates were 30 and
21 percent, respectively.
UP’s lottery rosters do not include SASIDs; these records are matched manually to the SIMS by
name, date of birth, application year and application grade. In some cases, this procedure did not
produce a unique match and information on town of residence was used to break ties. Our matching
procedure successfully located 96% (972) of UP Boston applicants in the SIMS/MCAS database.
Excluding student not enrolled in BPS at baseline produces the UP lottery sample of 962 students.

58

59

A.D. Crossman: Esperanza Charter
John Dibert Elementary
Laurel Elementary
Live Oak Elementary
Harney Elementary
Gentilly Terrace Elementary
Harriet Tubman Elementary
Joseph S. Clark Senior High
Sarah Towles Reed Elementary
McDonogh #42 Charter
Joseph A. Craig School
John McDonogh Senior High
Pride College Preparatory Academy
Crocker Arts and Technology School
Paul B. Habans Elementary School
Murray Henderson Elementary School
H.C. Schaumburg Elementary School
Abramson Science and Technology School

Legacy school

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Charter
legacy?
K–8
PK–8
PK–8
PK–8
PK–8
PK–8
PK–8
9–12
PK–8
PK–8
PK–8
9–12
K-5
PK-5
PK-6
1–5
PK-8
K-8

Esperanza Charter School
John Dibert Community School
SciTech Academy at Laurel Elementary
Batiste Cultural Arts Academy at Live Oak Elementary
Edgar P. Harney Spirit of Excellence Academy
Gentilly Terrace School
Harriet Tubman Charter School
Joseph S. Clark Preparatory High School
Dolores T. Aaron Elementary
McDonogh 42 Elementary Charter School
Joseph A. Craig Charter School
John McDonogh High School
Mildred Osborne Charter School
Lawrence D. Crocker College Prep
Paul Habans Charter School
Paul Habans Charter School
Schaumburg Elementary
Schaumburg Elementary

Takeover school

Table A1: RSD full charter takeovers from 2008-09 to 2012-13
Legacy
grades
Choice
FirstLine
ReNEW
ReNEW
Spirit of Excellence
New Beginnings
Crescent City
FirstLine
ReNEW
Choice
Friends of King
Future is Now
Arise Academy
New Orleans College Prep
Crescent City
Crescent City
ReNEW
ReNEW

Takeover charter network

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

"No Excuses"
network?

K–8
PK–8
PK–8
PK–8
K–8
PK–8
K–8
9–12
PK–8
PK–8
PK–8
9–12
PK–6
PK–5
PK–6
PK–6
PK–8
PK–8

Takeover
grades

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Study
takeover?

Notes: This table lists RSD's full charter takeovers from the 2008-09 to the 2012-13 academic years. Study takeovers are those involving a public-to-charter middle school takeover. "No Excuses" networks are identified using
charter applications and school or network web sites. There were no full charter takeovers in the 2008-09 academic year.

2013

2012

2011

2010

Closure year
(spring)

60

--12.4
0.22
$48,080
$40,400
$43,503
$44,002
$52,613

Average age
Proportion inexperienced (age ≤ 28)
Average years of experience
Proportion inexperienced (exp ≤ 2)
Average salary
No experience
One year
Two years
10 years or more

--7.0
0.41
$46,416
$42,047
$43,803
$44,695
$50,530

$11,056
--

----------

$11,682
--

$14,938
$14,000

32
0.40
--$66,696
-----

B. Teacher characteristics
42
-0.10
------$81,963
---------

41
0.03
--$77,251
-----

$15,054
$12,119

13.5
--

11.8
--

$17,948
$15,419

$10,934
--

Gavin
(7)

Boston
Boston
charter
(6)

28
0.60
--$60,459
-----

$14,586
$13,441

11.7
--

UP
(8)

Notes: Figures in columns 1-4 are calculated using data from http://www.louisianabelieves.com. Figures in columns 3-4 include any full takeover or legacy school for which
data were available, including charter-to-charter and high school full takeovers. Average class size is based on the 2010-2011 and 2011-2012 academic years, and is calculated
using the midpoint of reported class size ranges, with the exception of the class category size of "34 +", which is coded as an average class size of 34 students. Schools
included in column 3's class size figure are Sarah Towles Reed Elementary, Fannie C. Williams Elementary, Harriet Tubman Elementary School, Joseph S. Clark Senior High,
McDonogh 42 Elementary Charter, Joseph A. Craig, Crocker Arts and Technology, H.C. Schaumburg Elementary, Abramson Science and Technology, Pride College
Preparatory Academy, Paul B. Habans Elementary, and Murray Henderson Elementary. Schools included in column 4's class size figure are SciTech Academy at Laurel
Elementary, Esperanza Charter, Edgar P. Harney Spirit of Excellence Academy, Gentilly Terrace Elementary, Batiste Cultural Arts Academy at Live Oak Elementary, and
Reed Elementary. New Orleans teacher experience and salary are based on operator-level data for the 2010-2011 academic year. Per-pupil expenditures (PPE) are averages
over academic years 2008-2009 through 2010-2011. Column 1's PPE is based on aggregate figures reported for all RSD direct-run schools, and exclude one-time expenditures
related to Hurricane Katrina. Schools included in column 3's PPE are Gentilly Terrace, E.P. Harney Spirit of Excellence Academy, Batiste Cultural Arts Academy at Like Oak
Elementary, John Dibert Community School, SciTech Academy at Laurel Elementary, and Esperanza Charter. Schools included in column 4's PPE are AD. Crossman
Esperanza Charter and Harriet Tubman. Adjusted PPE figures are provided for better comparability. For New Orleans, excess spending (relative to charters) in operations and
management is deducted from RSD direct-run figures, as RSD direct-run expenditures include spending on building insurance premiums for all buildings overseen by RSD,
including those operated by charters. (See Cowen Institute, The State of Public Education in New Orleans: School Finances, March 2011.) For Boston, adjusted PPE figures
exclude special education expenses. Columns 5-6 include Boston traditional public and charter schools serving grades 6-8. Column 6 includes Academy of the Pacific Rim,
Boston Collegiate, Boston Preparatory, Brooke Charter Rosindale, Excel Academy, MATCH, Neighborhood House, Roxbury Preparatory, and Smith Leadership Academy.
Boston student/teacher ratio and teacher characteristics are averages for academic years 2010-2011 and 2011-2012. Student/teacher ratio is calculated based on October SIMS
(Student Information Management System) and on teacher full-time equivalents obtained from EPIMS (Educational Personnel Information Management System). PPE figures
for columns 5-6 are obtained from http://www.doe.mass.edu and http://profiles.doe.mass.edu, refer to fiscal year 2011-2012 and are enrollment-weighted. Gavin's PPE is
calculated based on Gavin-specific instructional spending, as reported on Schedule 3 of Boston's FY11 End of Year Financial Report, and on Boston's FY11 average spending
on school administration, pupil services, operations and management, and insurance and retirement program. Average teacher salary is obtained from
http://www.doe.mass.edu/finance/statistics/.

$13,104
$11,104

Student-teacher ratio
Average class size
Per-pupil expenditures
Reported
Adjusted

Table A2: RSD and Boston school and teacher characteristics
RSD
RSD
RSD
direct-run
charter
Legacy
Takeover
BPS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A. School characteristics
12.3
----20.3
19.4
19.9
19.7
--

61

Gavin

UP

334

307

290

290

913

204
873
673
425
543
267
112
326
168
274
45
2,410

Comparison
students

Notes: This table describes the sample of grandfathering-eligible students and their ineligible matches for the RSD study takeovers and for UP. Legacy school students are
matched to comparison students by race, sex, baseline grade and year, special education status, subsidized lunch eligibility, and baseline school SPS scores in five-point
bins.

2011

Table A3: RSD and UP grandfathering cohorts
Grandfathering-eligible students
Closure
Takeover charter
Legacy school
With baseline Direct-run/BPS at Unique analysis
Spring Year
network
All
covariates
baseline
sample
John Dibert
FirstLine
2010
140
92
86
78
Laurel
ReNEW
176
102
96
76
Live Oak
ReNEW
152
76
72
65
Harney
Spirit of Excellence
121
63
56
55
Gentilly Terrace
New Beginnings
156
111
107
106
Sarah Towles Reed ReNEW
2011
215
143
137
81
Joseph
A.
Craig
Friends
of
King
2012
216
154
142
86
Paul B. Habans
Crescent City
2013
232
180
168
87
Murray Henderson Crescent City
135
85
66
53
H.C. Shaumburg
ReNEW
111
81
71
55
Abramson
ReNEW
25
24
23
21
Pooled RSD:
1,657
1,105
1,019
763

Table A4: RSD and UP grandfathering attrition
Sample means
Analysis sample
RSD/Boston
RSD/Boston
Charter-bound
Takeover charter
Grandfatheringstudents
students
students
eligible students
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. RSD grandfathering
0.750
0.855
0.958
0.936

Has legacy grade outcomes
N

14,554
0.672

11,358
0.776

1,040
0.828

763
0.710

N

14,554
0.629

11,358
0.728

1,040
0.814

763
0.738

N

9,368
0.603

7,510
0.708

775
0.755

443
0.669

N

5,856
0.481

4,685
0.573

534
0.599

290
0.488

N

2,545

2,091

252

162

0.909

0.973

B. UP grandfathering
0.938
0.893

N

8,506
0.884

1,552
0.938

225
0.933

290
0.855

N

8,506
0.867

1,552
0.915

225
0.877

290
0.817

N

7,996

1,444

130

164

Has first exposure year
outcomes
Has second exposure year
outcomes
Has third exposure year
outcomes
Has fourth exposure year
outcomes

Has legacy grade outcomes

Has first exposure year
outcomes
Has second exposure year
outcomes

Balance coefficients
Analysis sample
No score
Baseline score
controls
controls
(5)
(6)
0.003
(0.011)
3,503
0.008
(0.021)
3,503
0.031
(0.027)
2,353
0.027
(0.034)
1,505
0.000
(0.050)
788

-0.012
(0.014)
1,203
-0.025
(0.018)
1,203
-0.065*
(0.033)
626

0.008
(0.011)
1,100
-0.013
(0.017)
1,100
-0.054*
(0.033)
565

Notes: This table reports sample means and coefficients from regressions of the variable in each row on a grandfathering eligibility dummy indicating
enrollment in an takeover legacy school in the fall of the academic year prior to takeover, controlling for matching strata. Regressions in column 6 also
control for 4th grade MCAS scores. The sample in columns 3-6 is restricted to students enrolled in an RSD direct-run school (panel A) or BPS school
(panel B) at baseline. Column 1 reports means for a sample of RSD/Boston students in the same baseline years as the analysis sample, while column 2 is
restricted to those students that enroll in an RSD/Boston charter school in grades following the baseline. Column 3 reports means for students that enroll
in a takeover charter in potential takeover grades, while column 4 describes students enrolled in a legacy school. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

62

Table A5: UP lottery records
2011
6th grade
7th grade
(1)
(2)
Total number of records
791
170
Excluding late applicants
698
81
Excluding applicants from outside of BPS
666
79
Excluding siblings of UP students
652
61
Excluding records not matched to SIMS
621
53
In a BPS school at baseline
619
51

2012
6th grade
(3)
457
361
323
302
298
292

Notes: This table summarizes the sample restrictions imposed for the analysis of UP's lottery applicants.

63

Total
(4)
1,418
1,140
1,068
1,015
972
962

Table A6: UP lottery descriptive statistics, balance, and attrition
Sample means
GrandfatheringLottery applicants
Boston
eligible students
students
6th grade
7th grade
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Balance
0.374
0.241
0.327
0.294

Hispanic
Black

0.375

0.469

0.483

0.373

White

0.124

0.152

0.090

0.196

Asian

0.073

0.100

0.055

0.098

Female

0.487

0.483

0.504

0.471

Special education

0.222

0.317

0.231

0.275

Free/reduced price lunch

0.794

0.928

0.802

0.843

Limited English proficient

0.280

0.307

0.248

0.275

6,744

290

911

51

0.003

-0.253

-0.054

-0.081

6,501

258

897

48

0.006

-0.235

-0.030

-0.169

6,387

254

890

47

0.917

0.855

0.924

6,744

290

911

51

0.878

0.817

0.872

0.784

6,744

164

911

51

N
Baseline math test score
N
Baseline ELA test score
N

Has first exposure year outcomes
N
Has second exposure year outcomes
N
Has third exposure year outcomes
N

0.826

0.814

4,294

617

B. Attrition
0.843

Balance coefficients
(Lottery applicants)
Immediate offer Waitlist offer
(5)
(6)
-0.023
(0.033)
0.004
(0.036)
0.014
(0.022)
0.025
(0.019)
0.003
(0.036)
0.032
(0.031)
0.019
(0.029)
0.023
(0.032)
962

0.035
(0.037)
-0.026
(0.040)
-0.005
(0.023)
-0.012
(0.019)
-0.017
(0.040)
-0.001
(0.034)
-0.024
(0.032)
-0.035
(0.034)
962

0.003
(0.066)
945

-0.064
(0.073)
945

-0.060
(0.066)
937

0.018
(0.074)
937

-0.016
(0.020)
962

0.033
(0.021)
962

-0.034
(0.025)
962

0.014
(0.028)
962

-0.047
(0.039)
617

-0.038
(0.044)
617

Notes: This table reports sample means and coefficients from regressions of the variable in each row on either an immediate or waitlist offer dummy. The
immediate offer dummy indicates that a lottery applicant was offered a seat in the March lottery, while the waitlist offer dummy indicates that an applicant was
eligible for the offer of a seat off the waitlist from March to the end of September. All regressions include lottery risk set dummies. The sample in columns 2-6 is
restricted to students enrolled in a BPS school at baseline. Column 1 reports means for a sample of Boston students in the same baseline grades and years as the
analysis sample. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

64

Legacy score
(1)
Legacy enrollment

-0.088**
(0.040)

Takeover enrollment
Legacy score (λ)

Gap to gain estimate
Instruments
N

2,553

Table A7: Relaxing gains exclusion
RSD
Outcome score Outcome gain
Legacy score
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Math
0.106**
(0.046)
0.198***
0.217***
(0.032)
(0.037)
0.527***
(0.132)
-0.020
(0.039)
31
5,625

31
5,625

1,028

UP
Outcome score Outcome gain
(5)
(6)

0.370***
(0.035)
0.629***
(0.104)
0.034
(0.043)
61
1,543

0.337***
(0.036)

61
1,543

B. ELA
Legacy enrollment

-0.030
(0.042)

Takeover enrollment

0.139***
(0.030)
0.515***
(0.129)

Legacy score (λ)

Gap to gain estimate
Instruments
N

-0.149***
(0.049)

2,553

0.154***
(0.037)

-0.015
(0.037)
31
5,621

31
5,621

0.309***
(0.037)
0.399***
(0.090)

1,025

-0.093*
(0.051)
64
1,539

0.403***
(0.041)

64
1,539

Notes: This table compares 2SLS estimates of takeover enrollment effects on math and ELA test scores under differing assumptions
about the persistence of legacy score effects. The outcomes, sample and enrollment endogenous variables are as in Table 4 (RSD) and
Table 8 (UP). The instruments in columns 2-3 and 5-6 are grandfathering eligibility interacted with baseline year, special education
status, and baseline school SPS bin (RSD) or school (UP). The estimates in columns 2 and 5 treat legacy scores and takeover enrollment
as endogenous. Column 1 reports the average effect of grandfathering eligibility on legacy scores, estimated by OLS. All models control
for matching strata, limited English proficiency, baseline test scores, and year/grade effects. Robust standard errors, clustered by student,
are reported in parentheses.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

65

