NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ACCESS TO INNOVATION:
EVIDENCE FROM TRIPS
Margaret Kyle
Yi Qian
Working Paper 20799
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20799

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

We thank Tahir Amin, Iain Cockburn, Carsten Fink, Craig Garthwaite, Intan Hamdan-Livramento,
Bhaven Sampat, Mark Schankerman, Tavneet Suri, and seminar participants at CERGE-EI, Copenhagen
Business School, DIW Berlin, Duke, KU Leuven, Mannheim, MINES ParisTech, Northwestern, and
the NBER Summer Institute, Peking University, Tsinghua University, the University of Hong Kong,
andWIPO for useful comments and suggestions. Intan Hamdan-Livramento, Sumner LaCroix, andWalter
Park generously shared their datasets on IPRs at the country level. Kyle thanks Pfizer for access to
the IMS data used. The views expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors, and we are responsible
for all errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Margaret Kyle and Yi Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Intellectual Property Rights and Access to Innovation: Evidence from TRIPS
Margaret Kyle and Yi Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 20799
December 2014
JEL No. I10,O34
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of pharmaceutical patent protection on the speed of drug launch, price, and
quantity in 60 countries from 2000-2013. The World Trade Organization required its member countries
to implement a minimum level of patent protection within a specified time period as part of the TRIPS
Agreement. However, members retained the right to impose price controls and to issue compulsory
licenses under certain conditions. These countervailing policies were intended to reduce the potential
static losses that result from reduced competition during the patent term. We take advantage of the
fact that at the product level, selection into TRIPS "treatment" is exogenously determined by compliance
deadlines that vary across countries. We find that patents have important consequences for access
to new drugs: in the absence of a patent, launch is unlikely. That is, even when no patent barrier exists,
generic entry may not occur. Conditional on launch, patented drugs have higher prices but higher sales
as well. The price premium associated with patents is smaller in poorer countries. Price discrimination
across countries has increased for drugs patented post-TRIPS and prices are negatively related to the
burden of disease, suggesting that countervailing policies to offset expected price increases may have
had the intended effects.

Margaret Kyle
MINES ParisTech (CERNA)
and PSL Research University
60 boulevard Saint Michel
75006 Paris
France
margaret.kyle@mines-paristech.fr
Yi Qian
Department of Marketing
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
yiqian@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Intellectual Property Rights and Access to Innovation: Evidence
from TRIPS∗
Margaret Kyle†and Yi Qian‡
December 13, 2014

Abstract
We examine the effect of pharmaceutical patent protection on the speed of drug launch,
price, and quantity in 60 countries from 2000-2013. The World Trade Organization required its
member countries to implement a minimum level of patent protection within a specified time
period as part of the TRIPS Agreement. However, members retained the right to impose price
controls and to issue compulsory licenses under certain conditions. These countervailing policies
were intended to reduce the potential static losses that result from reduced competition during
the patent term. We take advantage of the fact that at the product level, selection into TRIPS
“treatment” is exogenously determined by compliance deadlines that vary across countries. We
find that patents have important consequences for access to new drugs: in the absence of a
patent, launch is unlikely. That is, even when no patent barrier exists, generic entry may not
occur. Conditional on launch, patented drugs have higher prices but higher sales as well. The
price premium associated with patents is smaller in poorer countries. Price discrimination across
countries has increased for drugs patented post-TRIPS and prices are negatively related to the
burden of disease, suggesting that countervailing policies to offset expected price increases may
have had the intended effects.

1

Introduction

Intellectual property rights (IPRs) attempt to balance static and dynamic efficiency. By allowing
innovators to block competition and therefore appropriate a greater share of the value of their ideas,
∗

We thank Tahir Amin, Iain Cockburn, Carsten Fink, Craig Garthwaite, Intan Hamdan-Livramento, Bhaven
Sampat, Mark Schankerman, Tavneet Suri, and seminar participants at CERGE-EI, Copenhagen Business School,
DIW Berlin, Duke, KU Leuven, Mannheim, MINES ParisTech, Northwestern, and the NBER Summer Institute,
Peking University, Tsinghua University, the University of Hong Kong, and WIPO for useful comments and suggestions.
Intan Hamdan-Livramento, Sumner LaCroix, and Walter Park generously shared their datasets on IPRs at the country
level. Kyle thanks Pfizer for access to the IMS data used. The views expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
authors, and we are responsible for all errors.
†
MINES ParisTech (CERNA), PSL Research University and CEPR (margaret.kyle@mines-paristech.fr )
‡
Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University and NBER (yiqian@northwestern.edu)

1

IPRs can create incentives for investment in research and development (R&D). However, IPRs can
also lead to static inefficiencies in the form of monopoly prices. This tradeoff is especially acute in
the case of pharmaceuticals for developing countries. Incentives for drug development are critical,
since many diseases prevalent in developing countries lack appropriate treatments, but the prices
of innovative drugs in the absence of generic competition make them unaffordable to most people
there. The effects of IPRs on access and affordability are important for researchers, policymakers,
and firms.
IPRs have expanded considerably in recent years as a consequence of the 1994 Trade-Related
Intellectual Property Rights Agreement (TRIPS), negotiated at the end of the Uruguay Round of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). TRIPS requires members of the World Trade
Organization (WTO) to implement minimum standards for intellectual property (IP) protection.
For most developing countries, complying with TRIPS involved substantial changes to their IPR
policies, especially for pharmaceuticals. Supporters of TRIPS asserted that IPRs should benefit
developing countries in several ways. First, IPRs create incentives for innovation that can benefit
both rich and poor countries. Second, IPRs can promote domestic innovation in developing countries. And third, IPRs may increase the availability of new drugs, if innovative pharmaceutical
companies find markets with IPRs more attractive for launch. The Office of the Trade Representative of the United States explicitly states that “Stronger patent and data protection increases
the willingness of companies to release innovative drugs in free trade partners’ markets, potentially increasing, rather than decreasing, the availability of medicines.”1 However, developing and
least-developed countries have argued that patents reduce access to new drugs, since IPRs grant
monopolistic positions to pharmaceutical companies and allow them to charge higher prices.
If IPRs make a market more attractive to innovators, either through increased pricing power or
because they do not share the market with imitators, then we should increase product launches by
innovator firms following a country’s introduction of patents. In the presence of competitors, firms
may fear creating spillover benefits for their rivals; a monopoly position would therefore increase
investment in country-specific marketing and distribution channels. These investments may have
implications for all products the firm sells within a country, regardless of their individual patent
protection status. However, we should observe an effect on pricing only for those drugs eligible for
patent protection in the country, i.e. those with a patent priority date post-TRIPS compliance.
Higher prices would also be expected to reduce quantities sold.
Opponents of the TRIPS Agreement point to the substantial price differences often observed
between innovator and generic products. HIV treatments are the most prominent example: competition from generic firms for the supply of antiretroviral drugs in developing countries has been
credited with substantial reductions in price (Waning et al. (2010)).
This paper examines how IPRs, specifically patents, have affected new drug launches, prices
1

http://www.ustr.gov/about-us/press-office/fact-sheets/archives/2004/july/us-morocco-free-trade-agreementaccess-medicine

2

and sales across 59 countries of varying levels of development. We explain why patent protection
may shift the equilibrium speed of launch, price and quantity. We then empirically examine these
outcomes using data that allows us to compare patent protection in countries of different income
levels. Though the introduction of IPRs is an endogenous decision taken by policy makers, developing countries were required by WTO rules to implement a minimum level of patent protection
within a specified time period, and we argue that this requirement creates a natural experiment.
In addition, we exploit the fact that these policy changes did not affect all drugs in the same
way. Drug development has a large random component in the time between discovery (or initial
patent date) and completion of clinical trials and regulatory requirements (or initial launch date).
Within a country and year, we can compare the outcomes of products invented in a year before
they were eligible for patent protection meeting all the TRIPS requirements with those invented
just after TRIPS compliance. This allows us to control for unobservable country characteristics
that affect an innovator’s expected profitability and that vary over time, as well as unobservable
product characteristics that affect price.
Our results suggest that the consequences of TRIPS-required patents on access have not been
as negative as predicted by many in the global health community. Patents are generally associated
with earlier launch of new products and higher sales. The effect of a patent on an innovator’s
launch incentive appears to be greater than the effect of removing this barrier to entry for generics,
on average. This finding suggests the existence of other important barriers, some of which may be
directly linked to regulatory policies. Surprisingly, we find a decrease in the price premium enjoyed
by drugs with patents in the post-TRIPS era, although patented drugs are nevertheless still more
expensive. Countervailing policies such as price controls or the threat of compulsory licensing may
be responsible, either directly or indirectly by inducing different pricing behavior from originators.
We summarize related literature in the next section, with a discussion of important institutional
details and existing theory to motivate our empirical study. Section 3 explains our empirical model,
and Section 4 describes the data. Results are presented in Section 5, and we conclude in Section 6.

2
2.1

Background and literature
The impact of IPRs

IPRs potentially have both static and dynamic effects. Standard theory models predict negative
static effects, as patents allow inventors to block imitation. This monopoly position usually leads
to higher prices and lower consumption. However, these static losses can be offset by increased
incentives for inventors, leading to higher rates of innovation in the long run. There are some
notable exceptions to these predictions, including Boldrin & Levine (2002) and others who are
critical of IPRs as a mechanism to induce innovation. We focus here on the empirical evidence,
and specifically the pharmaceutical sector.

3

A number of papers have examined the effect of IPRs on pharmaceutical innovation, an industry
setting in which patents are especially important (Cohen et al. (2000)). In a study of 26 countries,
Qian (2007) suggested that IP implementation increased domestic innovation only if accompanied
by high levels of development, educational attainment, and economic freedom. Arora et al. (2008)
found that patent applications associated with process innovations increased in India after its
compliance with TRIPS in 2005. Lanjouw & Cockburn (2001) investigated the impact of TRIPS
on pharmaceutical innovations for diseases most prevalent in developing countries, but concluded
that too little time had elapsed by the time of their study to observe large changes. Ten years later,
Kyle & McGahan (2012) examined whether TRIPS compliance stimulated R&D activities for new
drugs across the world. They found that TRIPS has strengthened research on global diseases that
affect both high-income as well as developing countries, but it has not increased R&D activities for
diseases that almost exclusively affect low-income countries.
Other papers have focused on how IPRs have affected access to new treatments. In studies
covering a large number of developed as well as developing countries, Lanjouw (2005) and Cockburn
et al. (2014) found that stronger patent protection increased the speed of new drug launches in
rich countries, but the effect in lower income countries was ambiguous. Borrell (2005), examining
HIV treatments, found that patents were associated with faster launch in developing countries with
relatively low levels of income inequality. However, the results of Berndt et al. (2011) suggest that
while IPRs exist de jure, de facto protection in countries such as Brazil, India, and China remains
weak. These countries generally see substantial entry by generic firms, conditional on launch by at
least one firm.
The most important study in this area is Chaudhuri et al. (2006), who focused on a single
category of antibiotics in India prior to the introduction of pharmaceutical product patents. Using counterfactual welfare calculations derived from structural estimation, they concluded that the
introduction of IPRs would reduce social welfare, because of the increase in price a reduction in
generic competition would cause both for new treatments and their older substitutes. In addition,
domestic producers had an advantage in distribution, so that total consumption would fall substantially if the sole supplier was a foreign innovator firm. Given the importance of Indian generic
firms in supplying low-cost treatments for HIV in developing countries (Waning et al. (2010)), the
Chaudhuri et al. (2006) results have important implications for other countries as well. However,
Duggan et al. (2014) find that product patents in India are not associated with large price increases
between 2005 and 2008.

2.2

The TRIPS Agreement

The TRIPS Agreement specifies the minimum levels and enforcement of IPRs, including patents,
trademarks and copyright, that are a condition of membership in the World Trade Organization
(WTO). TRIPS compliance requires patent terms of at least 20 years for products and processes.

4

Two features of TRIPS are of particular importance here.
First, the introduction of product patents for pharmaceuticals was a major change for many
countries. Product patents on pharmaceuticals allow the originator to protect the active chemical
ingredient in a drug. This is considered the strongest form of protection, because no other firm
can produce or import that chemical during the period of patent protection. LaCroix & Liu (2008)
note that in 1960, very few countries allowed pharmaceutical product patents, but more than 95%
did so by 2005; TRIPS is responsible for much of this shift.
Second, the WTO established a process of dispute resolution between member states. If a
country fails to comply with TRIPS, other member states may use this process to impose trade
penalties on the offending country. To the extent that this gave patentholders (or at least their
representatives in the governments of member states) greater enforcement power, we would expect
TRIPS to strengthen patent protection in practice, even in the absence of a legislative change to
patent law.
Developing and least-developed countries generally objected to some terms of TRIPS, and
specifically to pharmaceutical product patents. To alleviate their concerns, poorer countries were
permitted a transition period to comply with TRIPS. While developed countries had one year
after joining the WTO to conform, most developing countries were required to implement TRIPS
by 2000, and least-developed countries (LDCs) by 2006. However, countries that did not grant
patents in a particular technology area in 1995 were given 10 years to comply. India, for instance,
had until 2005 to introduce pharmaceutical product patents. The transition period for LDCs was
later extended to 2016 for pharmaceutical product patents. Further details are provided in Section
4.3.
Several other exemptions that weaken the strength of pharmaceutical patents were included in
TRIPS to accommodate the concerns of developing countries as well as developed countries.2 The
2002 Doha Declaration first outlined the conditions under which countries may issue compulsory
licenses; these conditions include limiting the use of the licensed product to the domestic market,
restricting the use of compulsory licenses to cases of national health emergencies and providing
“reasonable” compensation to the patent holder. Since many countries lack domestic manufacturing
capacity and were therefore unable to use compulsory licenses, they negotiated the ability to import
compulsory-licensed products from foreign markets (parallel imports) in 2003. Several countries
have issued compulsory licenses, mainly for HIV treatments, although Thailand and India have also
done so for other diseases such as hypertension and cancer. Several developed countries, including
the United States, threatened compulsory licensing during public health scares such as flu outbreaks
(Beall & Kuhn (2012)).
Both developed and developing countries may impose price controls on pharmaceuticals under
2

For example, the patent law of many developed countries includes a “Bolar provision,” which permits research
using a patented pharmaceutical during the term of patent protection if the purpose of the research is compliance
with regulatory requirements for market approval.

5

the TRIPS Agreement (discussed below). The combination of price controls and compulsory licensing (or the threat of either) may serve as an important check on the market power granted by
pharmaceutical patents. These countervailing policies, which are challenging to account for in an
empirical model, are critical for interpreting our results.

2.3

Pharmaceutical regulation

The pharmaceutical sector is highly regulated. Most countries require proof of safety and efficacy
before permitting a drug to be sold, and many also regulate the prices that firms can charge for
pharmaceuticals; see Scott Morton & Kyle (2012) for an overview. Across developed and developing
countries, there is variation in the regulation of market entry and in the use of price controls. Price
controls may offset the expected effects of IPRs, since patent holders may be forced to charge lower
prices (thus reducing the incentives for innovation) and access may be higher as a result (thus
reducing the static inefficiencies associated with patents).
Most previous work on price regulation has focused on relatively rich markets. For example,
Danzon et al. (2005), Kyle (2006), Kyle (2007) and Danzon & Epstein (2008) all examine the
relationship between price controls and the speed of access to new drugs. If country markets were
completely independent and firms faced no capital constraints in product launch, we would expect
firms to launch a new drug in all markets immediately, especially considering the limited term of
patent protection (if applicable). In general, marginal costs of production are fairly low relative
to the fixed cost of developing a drug, at least for small molecule drugs. So long as a firm can
cover the marginal cost of producing the drug, the firm should be willing to sell. However, all these
papers find that the reality is more complicated.
First, firms must incur country-specific entry costs. In countries such as the US and EU member
states, the first firm to introduce a new chemical or biological entity must document the drug’s
safety and efficacy through clinical trial evidence. Most developing countries have regulatory agencies charged with granting marketing authorizations, though some allow firms to rely on dossiers
provided to other countries. The process of price negotiation with particular governments can be
time-consuming, generating further launch delays. This is a purely bureaucratic delay, although it
may be increasing in regulators’ preferences for low prices.
In addition, country markets are not truly independent. Many governments use “external
reference pricing” when setting the local price, meaning that they base the local price on that
observed in other countries. Thus, launching a new drug at a very low price in one country can
reduce the price the firm receives in other countries, if initial low price is referenced. Country
markets can also be linked through parallel trade, which is legal between European Union member
states and has been considered by the US. Parallel trade amounts to arbitrage of price differences
between countries, which again means that launch in a low-price market is less attractive than
would be the case with independent country markets. The general finding from the literature cited

6

above is that price controls are associated with launch delays. Whether the cost-savings generated
by the use of price controls outweigh the delay in access is unresolved, as is the effect on dynamic
incentives for investment in innovation.
With patent protection, the innovator may block entry by generic firms. Without patent protection, both innovators and generic firms are eligible to launch a new drug. Their incentives to
do so depend on other policies, in particular regarding data exclusivity and the requirements for
subsequent entrants. For example, many countries (including the US and EU member states) allow
generic firms seeking regulatory approval to rely on the clinical data provided by the first entrant.
They need only demonstrate that their product is bioequivalent to that of the first entrant’s. The
difference in regulatory treatment of first entrants and followers is considered vital for assuring
generic competition, since it drastically lowers the entry costs for the latter.3 However, the first
entrant may be granted a period of data exclusivity over its clinical trial evidence, during which
time generic firms must either independently provide similar evidence to the regulator or wait for
its expiration. Even in the absence of a patent, therefore, potential entrants may not launch due
to the high costs of acquiring clinical data for regulatory approval.

2.4

Summary of theoretical predictions

We assume firms (either innovators or generic producers) launch products when they expect positive
expected profits. If subsequent entrants can rely on the clinical trial evidence of the first entrant
and there is no period of data exclusivity, the first entrant may not be able to recoup the fixed costs
of launch. With a period of data exclusivity, both the innovator and generic firms may be willing
to launch. If it has already conducted clinical trials for regulatory approval in other countries, the
innovator may have a cost advantage in doing so. With patent protection and no data exclusivity,
then only the innovator has the right to launch the product. The innovator may choose not to
launch because of the regulatory spillovers discussed above.
In the absence of price regulation, the theoretical effect of IPRs on price, conditional on launch,
is fairly clear: the price with IPRs should be at least as high as that without IPRs.4 With price
regulation, the theoretical effect is less obvious, and depends on regulators’ willingness to reward
innovators, attract entry, control expenditures, etc.
In the case of total quantity sold (conditional on launch and price), the expected effect of
IPRs depends on the importance of country and product specific investments. Examples of such
investments include educating medical professionals about the existence, use and benefits of a new
drug; establishing distribution networks; ensuring the provision of complements such as diagnostics,
etc. If competitors can free-ride on those investments, then generic competition in the absence of
3

The 1984 Hatch-Waxman Act established the regulatory pathway for generic approval, after which generic entry
increased substantially.
4
An exception might occur if firms use price to signal quality when there are multiple producers of the same drug
and no reliable government certification of quality.

7

IPRs might result in lower levels of investment and lower quantities sold. On the other hand,
generic firms may sell a larger portfolio of products than innovator firms and therefore have greater
incentive to invest in distribution. In this case, removing generic firms from the market may reduce
quantity sold via inferior distribution.
To summarize, the theoretical impact of IPRs on launch, price and quantity is ambiguous.
Under regulatory conditions that require firms to provide clinical evidence of safety and efficacy
(information that is a public good), IPRs are likely to result in faster launch. In markets with free
pricing, IPRs are likely to result in higher prices; in markets with price controls, the effect may
depend on relative bargaining power. For products that require substantial country-level investment
in education and infrastructure, IPRs may encourage such investments and lead to higher quantities
sold. Chaudhuri et al. (2006) suggest instead that generic producers have superior distribution,
so that IPRs that block them from the market yield reduced quantities. Conditions may vary
substantially across countries and products, so effects may be heterogeneous.

3

Empirical model

In this section, we describe our estimation methods for evaluating the effects of IPRs on the time
to launch, price and quantity sold. We use data at the country-molecule-quarter level, which allows
us to control for molecule and country effects and to use within-molecule, between-country and/or
within-country, between-molecule comparisons in evaluating the effects of IPRs.

3.1

Endogeneity of patent protection

IPRs exist at the country level, and change for a subset of countries as a result of the TRIPS
Agreement. One estimation of the effect of IPRs is a comparison of the overall launch speed, price
level and quantity sold within countries following the introduction of IPRs, compared with those
that did not. If adoption of IPRs is driven by time-varying unobservables, however, this differencein-difference will yield biased results. Cockburn et al. (2014) use instrumental variables such as
legal origin, ethno-linguistic fractionalization, and the number of bilateral trade agreements signed
by a country in their study of drug launches.
Developing countries generally opposed the requirements of TRIPS, so one could argue that
this policy was exogenously imposed on many of them (Hamdan-Livramento (2009), LaCroix &
Liu (2008)). At the time of the WTO’s establishment, member countries that declared themselves
as “developed” had one year to bring their IPRs up to the minimum standards specified by TRIPS.
Developed countries that joined after 1995 were required to be compliant at the date their WTO
membership began. Original WTO members that declared themselves as “developing” were permitted a transition period for TRIPS implementation, with a deadline of 2000. A longer transition
period, until 2005, was permitted for countries that did not grant pharmaceutical product patents,

8

such as India. These countries were required to provide a “mailbox provision” until then, i.e. accept
patent applications even while deferring decisions until 2005, and to grant applicants five years of
marketing exclusivity during the transition period.

5

Least- developed countries, designated as

such by the United Nations, had the longest transition period: initially the deadline was January
1, 2006, and this was extended to 2016 as a result of the Doha round of negotiations in 2002. That
said, some countries resisted more than others, and some complied early. An instrument for the
year of actual compliance is the year by which a country was required to implement TRIPS under
WTO rules. One possible instrument for IPRs at the country-year level is the WTO’s deadline for
TRIPS compliance. However, it is correlated with the level of development, and has only crosscountry variation. The decision by originators to seek patent protection on a particular molecule
where and when such protection is available is also potentially endogenous. If originators perceive
patent protection to be ineffective or do not expect to market due to low profit expectations, they
may not even submit applications for patent protection.
We adopt an approach that exploits our country-molecule-quarter level information on patents.
Following changes to patent law in accordance with TRIPS, only a subset of products within a
country qualifies for strengthened patent protection and any associated pricing power, and this
subset is exogenously determined by the priority date of the first patent application globally and
the country’s required compliance dates with TRIPS. Similarly, within a molecule, the countries
in which a drug qualifies for product patents is exogenously determined by the date its priority
patent application was filed. We therefore define a “Post-TRIPS treated” group of products within a
country, composed of molecules whose patent priority dates allows them to apply for a patent under
a TRIPS-compliant legal regime in a country. If the patent priority date determining whether a
product qualifies for a Post-TRIPS patent in a country is exogenous, then the difference in outcomes
between products with pre-TRIPS patents and those with Post-TRIPS patents captures the effect of
strengthened IPRs.6 Within a country, the expiration of a granted patent is exogenously determined
by its application date, although patent extensions may apply in some cases.
We estimate separate regressions for each of our dependent variables of interest, i.e. the speed
of launch, price, and quantity sold. With this approach, we are assuming that firms first choose
whether (and how quickly) to launch, which may depend on the existence of IPRs. Given launch, we
examine whether prices are higher in the presence of IPRs and whether the quantity sold changes in
the presence of IPRs. To be clear, we are not estimating structural demand and supply equations.
Our claim is only that IPRs may shift the equilibrium levels of these outcomes.
We use a discrete-time model of firms’ launch decisions, assuming that we observe launch if firms
expect positive profits from market entry. The latent variable for profit Πijt denotes the profit from
the launch of drug j in country i and in quarter t, and we specify the following reduced-form profit
5

The US challenged India’s compliance with these terms in a WTO trade dispute.
In many countries, a patent system existed prior to official TRIPS compliance, but may not have offered the
same level of protection.
6

9

function conditional on drug launch:

Πijt = α0 + α1 ExpiredP atentijt
+ α2 OnP atentijt
+ Xijt µ + τit + ψj + ijt ,
where ExpiredP atentijt is a dummy variable equal to one if drug j has no remaining patent
protection in country i in quarter t, and OnP atentedijt is a dummy variable equal to one if drug
j has an active patent (i.e., granted and not yet expired) in quarter t. The omitted category is
the case of a drug that was never patented in country i. Xijt is a vector of other variables that
may affect the launch probability (market size, GDP levels, the number of previously launched
substitute pharmaceutical treatments for drug j in country i, etc.), τit is the time elapsed since the
first international launch for drug j in country i at time t, ψi is the disease category fixed-effect,7
and ijt is the unobserved error term. We estimate this using a discrete-time hazard with a logit
link.
The theoretical effect of IPRs is ambiguous in the launch equation. We simply estimate whether
countries have earlier access to innovations when patent protection exists (or ever existed) there,
without distinguishing whether the originator or imitators enter first. Originators may be more
likely to launch when they have strong IPR protection, but international reference pricing may
cause strategic delays in the launch. Generics may be quicker to market if no IPRs exist, but if
they rely on entry by an originator to reduce their regulatory requirements, they may not necessarily
enter the market before the originator.
We next examine the relationship between IPRs and price by estimating the following equation,
conditional on launch:

Pijt = β0 + β1 ExpiredP atentijt
+ β2 OnP atentijt
+ Xijt ν + φj + ijt ,
where φj is a drug fixed-effect and other variables are defined as in the launch model. The drug
fixed-effect controls for unobserved quality. Generally, we expect IPRs to give originators some
market power, and for this to be reflected in higher prices on patented products. However, the use
of price controls by countries may limit those price increases.
Finally, we turn to quantity. It is possible that originators may be more willing to undertake
7

We chose to use disease fixed-effects rather than drug due to the computational burden of estimating more than
700 fixed-effects in a non-linear model.

10

investments in education and advertising if they are able to appropriate most of the benefits,
which is more likely in the absence of generic competition. However, originators may invest less in
distribution, since they may have a smaller product portfolio than generic firms. To evaluate the
effect of IPRs, we estimate the following equation:

Qijt = γ0 + γ1 ExpiredP atentijt
+ γ2 OnP atentijt
+ Xijt µ + φj + ijt ,
where variables are defined as earlier.
We next estimate specifications that allow for the effect of patents to vary across countries. First,
we interact our patent status variables with country income per capita (logged). As an alternative,
we interact patent status with World Bank income group definitions to examine differences between
different levels of development. We also include a specification in which we allow for the effect of
patents to vary by country, rather than by income group.
Finally, we distinguish between pre- and post-TRIPS patents. Instead of defining a dummy
variable for whether a drug is currently on patent, we define whether it is protected by only preTRIPS patents or has some patent protection under a country’s TRIPS regime. We again allow
this to vary by country income groups. This specification allows us to explore the effects of TRIPS
in particular, rather than patents generally.
We perform the analysis using the two definitions for “patented”: the existence of any patent
(product, process, etc.) and the existence of a product patent. While product patents have received
the most attention and were the most contentious legislative change, researchers and policymakers
have also focused on the use of follow-on patents to extend market exclusivity. The latter specifications provide some insight into whether such additional patents affect originator incentives to
launch and market their products.
We also estimate the equations above with the addition of a country fixed effect, δi . This
fixed-effect will absorb differences across countries in, for example, the efficiency of bureaucracies
in approving new drugs; policies on price controls and reimbursement; and enforcement. The
difference between pre- and post-TRIPS patents is therefore a comparison of two groups of products,
one treated by theoretically stronger protection, net of unobserved quality differences (which are
absorbed by drug fixed-effects).

3.2

Instrumental variables approach

A limitation of the above approach is that patent protection is the endogenous outcome of decisions
by two key players. First, the originator must apply for protection (if offered in a country), and

11

expectations about the state of future patent protection in a country, or effective enforcement, as
well as expected price and quantity will influence this decision. Second, the policymaker or patent
office must grant the patent. As discussed above, many countries did not offer patent protection,
or offered weaker forms of protection, prior to TRIPS.
In an alternative model, we define an indicator variable for whether a drug was eligible for
TRIPS-compliant patent protection in a particular country, i.e. TRIPS compliance occurred no
later than the priority date plus 30 months. Having a priority date within this window exogenously
shifts the incentive for originators to apply for a patent (because of stronger protection or enforcement) and the obligation of patent offices to grant pharmaceutical product patents. In addition,
patents have a predetermined maximum term. While other country policies may extend this, we
take the “normal” expiration date of the first patent on a drug within a country as exogenous, at
least at the level of a specific patent at the time of filing. These patent terms vary across countries
and over time, as laws were changed to comply with TRIPS. For example, in 1995, the maximum
term of patent protection in the US changed from 17 years from the grant date to 20 years from the
filing date. We use indicators for the priority date falling within the period of TRIPS eligibility and
for the current period falling within the standard patent term following the approach recommended
by Wooldridge (2010).
First, we estimate a reduced-form model of patent protection (which we will call “stage 0”):

P atentedDrugijt = ν0 + ν1 W ithinW indowij
+ ν2 W ithinT ermijt
+ Xijt κ + φj + ξijt ,
ˆ
We then calculate predicted values P atentedDrug
ijt , and use this and its interaction with other
variables as instruments in the second stage regressions of price and quantity:

Pijt = ρ0 + ρ1 P atentedDrugijt
+ ρ3 IncomeGroupi ∗ P atentedDrugijt
+ Xijt χ + φj + ijt ,

Qijt = γ0 + γ1 P atentedDrugijt
+ γ3 IncomeGroupi ∗ P atentedDrugijt
+ Xijt ω + φj + ijt ,

12

where P atentedDrugijt and IncomeGroupi ∗ P atentedDrugijt are instrumented using the predicted values from stage 0, the square of predicted values, and the interaction with income (GDP
per capita, logged). As above, we also estimate an alternative specification using World Bank
income groups rather than a continuous measure of income. Although the dependent variable in
stage 0 is discrete, we use OLS due to the large number of fixed-effects. This method is robust to
misspecification of stage 0, although the estimator is not efficient if the linear probability model we
use is not correct.
The main drawbacks to this approach are the following. Since we lack separate instruments for
pre- and post-TRIPS patents, we treat any patent protection as the endogenous treatment variable.
The omitted category, no patent protection, includes both drugs that were never patented and
those with expired patents. Treatment effects are likely to be heterogeneous if patent protection
has different effects across countries and/or drugs. Finally, we cannot implement an instrumental
variables estimator for the nonlinear model of launch.

4

Data

4.1

Market outcome data

Our data on key market outcomes of interest – the speed of launch, price, and units sold – comes
from the MIDAS dataset produced by IMS Health. We have quarterly data on prices and units
sold from 2000-2013 and on launch from 1990-2013, a time period that allows us to examine several
years pre- and post-TRIPS implementation for many developing countries. The original data is
provided at the package level, i.e. bottles of 30 10mg tablets. For drugs sold in multiple packages
and presentations, we aggregate the revenues and number of “standard units” (smallest dose) up to
the level of a molecule or combination. Although there is some price discrimination across packages
within a country, this aggregation facilitates comparisons across countries. Each drug is assigned
to a therapeutic class (at the ATC3 level); for drugs with sales in multiple classes, we use the class
with the highest level of sales as its primary disease market.
The IMS data includes a total of 33,240 unique molecules or combinations of molecules, many
of which are quite old. We exclude diagnostic agents (ATC class T) and drugs that cannot be easily
assigned to a disease (ATC class V). We focus on drugs first launched anywhere in the world after
1990, since it is this set for which TRIPS is most relevant. Drugs that are unique to one country, a
set that includes many homeopathic products in India and China, are dropped from our analysis.
Finally, we restrict our sample to drugs that we could match to patent information. This leaves us
with a total of 716 drugs.
For each molecule-country pair, we observe launch date, the total sales in nominal local currency,
and the number of units sold. We convert nominal sales to real values using the country’s GDP

13

deflator. We calculate price as total sales divided by the total number of standard units sold.8
Thus, within-country price changes do not reflect exchange rate fluctuations or inflation. For crosscountry comparisons, we express prices in constant US dollars using the average exchange rate for
2013Q4.
We keep one observation per country and quarter for each drug starting from its initial launch.
A drug is considered launched in a country once positive sales are observed; prior to its launch
in a country but following its first launch elsewhere, launch is coded as zero and price and sales
are coded as missing. Ultimately, this dataset includes 56 quarters, 60 countries, and 716 unique
molecules, amounting to 1459993 molecule-country-quarter observations.

4.2

Firm-level data

We distinguish between originators, or firms that invest in the development of a new drug, and
generic firms. Originators generally own patent rights on the molecule or a license to those rights.
Many drugs are developed and/or marketed under license by multiple firms. For example, several
firms could collaborate in the development, with one firm responsible for marketing the drug globally, or one firm might develop the drug and license it out to other firms for marketing in North
America, Europe, etc. We use two approaches to identify these firms. First, the MIDAS dataset
includes some information on the licensing status of each firm generating sales of a molecule in
a country. If the licensing status is available and listed as either “original brand” or “licensed
brand”, we treat the observation as an originator sale, since the originator receives some payment
for the sale of a licensed brand or at least authorized its sale. For the remaining cases, we use
the R&D Focus database provided by IMS Health, which tracks drug development projects and
includes information on the drug, its intended uses, and the firms participating in its development
or marketing. We designate any firm listed as a co-developer or licensee on a drug project that is
also selling the product in one of our sample countries as an originator. All other sellers of that
drug are coded as generic firms or parallel importers.9

4.3

Country-level data

Summary information for the countries in our sample, including the dates of TRIPS deadlines,
World Bank income group definitions in 2000 and 2013, and region, is provided in Table 1. Our
sample includes the major emerging markets of Brazil, Russia, India, and China, as well as Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and South Africa. Thirty of our sample countries had TRIPS compliance
dates in 2000 or later (see Table 1). Many countries had adopted pharmaceutical product patent
8

Some observations have negative values for sales, which reflect the return of products to the manufacturer. We
set price to missing in these cases.
9
Parallel importers sell the originator’s own products in a country, but without a license. Parallel trade is
widespread within the European Union and is thought to be important in some developing countries. We are only
able to identify parallel traders within Europe, however.

14

legislation prior to their official compliance deadlines. Quite a few rose in income classification
between 2000 and 2013. In our analysis, we use the income classification as of 2000. Results are
similar using the 2013 definition, although we have fewer countries in the lowest income group.
Our main focus in this paper is the effect of IPRs on the outcomes in country-markets, so it
is critical that we correctly measure the existence or strength of IPRs at the country-level over
time. There are a number of possible candidates. The first is the Ginarte-Park index of IPRs
and enforcement (Ginarte & Park (1997)). This measure has the advantage of including a specific
index of patent protection for chemicals. It is only available at 5-year intervals, however, and is
not available for every country in our sample. We complement this with information collected by
LaCroix & Liu (2014) and Hamdan-Livramento (2009). We thank these authors for their willingness
to share their datasets.
An additional form of protection available in many countries is called data exclusivity. During
the period of data exclusivity, only the owner of the data may use it to obtain regulatory approval
for marketing a drug. This varies across countries and over time. Based on country i’s data
exclusivity term at time t, we define a dummy variable equal to one if drug j was likely to be
protected by data exclusivity.
To control for the impact of economic development or income level, we use the World Development Index (WDI) dataset from the World Bank. It includes GDP per capita, population, the
Gini coefficient of income inequality, health expenditures per capita, life expectancy, out-of-pocket
health expenditures, poverty rates, and GDP deflators across the sampled countries. To retain as
much of our sample as possible, we include only the subset of WDI indicators with very complete
coverage. Our source of information on quarterly exchange rates between the local currency and
the US dollar is the Pacific Exchange Rate Service for most countries, and individual central banks
otherwise.

4.4

Disease data

We define a market as a country-disease pair. Regulatory approval is required at the country level
in order to market a drug, and gaining regulatory approval in one country does not generally allow
a firm to access other countries.10 In addition, demand for a drug that treats a particular disease
is generally limited to the population affected by that disease. For example, we would not expect
demand for a colon cancer drug to be very high among those who do not have colon cancer. Since
the burden of disease (or demand) can change over time for any number of reasons (aging of the
population, spread of infectious diseases, changes in risky behaviors, etc.), our ideal measure would
capture such changes.
10

Within the European Union, a firm can use a centralized approval process handled by the European Medicines
Agency to win approval among all member states. Alternatively, a firm can apply for regulatory approval in one
member state and use this member state as a reference for approval in other EU countries. However, in order to have
the product reimbursed, the firm must negotiate with different (country specific) regulators over the price.

15

One approach, used by Danzon et al. (2005) among others, is the lag of total sales in each therapeutic class-country. A disadvantage of this measure is that it reflects demand for older products,
rather than potential market size. This is especially problematic where previous treatments were
unavailable or inadequate: the sales of HIV treatments in 1990 would be a massive underestimate of
the potential market size. A new drug that represents a major therapeutic advance would expect
to sell to the previously untreated population. In addition, historical sales of unpatented drugs
with aggressive price competition may not be an accurate forecast of the potential market for a
new treatment with patent protection.
The second measure is the number of deaths due to a disease from the WHO’s mortality
data, which has the advantage of covering most countries at annual intervals. This measure of
disease burden has several limitations, however. Coverage of poorer countries is incomplete, and
likely to include significant measurement error; the WHO cautions against making cross-country
comparisons since there are differences in how deaths are recorded across countries. In addition,
mortality is not the preferred measure of disease burden. For example, hypertension or diabetes
might increase the probability of death, but may not be recorded as the direct causes of death.
The mortality measure tends to underestimate the true burden of many chronic diseases that take
a long time to kill, but that take a toll during the affected person’s lifetime.
A third measure of disease burden is known as “disability-adjusted life years,” or DALYs. This
measure is also available from the WHO, but only for a single cross-section of countries in 2004. For
diseases with considerable variation over time, such as HIV, this will again introduce measurement
error. However, it is considered more appropriate for cross-country comparisons than mortality. We
matched each drug’s ATC classification to its DALY code, using fairly aggregate disease definitions
(e.g., infectious and parasitic diseases are matched to ATC codes J and P).11
Finally, we can allow for each country to have a specific disease effect by including country-ATC
fixed-effects. This avoids any issues in matching ATC codes to disease-level information from other
sources. However, it does require us to assume that the relative importance of diseases within a
country is stable during our study period, and increases the number of parameters substantially.
We estimate these models as a robustness check, but focus on more parsimonious specifications.

4.5

Patent data

Information on patents comes from IMS R&D Focus and Patent Focus, which we match to the
MIDAS data described above using the generic or chemical name. Of the 2,369 drugs that R&D
Focus identifies as launched after 1990, we were able to identify patents for 716. The unmatched
drugs are usually new versions or combinations of old molecules, for which originators rely on
country-specific data exclusivity protection in lieu of patents. The two data sources do not use
common identifiers. Where possible, we matched on chemical or molecule names. For vaccines and
11

see http://www.who.int/entity/healthinfo/statistics/gbdestimatescauselist.pdf

16

patents on drug delivery technologies, and for patents identified only by the name of the branded
product, additional work is required to find the corresponding product in the other dataset.
There are a number of complications in using pharmaceutical patent data. Linking patents
to marketed drugs is a many-to-many match. Most molecules have multiple associated patents,
covering the molecule itself, a use of the molecule, manufacturing processes, etc. In addition, a single
patent may protect multiple drugs. For example, the HIV treatment markted as EPZICOM in the
United States is a combination of abacavir (sold under the brand name ZIAGEN) and lamivudine
(sold as EPIVIR). Patents protecting one of the individual molecules may block entry into the
combination product, and there is also a patent on the combination. A process patent for the
preparation of optically active cis-nucleosides that specifically mentions abacavir and lamivudine
could protect each of the single-molecule products. Despite a move towards harmonization of IP
laws, the same molecule might be eligible for a different number of patents in different countries,
or different breadth of coverage.
When a molecule is protected by multiple patents, it is not always straightforward to determine
which patent is most important for blocking competition; this is true not only for the econometrician, but also for patent attorneys and the managers of pharmaceutical firms. Generic competition
may legally occur despite the existence of a patent on a molecule, because the patent covers a manufacturing process that generics have worked around, or because the originator has authorized a
generic. In some countries, generic competition may also occur because no patent exists, or because
patents are not enforced. We use two different measures of patent protection in the empirical analysis: the existence of an active patent (post-grant date and pre-expiration date) and the existence
of an active product patent, which is considered the most difficult to invent around.
We use the first application date for any patent associated with a molecule across all countries
as an approximation of its priority date.12 Originators generally must apply for protection in other
countries within 12-30 months of the priority date. Under the Paris Convention, inventors have 12
months to apply in other countries. Under the Patent Cooperation Treaty, inventors may take an
additional 18 months, for a total of 30. We account for each country’s status as a signatory to the
PCT in variable definitions. Because of the lengthy period of clinical trials, the priority date of the
first patent is usually at least 5 years before the launch date of a new drug.
We observe patenting activity in many countries prior to their required compliance with the
TRIPS Agreement. Some complied early, and most maintained a pre-TRIPS patent system that
provided weaker protection than TRIPS required. In addition, the legal availability of patents may
not always lead to the use of patents. If a market is very small or cannot support prices that allow
the firm to recover variable costs and the fixed costs of launch, then a firm may not bother to
apply for a local patent. Similarly, we may not observe patent applications when a firm expects
12

The filing date and priority date can be different, particularly when a patent application is derived from a parent
application. We do our best to deal with this by selecting the earliest filing date for all patents associated with a
molecule.

17

lax enforcement of the patent or a negative decision from the patent office.
We define a drug j as “on patent” in country i in quarter t if quarter t follows the earliest grant
date of any patent on j in i and if quarter t precedes the last expiration date of any patent granted
on j in i. Pre-TRIPS, the patent term varied by country. Post-TRIPS, patents have a duration of
20 years from the date of application. In some countries, drugs may be protected by “supplementary
protection certificates” or patent term extensions that allow years of market exclusivity. We adjust
our definition of “on patent” for patent extensions, lapsed patents, and invalidated patents. For
the specifications that focus on product patents, we use analogous definitions but exclude process,
composition, and other types of patents.

4.6

Summary of data

The distribution of broad disease areas for the molecules in our regression sample is listed in Table
2. Cancer, cardiovascular treatments, and anti-infectives have the highest number of molecules.
The list of countries included, along with their required TRIPS compliance dates and dates of
pharmaceutical product patent legislation, is contained in Table A of the appendix. For ease of
explication, we combine the three low income countries (India, Indonesia and Pakistan) with the
lower middle income group in the discussion and analysis that follows. All three were considered
lower middle income by 2013.
There is wide variation across countries in the fraction of drugs with product patents. For
example, there are very few with product patents in the United Arab Emirates and the Dominican
Republic, but more than 70% of the drugs launched since 1990 in the United States had a product
patent. Even among high income countries, some introduced product patent legislation relatively
late (such as Norway, Spain, and Estonia) and have a lower share of drugs with product patents.
Those without product patents in the US are generally older drugs for which a new use has been
discovered, or combinations of drugs that may not always qualify for product patents. The share of
products for which originators beat generics to market also varies substantially. The originator is
first more than 80% of the time in most countries. However, India is a clear exception: originators
are first in fewer than 20% of the opportunities (see Table A). In some South American and
Middle Eastern countries, generic firms precede originators in a significant number of cases. Some
of these countries only recently implemented product patents, but others may have weak patent
enforcement. Overall, the pattern of launch suggests that generic firms often rely on local entry by
originators, perhaps because obtaining regulatory approval is easier once the originator has provided
clinical data or because originators invest in advertising that generic firms can benefit from. It also
underscores the importance of patents in India compared with other developing countries. The
impact of introducing patent protection is likely to be larger in India than anywhere else, and may
have consequences for the supply of generic drugs to countries where IPRs do not block entry.
Table 3 presents simple means of several key variables by income group and patent status. Not

18

surprisingly, the fraction of product launched is generally increasing in country income, with 55%
of eligible treatments available at some point during 1990-2013 in high income OECD countries,
but only 35% for lower middle income/low income countries. Launch by originators is faster in
high income countries, and originators are quicker to markets than generics in every income group.
However, generic entry is more likely in the upper and lower middle income groups, and occurs
slightly earlier than in high income countries on average.13 The existence of a product patent
implies faster originator entry (a median of 1.5 versus 3.51 years). More surprisingly, generic entry
is slow whether a product patent exists or not, though somewhat more likely when no product
patent exists. However, originators are still first in more than three-quarters of the cases. This
suggests that product patents are not the only important barrier to entry in most countries. Figure
1 shows the distribution of the number of producers over drug-country-quarter observations by
patent status; results using the presence of any patent are similar. The presence of a product
patent mostly affects whether any producer is active. That is, there is a shift from no producers
to a monopoly; the shift from more competitive markets to a monopoly is not evident. Of course,
originators are more likely to seek patents where they expect to earn positive profits. These simple
summary statistics suggest that if originators do not expect profits, generic firms may not either.
Trends in patenting and launch activity are shown in Table 4. There is a clear increase in
patenting over time (subject to truncation issues for recently introduced drugs, for which secondary
patents may continue to be granted). Launch lags remain significant: while drugs first launched
since 1995 appear to be reaching more countries than those pre-1995, those first launched since
2005 have not yet reached half the countries in our sample.
Summary statistics for variables used in the regression analysis are presented in Tables 5 and
6. Table 5 contains the sample used for the launch regression, which runs from 1990-2013; only
observations up to and including the quarter of launch are included for this analysis. Table 6
corresponds to the sample used for the price and quantity regressions, for which data is available
from 2000-2013. Only observations post-launch are included.

5
5.1

Results
Main effects

In all the tables of estimation results that follow, standard errors are clustered by country. Year
fixed-effects are included in all specifications, drug fixed-effects are included in the price and quantity regressions, and therapeutic-class fixed-effects are included in the launch regressions. Because
our price measure is the price per “standard unit,” which varies across drugs,14 it is essential that
we include a drug fixed-effect. This inclusion is also important if patents are more likely to be
13
The different outcomes observed in the high income non-OECD category likely reflect the small number of
countries (Kuwait, Singapore, Slovenia and the United Arab Emirates) with high income inequality.
14
Ideally, we would use the price per standard course of treatment, but this is not available.

19

granted on novel drugs and novelty is positively correlated with a drug’s quality or effectiveness, or
if originators are more likely to seek protection on high quality drugs (though quality is generally
difficult to assess when the first patent applications are filed).
Market size is approximated by country level variables such as the disease burden associated
with each drug’s primary therapeutic class, population, GDP per capita and life expectancy. Information on national health policies such as the existence of an essential medicines list, use of price
controls, average out-of-pocket expenditures, etc. is available for a subset of countries, and the
effect of many of these (endogenous) policies on access is, of course, also of great interest. However, incorporating this information would reduce the sample of countries considerably. Because
we observe few changes for these policies over time within countries, we instead include a country
fixed-effect in some specifications. Other control variables include the number of substitute drugs
sold locally and the number of products marketed by the originator in country j (both lagged one
period). Finally, a lagged price index that tracks changes in the price of other (older) drugs in
the same ATC3 therapeutic class is included. Our discussion below focuses only on the variables
related to intellectual property.
Tables 7 and 8 present the results of the simplest specifications we estimate. We exclude country
fixed-effects, and focus only on how the existence of a patent affects launch, price and quantity sold.
We distinguish between cases where no patent ever existed (the excluded category), where a drug
had some patent protection that has expired, and where a drug is currently protected by a product
patent (Table 7) or any patent (Table 8). On-patent products are most likely to be launched and to
sell in higher quantities, but also command the highest prices. Products with expired patents sell in
lower quantities and at lower prices than those that are on patent, but higher prices and quantities
relative to those that were never protected. The latter likely reflects the greater availability of
patent protection in richer countries and the greater incentives to seek patents in those markets.
Tables 9 and 10 include country fixed-effects. These absorb time-invariant differences in regulatory barriers, the structure of retail and hospital pharmacy distribution, price controls, and other
factors. While the results for product launch are very similar, we find much smaller coefficients
on patent status in the price and quantity regressions. This is not very surprising, since richer
countries generally granted patents earlier than poorer countries and incentives to patent in rich
countries are also probably higher. The price variation associated with patents appears to be driven
mostly by cross-country variation.

5.2

Effects by country income

We next explore whether the importance of patents varies by country income. Demand for pharmaceuticals in rich countries tends to be somewhat inelastic, especially when patients have insurance
coverage. In contrast, the average patient in a poorer country may be unable to pay high out-ofpocket prices or to afford insurance, limiting the ability of originators to exercise any market power

20

provided by patents. We would therefore expect prices to be lower overall in poorer countries, and
for the patent premium to be smaller there. That said, there are reasons to expect deviations from
this pricing pattern. If firms are unable to price discriminate across patients of different income
levels within a country, they may choose to set a high price and sell only to the richest segment in
lower income countries. Governments in rich countries may act as monopsony purchasers or have
greater bargaining power in negotiating prices with pharmaceutical firms than poorer countries.
Both factors suggest that prices may be relatively high in poorer countries, with lower quantities
sold.
Results from regression specifications that interact patent status with logged GDP per capita
are presented in Tables 11 and 12. We find the most striking differences for launch. Drugs that
are never patented are unlikely to be marketed, regardless of income. Launch of on-patent drugs is
increasing in income, but the opposite is true for drugs with expired patents. In other words, poor
countries are more likely to receive older drugs (meaning they could be sold either by originators or
by generic firms, although we showed earlier that originators are more likely to be first); firms are
less likely to introduce drugs with expired patents in rich countries. Clearly, selection is important.
Drugs that prove unsuccessful in their initial launch markets may never be sold globally. The results
for price also suggest that patents are indeed worth more in richer markets, although differences
between never patented, expired patent and on-patent products are not statistically significant.
That is, differential pricing across countries is not markedly different for on-patent drugs, which is
somewhat surprising. If markets were perfectly competitive in the absence of a patent barrier, we
would expect price to fall to marginal cost and to vary little across countries. In fact, we observe
large price differences across countries regardless of patent status. In the case of quantity, the
estimated difference across patent status is an imprecisely estimated zero. Results using World
Bank income group classifications, shown in Tables 13 and 14, are very similar.
Next, we explore whether TRIPS changed the value of patents. In Tables 15 and 16, we allow
the effect of patents to vary by income group and distinguish between patents granted pre-TRIPS
or post-TRIPS. As described earlier, the same drug can have pre-TRIPS and post-TRIPS patent
status in two different countries, depending on when each complied with TRIPS. Within a country,
we argue that the set of drugs with post-TRIPS patents is also (mostly) exogenously determined
by priority dates and TRIPS deadlines. Figures 2, 3 and 4 provide a graphical summary. Overall,
drugs are more likely to be launched if they have post-TRIPS patents, as well as to sell in higher
quantities. The most surprising result is that the price of such drugs is lower than pre-TRIPS
patented products, on average, in the poorest category of countries.
We interpret these results with caution, since they are driven by a small number of drugs. Most
low and lower middle income countries faced TRIPS compliance deadlines of 2005. Because of
the lengthy drug development cycle, very few drugs first patented after 2005 have been brought to
market by 2013, when our sample ends. Identifying differences is difficult once drug fixed effects are

21

included, and our estimates are noisy. However, the general pattern that emerges is that prices have
not significantly increased post-TRIPS, and quantities have not significantly declined, in relatively
poor countries. We discuss possible explanations in section 5.4. In addition, while we include
drug fixed-effects to control for the quality of a molecule, it is also possible that quality varies
between manufacturers of the same molecule. In recent studies of the quality of drugs available in
pharmacies in the developing world, Bate et al. (2014a) and Bate et al. (2014b) present evidence
of significant quality differences between manufacturers and countries. They find that innovator
products tend to be of higher quality. Thus, higher prices on innovator products may signal quality
in markets where less stringent regulation exists. In the absence of generic competitors, originators
may have less reason to signal quality through price.

5.3

Results using instrumental variables

Our final analysis adopts a different approach to identifying the effect of patent protection. Rather
than grouping products by whether they have pre- or post-TRIPS patents, we use a country’s
compliance with TRIPS as an exogenous shifter for the incentives of firms to seek patents and for
a country to grant them. We can also exploit the exogenously determined (at the time of patent
application) statutory patent term, which should be correlated with patent status but have no
effect on price or quantity except through patent status. The statutory limit should be unrelated
to quality, unlike patent term extensions or other regulatory provisions for market exclusivity. It
should also be unrelated to endogenous challenges (which are more likely for expensive or important
drugs) to a patent’s validity. The statutory patent term is specified by law as years since application
or years since grant. Since the decision to apply (and possibly to grant) is endogenous, we instead
base this definition on the priority date plus 12 or 30 months, depending on a country’s status as a
signatory to the Patent Convention Treaty. As noted above, we focus only on the linear price and
quantity equations, and on a simplified measure of patent status.
Table 17 contains the estimation details for patent status (“stage 0”) and the first stage IV
regressions, where we define “patented” as having any patent protection. In stage 0, we estimate a linear model for patent status using all explanatory variables (including year, country and
drug fixed-effects) plus indicators for whether the priority date fell within the window of TRIPS
compliance and for whether the period is within the statutory term of patent protection. The
latter are both highly significant and economically meaningful. We then generate predicted val\
ues (P atentedDrug)
for patent status, and use these, their square, and their interactions with
income groups as instruments for patent status in the price and quantity regressions. Standard
tests indicate that these instruments are valid.
Table 18 contains the results of IV estimation of price and quantity, with OLS included for
comparison. While the OLS estimates indicate only small differences in price or quantity associated
with patents, the IV estimates point to a much larger effect. The price premium associated with

22

patent protection is large and significant for all income groups except the poorest. This makes
intuitive sense: while patents provide some market power, its exercise (through setting high prices)
is likely to be limited where purchasing power is very low. In rich countries, patents allow the use
of much higher markups. The IV estimates also suggest more use of differential pricing for patented
drugs than do the OLS. Patented drugs sell in higher quantities in most income groups.
The IV estimates rely on the variation explained by the exogenous option of post-TRIPS protection and pre-determined statutory patent terms, and provide the local average treatment effect
of patents for the subset of cases where this variation changed patent status. The estimated local
average treatment effect of patent status for these products may not be representative for all drugs.

5.4

Discussion

Most of the debate about patented drugs is focused on price, with concerns that patients in poor
countries are unable to afford them. We expected patents to be associated with increased prices, if
patent holders are able to exploit their market power. In general, this is what we find, and concerns
about the effect of IPRs on affordability are certainly valid. However, there are two reasons to be
somewhat optimistic about the effects of patents in developing countries. The price premium
associated with patents is close to zero, on average, in the lower-middle income countries in our
sample. This is true whether we rely on OLS or on IV specifications. These results obscure the
changes specific to the implementation of the TRIPS Agreement in developing countries, however.
In fact, we find that TRIPS has actually been associated with a smaller price difference attributable
to patent protection in the poorest countries in our sample. Pre-TRIPS patented drugs are relatively
more expensive there. The price premium associated with patents is highest in rich countries, and
our estimates of this premium are higher when we control for the endogeneity of patent protection.
Two other measures of access receive less attention, but are worthy of discussion. Most of our
specifications find little difference in the quantities sold associated with patent status, although the
IV estimates show a more worrisome picture in poor countries. Drugs with post-TRIPS patents
have higher sales than those without such protection, however. This suggests that originators invest
in efforts to shift out demand when IPRs protect them from generic competition. Since advertising
and investments in educating patients or health care practitioners would generally spill over to
competitors, it makes sense that originators underinvest in them when facing generic imitation.
We did not have a clear prediction for the effect of patents on launch, but we find across all
specifications that launch of new products is faster in the presence of patents. As was evident from
the summary statistics, patents are not the only barrier to generic entry in practice: even when
patents do not exist, generics may not enter, and they rarely enter first in most markets.
Cockburn et al. (2014), in a study of country-level patent policy and launch incentives in an
earlier period than that covered here, also emphasize the importance of IPRs and access. They
found interesting differences for countries that offered only short process patents versus those with

23

long product patents, but TRIPS has eliminated these cross-country differences. Other authors who
have conducted a recent analysis of the pharmaceutical market in one important developing country,
India, find only a small increase in price post-TRIPS (Duggan et al. (2014)) and note the substantial
launch delays associated with weak patent protection (Berndt & Cockburn (2014)). Our results
are broadly consistent with these recent contributions. However, all of these papers use market
data from IMS Health, which does not necessarily cover all distribution channels, particularly in
developing countries. We believe it is the best available source for a multi-country study of a large
cross-section of products. Studies that use alternative sources or that focus on a specific disease
area, particularly those in which NGOs are active in distribution and not sampled by IMS, may
yield different results. Chaudhuri et al. (2006) is one such example, and identifying cases where
patents have had more negative consequences is important for adjusting policy.
In our description of the TRIPS Agreement, we noted several exceptions that developing countries negotiated. These include the right to use price controls and the right to issue compulsory
licenses (both of which have also been invoked by rich countries). One explanation for the observed post-TRIPS reduction in price in lower middle income and low income countries is that
these countries exercised more stringent price controls on pharmaceuticals at the same time they
introduced stronger patents. India established a panel to examine regulating the price of patented
medicines in 2007, shortly after its TRIPS compliance deadline in 2005. Originators may still expect higher profits with price controls if they are not sharing the market with generic imitators, so
launch would be more attractive. We find some evidence for this. So far, the use of compulsory
licensing has been limited. Beall & Kuhn (2012) identified only 34 potential compulsory licenses
in 26 countries by 2011. Of course, originators may have started to reduce prices post-TRIPS or
to use voluntary licensing in order to make compulsory licensing less attractive to governments, or
perhaps due to increased attention to corporate social responsibility. For example, to encourage innovators to increase the availability of their products in developing countries, accesstomedicines.org
produces an annual index of pharmaceutical firms based on their pricing, licensing, R&D investments, and other dimensions. Merck and GlaxoSmithKline announced a large price cut on their
cervical cancer vaccines for developing countries in May 2013. Gilead, the producer of the hepatitis
C treatment SOVALDI, recently issued voluntary licenses for manufacturers selling in low-income
markets. Patent challenges, or attempts to invalidate pharmaceutical patents, may also play a
role. Such challenges exist in both developed countries (indeed, the Hatch-Waxman Act in the US
provides clear incentives for such challenges) and increasingly in developing countries as well. In
addition, countries vary in the definition of the inventive step required to patent an innovation.
Sampat et al. (2012) describe the case of India, whose Patent Act does not allow patents on variants of existing pharmaceuticals without proof of increased effectiveness. Garrison (2006) provides
a detailed description of other exceptions used by developing countries to limit scope of patent
protection.

24

The countervailing responses just described are most likely to affect important drugs: those
that treat serious diseases with a high local burden. That is, price controls and compulsory licenses
are more relevant for HIV or hepatitis treatments than for acne, restless leg syndrome, or erectile
dysfunction. We include one final set of specifications that includes country fixed-effects, and allows
the effect of patent status to vary by disease burden within a country. These results are presented
graphically in Figures 7, 8 and 9. For launch, we find that post-TRIPS patents have been most
important for diseases with lower disease burdens. When disease burden is high, our results indicate
that drugs with post-TRIPS patents have lower prices (and higher quantities) than with pre-TRIPS
patents, and the opposite is true for drugs treating diseases with a lower burden. The results are
also consistent with the idea (also noted by Berndt & Cockburn (2014)) that these policies make
product launch less attractive, as we observe a smaller bump in launch for post-TRIPS patents when
disease burden is greatest. However, these differences are statistically insignificant, and therefore
only suggestive.
There are alternative explanations for a change in prices unrelated to non-IP policy shifts
or political pressures. First, if originators are more willing to launch new products when they are
protected by IPRs, the set of products available in a market will expand. This larger set of products
may include those for which patents shifted the expected quantity sold by the innovator more than
the price commanded (especially in relatively poor countries, where demand may be more elastic).
In other words, the adoption of patents may have encouraged the launch of products with lower
prices, for which innovators could not cover the fixed costs of launch without the assurance of 100%
market share. Another explanation is related to the form of competition in developing markets.
While generic products in developed countries are usually considered (nearly) perfect substitutes for
the original product, emerging markets often see competition between “branded” generics, where
real or perceived quality may vary across firms. In these environments, firms may incur some costs
to develop and protect their brand names, or use price to signal quality. It is possible that by
allocating the entire market to the originator, TRIPS-related IPRs have eliminated the need to
differentiate from other producers of the same molecule; lower costs allow lower prices.
Whether the price changes are voluntary responses by firms or result directly from other policy
instruments, our estimates reflect the “net” effect of TRIPS rather than the effect of IPRs alone,
and there may be substantial heterogeneity in the outcomes across countries. However, the results
suggest that these exemptions largely offset the negative impact of stronger IPRs, conditional on
product launch. They may come at some cost: while Kyle & McGahan (2012) find that IPRs in
developing countries have not greatly shifted drug development incentives, the use of price controls
in relatively rich markets is associated with launch delays (Kyle (2007)).

25

6

Conclusion

Our results suggest several points about the relationship between IPRs and access. First, the
existence of IPRs is neither necessary nor sufficient for the launch of pharmaceutical innovations at
the country level. That is, the existence of patents on a molecule in a country does not always block
generic imitation, nor does the lack of patents always deter an originator from making a product
available. This suggests substantial heterogeneity in the value of IPRs, both across countries and
across drugs. IPRs that are not enforced are worth very little. IPRs on molecules with very high
imitation costs or low potential for profit in a country are also not particularly important. While
patented products generally command higher prices, we find that the price premium for patent
products is smaller following TRIPS compliance. This may reflect the greater use of pharmaceutical
price controls, bargaining power of government purchasers or the threat of compulsory licensing
in order to offset some of the market power granted by IPRs. Post-TRIPS patented drugs enjoy
higher sales. Finally, IPRs have a very large bearing on product launch. Thus, while the potential
for patents to limit access is often emphasized in policy discussions, it appears that IPRs – by
creating increased incentives for marketing efforts by originators – may increase the availability of
new treatments to populations in developing countries.
The TRIPS Agreement, which generally strengthened and harmonized IPRs across countries,
does appear to have changed market outcomes. On average, access to new pharmaceuticals has at
least not decreased following TRIPS. Point estimates show an increase in the probability of new
product launch and quantities sold, although differences are not always statistically significant.
While patents are also associated with higher prices, there is some evidence that prices in poorer
countries have fallen, though not to the level of off-patent products. However, the effect of IPRs may
be confounded by other policy changes. It is certainly possible that in the absence of countervailing
policies, stronger IPRs would have resulted in a larger increase in prices. It is also likely that IPRs
have very different implications for countries with a large generic sector (e.g., India) than for most
of the developing countries we examine. Nevertheless, we believe the results should be considered
relatively good news about the relationship between IPRs and access to innovative medicines,
although considerable work remains to improve the latter.

References
Arora, A., Branstetter, L., & Chatterjee, C. (2008). Strong Medicine: Patent Reform and the
Emergence of a Research-Driven Pharmaceutical Industry in India.
Bate, R., Jin, G. Z., & Mathur, A. (2014a). Falsified or substandard? assessing price and non-price
signals of drug quality. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, forthcoming.

26

Bate, R., Jin, G. Z., Mathur, A., & Attaran, A. (2014b). Poor drug quality and global trade: A
pilot study. NBER Working Paper 20469 .
Beall, R., & Kuhn, R. (2012). Trends in Compulsory Licensing of Pharmaceuticals Since the Doha
Declaration: A Database Analysis. PLoS Medicine, 9 (1), e1001154.
Berndt, E. R., Blalock, N., & Cockburn, I. M. (2011). Diffusion of new drugs in the post-trips era.
International Journal of the Economics of Business, 18 (2), 203–224.
Berndt, E. R., & Cockburn, I. M. (2014). The hidden cost of low prices: Limited access to new
drugs in india. Health Affairs, 33 (9), 1567–1575.
Boldrin, M., & Levine, D. (2002). The Case Against Intellectual Property. American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 92 , 209–212.
Borrell, J.-R. (2005). Patents and the faster introduction of new drugs in developing countries.
Applied Economics Letters, 12 (2), 379–382.
Chaudhuri, S., Goldberg, P., & Jia, P. (2006). Estimating the Effects of Global Patent Protection
in Pharmaceuticals: A Case Study of Quinilones in India. American Economic Review , 96 (5),
1477–1513.
Cockburn, I., Lanjouw, J., & Schankerman, M. (2014). Global diffusion of new drugs: The role of
patent policy, price controls and institutions. NBER Working Paper 20492 .
Cohen, W., Nelson, R., & Walsh, J. (2000). Protecting their Intellectual Assets: Appropriability
Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not). NBER Working Paper 7552 .
Danzon, P. M., & Epstein, A. (2008). Effects of Regulation on Drug Launch and Pricing in
Interdependent Markets. NBER Working Paper 14041 .
Danzon, P. M., Wang, R., & Wang, L. (2005). The Impact of Price Regulation on the Launch Delay
of New Drugs – Evidence from Twenty-five Major Markets in the 1990s. Health Economics, 14 ,
269–292.
Duggan, M., Garthwaite, C., & Goyal, A. (2014). The market impacts of pharmaceutical product
patents in developing countries: Evidence from India. NBER Working Paper 20548 .
Garrison, C. (2006). Exceptions to Patent Rights in Developing Countries. Tech. rep., International
Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development.
Ginarte, J., & Park, W. (1997). Determinants of Patent Rights: A Cross-National Study. Research
Policy, 26 (3), 283–301.

27

Hamdan-Livramento, I. (2009). How compliant are developing countries with their TRIPS obligations? CEMI Working Paper 2009-001.
Kyle, M. (2006). The role of firm characteristics in pharmaceutical product launches. RAND
Journal of Economics, 37 (3), 602–618.
Kyle, M. (2007). Pharmaceutical price controls and entry strategies. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 89 (1), 88–99.
Kyle, M., & McGahan, A. (2012). Investments in pharmaceuticals before and after TRIPS. Review
of Economics and Statistics, 94 (4), 1157–1172.
LaCroix, S., & Liu, M. (2008). Patents and Access to Essential Medicines , chap. 13, (pp. 423–464).
Frontiers of Economics and Globalization. Elsevier.
LaCroix, S., & Liu, M. (2014). The impact of stronger property rights in pharmaceuticals on
innovation in developed and developing countries.
Lanjouw, J. (2005). Patents, price controls and access to new drugs: How policy affects global
market entry. NBER Working Paper 11321 .
Lanjouw, J., & Cockburn, I. (2001). Do patents matter? Empirical evidence after GATT. NBER
Working Paper 7495 .
Qian, Y. (2007). Do Additional National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation in an International Patenting Environment? Review of Economics and Statistics, 89 (3), 436–453.
Sampat, B. N., Shadlen, K. C., & Amin, T. M. (2012). Challenges to India’s Pharmaceutical Patent
Laws. Science, 337 , 414–415.
Scott Morton, F., & Kyle, M. (2012). Markets for Pharmaceutical Products. In M. V. Pauly, T. G.
Mcguire, & P. P. Barros (Eds.) Handbook of Health Economics, vol. 2, chap. 12, (pp. 763–823).
Elsevier.
Waning, B., Diedrichsen, E., & Moon, S. (2010). A lifeline to treatment: the role of Indian
generic manufacturers in supplying antiretroviral medicines to developing countries. Journal of
the International AIDS Society, 13 (35).
Wooldridge, J. (2010). Econometric Analysis of Cross-section and Panel Data. MIT Press, 2nd ed.

28

Table 1: Distribution of country characteristics
Year of TRIPS compliance deadline N
1995
25
1996
1
1999
1
2000
16
2001
2
2005
12
2012
1
Total
58
Income group (2000)
N
High OECD
20
High nonOECD
4
Upper middle
17
Lower middle
16
Low income
3
Total
60
WDI geographic region
N
East Asia & Pacific
10
Europe & Central Asia
27
Latin America & Caribbean
9
Middle East & North Africa
9
North America
2
South Asia
2
Sub-Saharan Africa
1
Total
60
Table 2: Distribution of molecules
Disease
Infectious and parasitic
Respiratory
Nutritional deficiencies
Neoplasms
Diabetes
Endocrine
Neuropsychotic
Sense organ
Cardiovascular
Digestive
Genitourinary
Skin
Musculoskeletal
Oral
Total

29

across diseases
N
102
49
3
116
36
11
92
10
136
44
41
36
39
1
716

Table 3: Access and price by income group and patent status
Launch
Originator
Orig. launch Any generic
(mean)
1st (mean)
(median yrs) (mean)
High OECD
0.55
0.86
1.50
0.28
High nonOECD
0.40
0.82
2.75
0.25
Upper middle
0.44
0.79
2.76
0.39
Lower middle
0.35
0.69
3.75
0.49
Never patented
0.31
0.73
3.51
0.43
Ever patented
0.59
0.84
1.75
0.32
Ever product patent 0.60
0.84
1.50
0.31
Total
0.45
0.80
2.25
0.36

Table 4: Patenting and launch activity over time
Mean number
Patent countries Launch countries
First global launch
1990-1994
14.00
22.30
1995-1999
20.33
31.08
2000-2004
31.00
29.43
2005-2009
36.40
25.94
Post-2010
32.33
14.25
Total
31.06
26.01

30

Generic launch
(median yrs)
7.76
4.76
7.01
7.26
7.50
7.01
7.01
7.25

Figure 1: Number of producers by patent status

31

32

Table 5: Summary statistics (launch)
Variable
=1 if molecule launched in country this quarter
Ever launched in country
Originator 1st to market
Active product patent
Number of active patents
Any active patent
Active product patent granted post-TRIPS
Number of active post-TRIPS patents in country (compliance deadline)
Any active patent granted post-TRIPS
Ever had any patent in country
Ever had product patent in country
Drug has data exclusivity in country-quarter
Out-of-pocket share of private health exp
Govt share of health expenditures
GINI index of income inequality
Log(DALY)
Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Data exclusivity term granted by country
Number of local substitutes
Log originator products in country, t-1
Mean
0.01
0.09
0.74
0.15
2.75
0.28
0.03
0.91
0.11
0.37
0.22
0.49
76.5
60.98
37.1
3.36
2.14
74.15
2.98
5.57
7.61
2.26

Std. Dev.
0.11
0.29
0.44
0.35
15.38
0.45
0.17
7.28
0.31
0.48
0.41
0.5
18.6
17.78
8.9
2
1.22
5.24
1.6
2.82
9.58
1.87

N
1459993
1459993
318857
1459993
1459993
1459993
1459993
1459993
1459993
1459993
1459993
1459993
1221656
1221656
1348531
1447309
1459993
1459993
1459993
1293979
1459993
1459993

33

Table 6: Summary statistics (price, quantity)
Variable
Mean
1.02
Ln(price per unit in US dollars)
Ln(quantity)
4.47
Active product patent
0.31
Number of active patents
9
Any active patent
0.59
Active product patent granted post-TRIPS
0.08
Number of active post-TRIPS patents in country (compliance deadline)
3.72
Any active patent granted post-TRIPS
0.37
Ever had any patent in country
0.67
Ever had product patent in country
0.43
Drug has data exclusivity in country-quarter
0.41
Out-of-pocket share of private health exp
72.54
Govt share of health expenditures
63.85
GINI index of income inequality
36.21
Log(DALY)
3.34
Ln(GDP per capita)
2.6
Life expectancy
76.37
Ln(population)
3.18
Data exclusivity term granted by country
6.25
Number of local substitutes
11.38
Price index of ATC class
1.55
Log originator products in country, t-1
3.14
Std. Dev.
2.43
3.13
0.46
35.07
0.49
0.28
15.68
0.48
0.47
0.49
0.49
19.57
16.36
8.59
1.82
1.16
5.27
1.58
2.99
10.25
5.01
1.72

N
617996
617996
617996
617996
617996
617996
617996
617996
617996
617996
617996
507856
507856
589626
615338
617996
617996
617996
572625
617996
617996
617996

Table 7: Main Effect of Product Patent
Expired patent
On patent
Log(DALY)
Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products in country, t-1
Intercept
N
Pseudo R2
Adj. R2

Launch
b/se
0.5969∗∗∗
(0.0512)
0.8808∗∗∗
(0.0538)
0.0098
(0.0173)
−0.0160
(0.0501)
0.0160
(0.0111)
0.0186
(0.0290)
0.0076∗∗∗
(0.0015)
0.0040∗
(0.0022)
0.2102∗∗∗
(0.0091)
−6.3602∗∗∗
(0.8278)
1112013
.0897

Price
b/se
0.3005∗∗∗
(0.1082)
0.4774∗∗∗
(0.1404)
−0.0611∗
(0.0329)
0.2842∗∗∗
(0.0995)
0.0255
(0.0190)
0.0274
(0.0436)
0.0033
(0.0068)
−0.0078
(0.0150)
0.0521
(0.0374)
−2.3302∗
(1.3860)
620330

.832
Year
Year
Fixed effects
ATC
Drug
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country.

34

Quantity
b/se
0.2820∗
(0.1482)
0.5324∗∗∗
(0.1893)
0.1856∗∗∗
(0.0571)
0.7687∗∗∗
(0.1334)
0.0377
(0.0226)
0.7909∗∗∗
(0.0599)
0.0144∗∗∗
(0.0047)
−0.0020
(0.0051)
0.1097∗∗∗
(0.0407)
−4.0173∗∗
(1.5793)
620330
.765
Year
Drug

Table 8: Main Effect of Any Patent
Expired patent
On patent
Log(DALY)
Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products in country, t-1
Intercept
N
Pseudo R2
Adj. R2

Launch
b/se
0.5207∗∗∗
(0.0754)
0.7934∗∗∗
(0.0501)
0.0123
(0.0172)
−0.0098
(0.0496)
0.0157
(0.0109)
0.0212
(0.0286)
0.0079∗∗∗
(0.0015)
0.0041∗
(0.0022)
0.2117∗∗∗
(0.0091)
−6.3394∗∗∗
(0.8118)
1112013
.0892

Price
b/se
0.2448∗∗
(0.1042)
0.4022∗∗∗
(0.1251)
−0.0618∗
(0.0328)
0.2929∗∗∗
(0.0996)
0.0252
(0.0192)
0.0310
(0.0431)
0.0034
(0.0069)
−0.0078
(0.0151)
0.0529
(0.0373)
−2.3440∗
(1.4011)
620330

.832
Year
Year
Fixed effects
ATC
Drug
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country.

35

Quantity
b/se
0.1373
(0.1323)
0.4477∗∗
(0.1730)
0.1843∗∗∗
(0.0571)
0.7758∗∗∗
(0.1346)
0.0373
(0.0227)
0.7948∗∗∗
(0.0601)
0.0145∗∗∗
(0.0047)
−0.0020
(0.0051)
0.1112∗∗∗
(0.0410)
−4.0242∗∗
(1.5852)
620330
.765
Year
Drug

Table 9: Main Effect of Product Patent with Country Fixed Effects
Expired patent
On patent
Log(DALY)
Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products in country, t-1
Intercept
N
Pseudo R2
Adj. R2

Launch
b/se
0.5688∗∗∗
(0.0403)
0.9335∗∗∗
(0.0430)
0.0323∗∗∗
(0.0123)
−0.3091
(0.2191)
−0.0445
(0.0369)
−0.5978∗
(0.3065)
0.0047∗∗∗
(0.0013)
0.0049∗∗∗
(0.0017)
0.2031∗∗∗
(0.0096)
−0.1872
(3.3910)
1112013
.0972

Price
b/se
0.0544∗
(0.0309)
0.1114∗∗∗
(0.0315)
−0.0856∗∗∗
(0.0184)
−0.4720∗∗∗
(0.1533)
−0.0209
(0.0228)
−0.5537∗∗
(0.2184)
0.0061∗
(0.0032)
0.0175∗∗∗
(0.0039)
−0.0060
(0.0157)
1.6295
(2.0516)
620330

.886
Year
Year
Fixed effects
ATC
Drug
Country
Country
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country.

36

Quantity
b/se
−0.1022∗∗
(0.0453)
0.0701
(0.0479)
0.2474∗∗∗
(0.0357)
1.0887∗∗∗
(0.2364)
0.0723∗
(0.0375)
1.0348∗
(0.5997)
0.0133∗∗∗
(0.0039)
−0.0041
(0.0030)
0.1049∗∗∗
(0.0246)
−7.0032∗
(3.8635)
620330
.800
Year
Drug
Country

Table 10: Main Effect of Any Patent with Country Fixed Effects
Expired patent
On patent
Log(DALY)
Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products in country, t-1
Intercept
N
Pseudo R2
Adj. R2

Launch
b/se
0.4699∗∗∗
(0.0682)
0.8226∗∗∗
(0.0391)
0.0342∗∗∗
(0.0124)
−0.3463
(0.2128)
−0.0416
(0.0369)
−0.6389∗∗
(0.3052)
0.0052∗∗∗
(0.0014)
0.0050∗∗∗
(0.0017)
0.2051∗∗∗
(0.0096)
−0.1687
(3.4028)
1112013
.0965

Price
b/se
0.0352
(0.0354)
0.0854∗∗∗
(0.0295)
−0.0862∗∗∗
(0.0182)
−0.4758∗∗∗
(0.1556)
−0.0202
(0.0228)
−0.5566∗∗
(0.2191)
0.0062∗
(0.0032)
0.0176∗∗∗
(0.0039)
−0.0060
(0.0157)
1.5943
(2.0530)
620330

.886
Year
Year
Fixed effects
ATC
Drug
Country
Country
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country.

37

Quantity
b/se
−0.1738∗∗∗
(0.0533)
−0.0019
(0.0413)
0.2455∗∗∗
(0.0358)
1.0695∗∗∗
(0.2368)
0.0740∗
(0.0372)
1.0191∗
(0.6012)
0.0135∗∗∗
(0.0039)
−0.0040
(0.0030)
0.1050∗∗∗
(0.0246)
−7.0376∗
(3.8603)
620330
.800
Year
Drug
Country

Table 11: Estimation Results Using Product Patent by Income
Launch
b/se
0.8752∗∗∗
(0.1252)
0.6082∗∗∗
(0.1649)
−0.1057∗∗
(0.0523)
0.0893
(0.0647)

Expired patent
On patent
Log(GDP per capita) × expired patent
Log(GDP per capita) × on patent
Drug has data exclusivity in country-quarter
Log(DALY)

0.0094
(0.0169)
−0.0072
(0.0522)
0.0145
(0.0114)
0.0188
(0.0294)
0.0076∗∗∗
(0.0015)
0.0039∗
(0.0022)
0.2097∗∗∗
(0.0093)
−6.2555∗∗∗
(0.8823)
1112013
.0903

Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products in country, t-1
Intercept
N
Pseudo R2
Adj. R2

Price
b/se
0.0813
(0.2035)
0.4293∗
(0.2336)
0.0948
(0.0820)
0.0336
(0.0933)
0.1038
(0.0874)
−0.0646∗∗
(0.0317)
0.2460∗∗
(0.1040)
0.0238
(0.0191)
0.0262
(0.0444)
0.0031
(0.0067)
−0.0076
(0.0150)
0.0520
(0.0370)
−2.1219
(1.4121)
620330

.833
Year
Year
Fixed effects
ATC
Drug
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country.

38

Quantity
b/se
−0.0642
(0.1114)
−0.2438∗
(0.1417)
0.0033
(0.0458)
0.1233∗∗
(0.0514)
−0.1713∗∗∗
(0.0437)
0.2489∗∗∗
(0.0357)
1.0741∗∗∗
(0.2329)
0.0724∗
(0.0375)
1.0173∗
(0.5983)
0.0132∗∗∗
(0.0039)
−0.0044
(0.0030)
0.1054∗∗∗
(0.0248)
−6.9197∗
(3.8464)
620330
.801
Year
Drug

Table 12: Estimation Results Using Any Patent by Income
Launch
b/se
1.0157∗∗∗
(0.1387)
0.6256∗∗∗
(0.1428)
−0.2049∗∗∗
(0.0592)
0.0566
(0.0589)

Expired patent
On patent
Log(GDP per capita) × expired patent
Log(GDP per capita) × on patent
Drug has data exclusivity in country-quarter
Log(DALY)

0.0118
(0.0167)
−0.0033
(0.0518)
0.0142
(0.0111)
0.0216
(0.0287)
0.0080∗∗∗
(0.0016)
0.0040∗
(0.0022)
0.2113∗∗∗
(0.0093)
−6.2356∗∗∗
(0.8629)
1112013
.09

Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products in country, t-1
Intercept
N
Pseudo R2
Adj. R2

Price
b/se
0.0794
(0.2101)
0.2482
(0.2102)
0.0800
(0.0813)
0.0717
(0.0879)
0.1081
(0.0868)
−0.0651∗∗
(0.0316)
0.2503∗∗
(0.1038)
0.0231
(0.0193)
0.0284
(0.0442)
0.0030
(0.0068)
−0.0076
(0.0150)
0.0526
(0.0371)
−2.0887
(1.4246)
620330

.832
Year
Year
Fixed effects
ATC
Drug
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country.

39

Quantity
b/se
−0.0812
(0.1603)
−0.1466
(0.1035)
−0.0236
(0.0606)
0.0651
(0.0431)
−0.1639∗∗∗
(0.0441)
0.2460∗∗∗
(0.0358)
1.0710∗∗∗
(0.2341)
0.0738∗
(0.0371)
1.0135∗
(0.5983)
0.0133∗∗∗
(0.0039)
−0.0041
(0.0030)
0.1067∗∗∗
(0.0248)
−7.0005∗
(3.8367)
620330
.8
Year
Drug

Table 13: Estimation Results Using Product Patent by Income Group
Expired patent
On patent
High nonOECD × expired patent
Upper middle × expired patent
Lower middle × expired patent
High nonOECD × on patent
Upper middle × on patent
Lower middle × on patent

Launch
b/se
0.6929∗∗∗
(0.1661)
1.1871∗∗∗
(0.1749)
0.0916
(0.1779)
0.0184
(0.1740)
0.0009
(0.1863)
−0.2495
(0.1932)
−0.4282∗∗
(0.1810)
−0.4806∗∗
(0.2078)

Drug has data exclusivity in country-quarter
High nonOECD
Upper middle
Lower middle
Log(DALY)
Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products in country, t-1
Intercept
N
Pseudo R2
Adj. R2

0.3455
(0.2217)
0.3963∗
(0.2282)
0.2657
(0.2647)
0.0141
(0.0154)
−0.0006
(0.0820)
0.0186
(0.0120)
0.0336
(0.0296)
0.0076∗∗∗
(0.0015)
0.0036
(0.0024)
0.2082∗∗∗
(0.0091)
−6.9383∗∗∗
(1.0585)
1112013
.091

Price
b/se
0.2609∗∗∗
(0.0819)
0.4028∗∗∗
(0.1132)
−0.0233
(0.1528)
0.2211
(0.1882)
−0.2943
(0.1886)
−0.0674
(0.1751)
0.2080
(0.2100)
−0.0994
(0.1936)
0.1090
(0.0863)
−0.1788
(0.1788)
−0.4005
(0.3831)
−0.4485
(0.7233)
−0.0728∗∗
(0.0309)
0.1338
(0.2599)
0.0233
(0.0167)
0.0179
(0.0498)
0.0022
(0.0063)
−0.0067
(0.0141)
0.0458
(0.0373)
−1.4191
(1.4676)
620330

Quantity
b/se
0.3298∗∗
(0.1542)
0.6940∗∗∗
(0.1997)
0.5445
(0.3410)
−0.1752
(0.1910)
−0.1464
(0.2016)
0.2960
(0.4699)
−0.6153∗∗
(0.2491)
−0.5539∗
(0.2773)
−0.1145
(0.0860)
−0.8883∗
(0.4985)
−0.1766
(0.3510)
−0.4956
(0.6062)
0.1574∗∗∗
(0.0523)
0.6102∗∗∗
(0.2235)
0.0196
(0.0157)
0.7585∗∗∗
(0.0640)
0.0122∗∗
(0.0047)
−0.0027
(0.0051)
0.0928∗∗
(0.0358)
−1.6939
(1.1644)
620330

.834
.770
Year
Year
Year
Fixed effects
ATC
Drug
Drug
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country. The omitted income
group is High income OECD.

40

Table 14: Estimation Results Using Any Patent by Income Group
Expired patent
On patent
High nonOECD × expired patent
Upper middle × expired patent
Lower middle × expired patent
High nonOECD × on patent
Upper middle × on patent
Lower middle × on patent

Launch
b/se
0.3321∗
(0.1766)
1.0817∗∗∗
(0.1727)
0.4396∗∗
(0.2031)
0.3918∗∗
(0.1941)
0.4329∗∗
(0.1956)
−0.1993
(0.1828)
−0.3560∗∗
(0.1780)
−0.4243∗∗
(0.2014)

Drug has data exclusivity in country-quarter
High nonOECD
Upper middle
Lower middle
Log(DALY)
Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products in country, t-1
Intercept
N
Pseudo R2
Adj. R2

0.3551
(0.2203)
0.4205∗
(0.2263)
0.3046
(0.2599)
0.0168
(0.0152)
0.0172
(0.0795)
0.0185
(0.0118)
0.0387
(0.0289)
0.0080∗∗∗
(0.0015)
0.0038
(0.0023)
0.2100∗∗∗
(0.0091)
−6.9952∗∗∗
(1.0384)
1112013
.0908

Price
b/se
0.1778∗∗
(0.0775)
0.3592∗∗∗
(0.0987)
0.1214
(0.1533)
0.2559
(0.1981)
−0.1976
(0.1918)
−0.0841
(0.1650)
0.2023
(0.1984)
−0.2328
(0.1872)
0.1124
(0.0858)
−0.1775
(0.1791)
−0.3907
(0.3859)
−0.4329
(0.7283)
−0.0735∗∗
(0.0308)
0.1413
(0.2610)
0.0231
(0.0168)
0.0192
(0.0501)
0.0023
(0.0063)
−0.0068
(0.0141)
0.0473
(0.0375)
−1.4356
(1.4757)
620330

Quantity
b/se
0.1409
(0.1493)
0.5812∗∗∗
(0.1782)
0.5497∗∗
(0.2689)
−0.1024
(0.1960)
−0.0197
(0.2275)
0.3846
(0.4359)
−0.4544∗∗
(0.2206)
−0.4156∗
(0.2318)
−0.1040
(0.0865)
−0.8847∗
(0.5003)
−0.1651
(0.3459)
−0.4798
(0.5993)
0.1532∗∗∗
(0.0524)
0.6203∗∗∗
(0.2228)
0.0194
(0.0157)
0.7638∗∗∗
(0.0640)
0.0124∗∗
(0.0047)
−0.0025
(0.0051)
0.0957∗∗∗
(0.0358)
−1.7308
(1.1619)
620330

.834
.77
Year
Year
Year
Fixed effects
ATC
Drug
Drug
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country. The omitted income
group is High income OECD.

41

Table 15: Estimation Results Using Product Patent by Income Group and TRIPS Status
Expired patent
Pre-TRIPS patent
Post-TRIPS patent
High nonOECD × Expired patent
Upper middle × Expired patent
Lower middle × Expired patent
High nonOECD × Pre-TRIPS patent
Upper middle × Pre-TRIPS patent
Lower middle × Pre-TRIPS patent
High nonOECD × Post-TRIPS patent
Upper middle × Post-TRIPS patent
Lower middle × Post-TRIPS patent

Launch
b/se
0.6968∗∗∗
(0.1667)
0.8960∗∗∗
(0.1800)
1.4513∗∗∗
(0.1773)
0.0994
(0.1786)
0.0128
(0.1747)
−0.0048
(0.1883)
−0.2771
(0.1955)
−0.2066
(0.1876)
−0.2351
(0.2184)
−0.2514
(0.1835)
−0.5416∗∗∗
(0.1840)
−0.6247∗∗∗
(0.2116)

Drug has data exclusivity in country-quarter
High nonOECD
Upper middle
Lower middle
Log(DALY)
Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products in country, t-1
Intercept
N
Pseudo R2
Adj. R2

0.3741∗
(0.2218)
0.4490∗∗
(0.2273)
0.3438
(0.2616)
0.0180
(0.0155)
0.0277
(0.0810)
0.0193
(0.0123)
0.0428
(0.0293)
0.0070∗∗∗
(0.0014)
0.0037∗
(0.0022)
0.2041∗∗∗
(0.0091)
−7.2389∗∗∗
(1.0773)
1112013
.0926

Price
b/se
0.2617∗∗∗
(0.0821)
0.4085∗∗∗
(0.1171)
0.3911∗∗∗
(0.1121)
−0.0245
(0.1534)
0.2221
(0.1884)
−0.2941
(0.1888)
−0.0842
(0.1697)
0.1861
(0.2216)
0.0313
(0.2549)
−0.0594
(0.1863)
0.2445
(0.2048)
−0.3602
(0.2977)
0.1113
(0.0857)
−0.1795
(0.1797)
−0.4007
(0.3807)
−0.4482
(0.7189)
−0.0734∗∗
(0.0309)
0.1329
(0.2582)
0.0237
(0.0170)
0.0178
(0.0499)
0.0022
(0.0063)
−0.0068
(0.0142)
0.0443
(0.0370)
−1.4371
(1.4851)
620330

Quantity
b/se
0.3229∗∗
(0.1533)
0.6246∗∗∗
(0.2050)
0.8150∗∗∗
(0.1929)
0.5505
(0.3392)
−0.1733
(0.1900)
−0.1416
(0.2041)
0.0167
(0.4598)
−0.6523∗∗
(0.2597)
−0.7167∗∗
(0.3061)
0.5689
(0.4390)
−0.4510∗
(0.2450)
−0.0980
(0.2542)
−0.1224
(0.0846)
−0.8713∗
(0.4967)
−0.1598
(0.3423)
−0.4735
(0.5886)
0.1615∗∗∗
(0.0521)
0.6156∗∗∗
(0.2158)
0.0207
(0.0152)
0.7625∗∗∗
(0.0631)
0.0120∗∗
(0.0047)
−0.0025
(0.0052)
0.0945∗∗
(0.0358)
−1.8535
(1.1392)
620330

.834
.771
Year
Year
Year
Fixed effects
ATC
Drug
Drug
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country. The omitted income
group is High income OECD.
42

Table 16: Estimation Results Using Any Patent by Income Group and TRIPS Status
Expired patent
Pre-TRIPS patent
Post-TRIPS patent
High nonOECD × Expired patent
Upper middle × Expired patent
Lower middle × Expired patent
High nonOECD × Pre-TRIPS patent
Upper middle × Pre-TRIPS patent
Lower middle × Pre-TRIPS patent
High nonOECD × Post-TRIPS patent
Upper middle × Post-TRIPS patent
Lower middle × Post-TRIPS patent

Launch
b/se
0.3314∗
(0.1764)
0.6415∗∗∗
(0.1671)
1.3160∗∗∗
(0.1754)
0.4358∗∗
(0.2036)
0.3817∗∗
(0.1940)
0.4205∗∗
(0.1965)
−0.0742
(0.1941)
−0.0017
(0.1761)
−0.0443
(0.2011)
−0.2495
(0.1863)
−0.4519∗∗
(0.1793)
−0.5381∗∗
(0.2113)

Drug has data exclusivity in country-quarter
High nonOECD
Upper middle
Lower middle
Log(DALY)
Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products in country, t-1
Intercept
N
Pseudo R2
Adj. R2

0.3912∗
(0.2213)
0.4770∗∗
(0.2252)
0.3859
(0.2570)
0.0208
(0.0149)
0.0431
(0.0791)
0.0199
(0.0125)
0.0485∗
(0.0286)
0.0077∗∗∗
(0.0015)
0.0040∗
(0.0021)
0.2067∗∗∗
(0.0091)
−7.3720∗∗∗
(1.0783)
1112013
.0935

Price
b/se
0.1762∗∗
(0.0770)
0.3108∗∗∗
(0.0936)
0.3937∗∗∗
(0.1069)
0.1183
(0.1540)
0.2623
(0.1989)
−0.1928
(0.1909)
−0.1146
(0.1512)
0.2025
(0.2021)
0.0714
(0.2491)
−0.0806
(0.1685)
0.2460
(0.2066)
−0.5353∗
(0.2898)
0.1132
(0.0846)
−0.1652
(0.1806)
−0.3808
(0.3771)
−0.4181
(0.7151)
−0.0730∗∗
(0.0310)
0.1373
(0.2556)
0.0251
(0.0174)
0.0190
(0.0502)
0.0024
(0.0061)
−0.0068
(0.0140)
0.0437
(0.0367)
−1.5901
(1.4929)
620330

Quantity
b/se
0.1347
(0.1473)
0.3799∗∗
(0.1698)
0.7250∗∗∗
(0.1814)
0.5563∗∗
(0.2690)
−0.0928
(0.1940)
−0.0126
(0.2288)
0.1877
(0.4434)
−0.3779∗
(0.2158)
−0.5294∗∗
(0.2495)
0.4887
(0.3937)
−0.3904∗
(0.2276)
−0.1162
(0.2423)
−0.1232
(0.0830)
−0.8360∗
(0.4924)
−0.1145
(0.3262)
−0.4099
(0.5607)
0.1565∗∗∗
(0.0522)
0.6300∗∗∗
(0.2059)
0.0216
(0.0148)
0.7689∗∗∗
(0.0622)
0.0117∗∗
(0.0046)
−0.0019
(0.0050)
0.0979∗∗∗
(0.0354)
−2.0368∗
(1.1084)
620330

.835
.771
Year
Year
Year
Fixed effects
ATC
Drug
Drug
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country. The omitted income
group is High income OECD.
43

Table 17: 1st Stage IV Estimation Results

Within window
Within term
Drug has data exclusivity
in country-quarter
Log(DALY)
Ln(GDP per capita)
Life expectancy
Ln(population)
Number of local substitutes
Price index of ATC class
Log originator products
in country, t-1
\
P atentedDrug
\
P atentedDrug

Stage 0
Patented

Patented

b/se

b/se

0.1817∗∗∗
(0.0009)
0.0098∗∗∗
(0.0010)
-0.0220∗∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0018∗∗∗
(0.0004)
0.3396∗∗∗
(0.0031)
0.0274∗∗∗
(0.0005)
0.2515∗∗∗
(0.0047)
0.0012∗∗∗
(0.00003)
-0.0001∗
(0.0001)
0.0160∗∗∗
(0.0004)

2

\
P atentedDrug*High
non-OECD
\
P atentedDrug*Upper
middle
\
P atentedDrug*Lower
middle
Intercept

-3.3003∗∗∗
(0.0470)

N
F-statistic
Adj. Partial R2 for IVs
Adj. R2

1761836
18544.63
0.5660

IV first stage regressions
Patented* Patented*
nonOECD Upper middle
b/se
b/se

Patented*
Lower middle
b/se

0.0050∗∗∗
(0.0012)
0.0029∗∗∗
(0.0007)
0.2438∗∗∗
(0.0062)
0.0170∗∗∗
(0.0010)
0.2563∗∗∗
(0.0093)
0.0005∗∗∗
(0.0001)
-0.0004∗∗
(0.0002)
0.0059∗∗∗
(0.0007)
0.0982∗∗∗
(0.0261)

0.0007∗∗∗
(0.0003)
-0.0011∗∗∗
(0.0002)
-0.0184∗∗∗
(0.0018)
0.0059∗∗∗
(0.0003)
0.1477∗∗∗
(0.0027)
0.0002∗∗∗
(0.00002)
0.00004
(0.00005)
0.0027∗∗∗
(0.0002)
-0.2430∗∗∗
(0.0076)

-0.0065∗∗∗
(0.0008)
0.0032∗∗∗
(0.0004)
0.1505∗∗∗
(0.0040)
0.0019∗∗∗
(0.0006)
0.0368∗∗∗
(0.0061)
0.0005∗∗∗
(0.00004)
0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0045∗∗∗
(0.0005)
-0.9019∗∗∗
(0.0170)

-0.0172∗∗∗
(0.0006)
0.0017∗∗∗
(0.0004)
0.2127∗∗∗
(0.0034)
0.0200∗∗∗
(0.0005)
0.1425∗∗∗
(0.0051)
-0.0006∗∗∗
(0.0001)
-0.0006∗∗∗
(0.0001)
0.0156∗∗∗
(0.0004)
-1.2048∗∗∗
(0.0143)

0.2902∗∗∗
(0.0164)
0.4312∗∗∗
(0.0261)
0.0322∗
(0.0173)
0.1489∗∗∗
(0.0212)
-2.1989∗∗∗
(0.0872)

0.1111∗∗∗
(0.0048)
1.4396∗∗∗
(0.0076)
0.1091∗∗∗
(0.0050)
0.1613∗∗∗
(0.0062)
-0.9238∗∗∗
(0.0254)

0.3004∗∗∗
(0.0108)
0.4694 ∗∗∗
(0.0171)
1.4629 ∗∗∗
(0.0113)
0.5597∗∗∗
(0.0139)
-0.3971∗∗∗
(0.0570)

0.4392∗∗∗
(0.0090)
0.5785∗∗∗
(0.0143)
0.4849∗∗∗
(0.0095)
1.5710∗∗∗
(0.0116)
-2.0793∗∗∗
(0.0479)

620330
1124.43
0.0098
0.5925

620330
620330
1091.3
1075.84
0.0759
0.0779
0.5853
0.5818
Year
Drug
Country

Fixed effects
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01.

44

620330
728.68
0.0759
0.4851

Table 18: Estimation Results Using Any Patent by Income Group
OLS Price
b/se
0.1002∗∗∗
(0.0281)
0.0146
(0.0562)
−0.0109
(0.0390)
−0.1055∗∗
(0.0399)
−0.0063
(0.0216)
−0.0862∗∗∗
(0.0183)
−0.4773∗∗∗
(0.1563)
−0.0203
(0.0229)
−0.5639∗∗
(0.2201)
0.0060∗
(0.0032)
0.0175∗∗∗
(0.0039)
−0.0045
(0.0155)
1.6407
(2.0668)

IV Price
OLS Quantity
b/se
b/se
On patent
0.2289∗∗∗
0.3109∗∗∗
(0.0527)
(0.0587)
High nonOECD × on patent
0.2233∗∗∗
−0.2927∗
(0.0439)
(0.1746)
Upper middle × on patent
0.3394∗∗∗
−0.3370∗∗∗
(0.0253)
(0.0851)
Lower middle × on patent
−0.1074∗∗∗
−0.3486∗∗∗
(0.0282)
(0.0852)
Drug has data exclusivity in country-quarter
−0.0039
−0.1639∗∗∗
(0.0031)
(0.0441)
Log(DALY)
−0.0875∗∗∗
0.2464∗∗∗
(0.0018)
(0.0358)
Ln(GDP per capita)
−0.5599∗∗∗
1.0897∗∗∗
(0.0274)
(0.2393)
Life expectancy
−0.0251∗∗∗
0.0742∗
(0.0029)
(0.0376)
Ln(population)
−0.6281∗∗∗
1.0121
(0.0307)
(0.6094)
Number of local substitutes
0.0058∗∗∗
0.0133∗∗∗
(0.0002)
(0.0039)
Price index of ATC class
0.0176∗∗∗
−0.0041
(0.0004)
(0.0030)
Log originator products in country, t-1
−0.0080∗∗∗
0.1064∗∗∗
(0.0020)
(0.0247)
Intercept
2.1559∗∗∗
−7.0482∗
(0.2939)
(3.9049)
N
620330
Adj. R2
.886
.884
.800
Year
Fixed effects
Drug
Country
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p< .01. Standard errors are clustered by country. The omitted income
group is High income OECD.

45

IV Quantity
b/se
1.4202∗∗∗
(0.0904)
−1.4407∗∗∗
(0.0752)
−1.2648∗∗∗
(0.0433)
−0.9603∗∗∗
(0.0484)
−0.1739∗∗∗
(0.0053)
0.2460∗∗∗
(0.0030)
0.8055∗∗∗
(0.0469)
0.0543∗∗∗
(0.0050)
0.7306∗∗∗
(0.0526)
0.0122∗∗∗
(0.0003)
−0.0042∗∗∗
(0.0007)
0.1079∗∗∗
(0.0034)
−5.9182∗∗∗
(0.5040)
.795

Figure 2: Patent protection and launch, by income group

Figure 3: Patent protection and price, by income group

46

Figure 4: Patent protection and quantity, by income group

Figure 5: Patent protection and price, IV estimates

47

Figure 6: Patent protection and quantity, IV estimates

Figure 7: Patent protection and launch, by disease burden

48

Figure 8: Patent protection and price, by disease burden

Figure 9: Patent protection and quantity, by disease burden

49

50

2003
2000
1990
1987

ALGERIA

ARGENTINA

AUSTRALIA

AUSTRIA
2005

1997
1993
1987
1993
2000
2004
1991
2000
1998
2005
1994
1995
1978
1968
1992
1994
2005
1997

BRAZIL

BULGARIA

CANADA

CHINA

COLOMBIA

CROATIA

CZECH REPUBLIC

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

ECUADOR

EGYPT

ESTONIA

FINLAND

FRANCE

GERMANY

GREECE

HUNGARY

INDIA

INDONESIA

2000

2005

1995

1995

1995

1995

1995

2000

2005

2000

2000

1995

2000

2000

2001

1995

1996

1995

BELGIUM

1995

1995

2005

Legislation Deadline

Lower middle

Lower middle

Upper middle

High OECD

High OECD

High OECD

High OECD

Upper middle

Lower middle

Lower middle

Lower middle

Upper middle

Upper middle

Lower middle

Lower middle

High OECD

Lower middle

Upper middle

High OECD

High OECD

High OECD

Upper middle

Lower middle

Income Group

Country List and IPR Implementation Measures

Country

A

0.80

0.18

0.86

0.85

0.88

0.87

0.87

0.74

0.63

0.77

0.62

0.84

0.68

0.79

0.57

0.85

0.81

0.83

0.87

0.84

0.85

0.75

0.49

patent

first (mean)

0.06

0.07

0.27

0.50

0.71

0.72

0.24

0.11

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.28

0.13

0.07

0.30

0.60

0.23

0.23

0.70

0.50

0.65

0.19

0.05

(mean)

Product

Originator

51

1995

1978
1976
1999
1986

ITALY

JAPAN

JORDAN

KOREA

2000
1994

LEBANON

LITHUANIA

2005
2000
1998
1993
1992
1992
2004
1994
1991
1992

PAKISTAN

PERU

PHILIPPINES

POLAND

PORTUGAL

RUSSIA

SAUDI ARABIA

SINGAPORE

SLOVAKIA

SLOVENIA

1995

1995

2000

2005

2012

1995

2000

2000

2000

2005

1995

1992

NORWAY

2005
1995

2000

MOROCCO

2000

NEW ZEALAND

1991

2000

MALAYSIA

MEXICO

1995

LUXEMBOURG
1983

1999

1993

LATVIA
2001

2005

KUWAIT

2000

2000

1995

1995

Legislation Deadline

IRELAND

Country

High nonOECD

Upper middle

High nonOECD

Upper middle

Lower middle

High OECD

Upper middle

Lower middle

Lower middle

Lower middle

High OECD

High OECD

Lower middle

Upper middle

Upper middle

High OECD

Upper middle

Upper middle

Lower middle

High nonOECD

Upper middle

Lower middle

High OECD

High OECD

High OECD

Income Group

0.85

0.84

0.85

0.78

0.80

0.82

0.83

0.80

0.71

0.58

0.87

0.78

0.65

0.81

0.85

0.84

0.76

0.69

0.76

0.72

0.81

0.72

0.91

0.90

0.85

patent

first (mean)

0.22

0.24

0.35

0.07

0.34

0.37

0.20

0.31

0.05

0.01

0.29

0.56

0.10

0.43

0.10

0.62

0.17

0.00

0.26

0.01

0.53

0.00

0.63

0.71

0.56

(mean)

Product

Originator

52

1978
1977
1999
2000
1999
2002
1949
1790
1991

SWEDEN

SWITZERLAND

THAILAND

TUNISIA

TURKEY

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED STATES

URUGUAY
2000

1992

SPAIN

VENEZUELA

1997

SOUTH AFRICA

2000

2005

1995

1995

2005

2005

2005

2000

1995

1995

1995

1995

Legislation Deadline

Country

Upper middle

Upper middle

High OECD

High OECD

High nonOECD

Lower middle

Lower middle

Lower middle

High OECD

High OECD

High OECD

Upper middle

Income Group

0.76

0.64

0.86

0.86

0.82

0.82

0.67

0.84

0.88

0.87

0.89

0.83

patent

first (mean)

0.02

0.02

0.76

0.73

0.01

0.13

0.01

0.03

0.71

0.69

0.41

0.60

(mean)

Product

Originator

