NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFERRING CARBON ABATEMENT COSTS IN ELECTRICITY MARKETS:
A REVEALED PREFERENCE APPROACH USING THE SHALE REVOLUTION
Joseph A. Cullen
Erin T. Mansur
Working Paper 20795
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20795
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

We thank Luis Gautier, Matthew Kotchen, and seminar participants at Washington University, University
of Chicago, Portland Energy Economics Conference, Dartmouth College, University of Colorado,
International Industrial Organization Conference, IFN Electricity Markets Conference, the Energy
Institute at Haas Conference, Middlebury College, Yale University, and the World Bank. We thank
Wolfram Schlenker for providing weather data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Joseph A. Cullen and Erin T. Mansur. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Inferring Carbon Abatement Costs in Electricity Markets: A Revealed Preference Approach
using the Shale Revolution
Joseph A. Cullen and Erin T. Mansur
NBER Working Paper No. 20795
December 2014, Revised May 2015
JEL No. Q4,Q5
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how much carbon emissions from the electricity industry would decrease in response
to a carbon price. We show how both carbon prices and cheap natural gas reduce, in a nearly identical
manner, the historic cost advantage of coal-fired power plants. The shale revolution has resulted in
unprecedented variation in natural gas prices that we use to estimate the short-run price elasticity of
abatement. Our estimates imply that a price of $10 ($60) per ton of carbon dioxide would reduce emissions
by 4% (10%). Furthermore, carbon prices are much more effective at reducing emissions when natural
gas prices are low. In contrast, modest carbon prices have negligible effects when gas prices are at
levels seen prior to the shale revolution.
Joseph A. Cullen
Washington University in St. Louis
jacullen@gmail.com
Erin T. Mansur
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
erin.mansur@dartmouth.edu

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, regulators have implemented a myriad of policies to mitigate climate change. The US federal government’s recent policies either indirectly address climate
change (e.g., weatherization and renewables programs) or mandate standards, like tightening the Corporate Average Fuel Economy standards or capping carbon dioxide (CO 2 )
emissions rates for new power plants. Meanwhile other regulators have set a carbon price,
like British Columbia’s carbon tax, EU’s Emissions Trading System, northeastern states’
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), and California’s Cap-and-Trade Program.
This paper examines how a carbon price is likely to affect emissions from the US electricity
sector, which accounts for about one third of US greenhouse gases (EPA 2013), and has
been the focus of many recently proposed regulations. 1 Firms can respond to carbon prices
immediately by altering the mix of power plants used to meet demand: this is known as
fuel switching. Just by switching generation from operating coal plants to the available,
underutilized capacity at natural gas plants could reduce CO 2 emissions from the electricity
industry by 23 to 42 percent (Lafrancois 2012). Whether or not this is feasible is an empirical
question. This paper measures the expected environmental benefits from fuel switching in
response to a range of carbon prices.
In order to do this, we examine how a carbon price would affect the marginal cost of
producing electricity. This paper shows how a carbon price provides similar incentives for
fuel switching as does a change in the cost ratio: namely the price of coal (per unit of heat
content) over the price of natural gas. Briefly, higher carbon prices make coal-fired power
plants less competitive than natural gas-fired power plants. Other power plants (nuclear,
hydroelectric, and other renewables) have low marginal costs and remain inframarginal. 2
Similarly, when the cost ratio rises, natural gas plants gain an advantage: some cheap
baseload coal plants may be displaced by even cheaper combined-cycle natural gas plants.
While broadly this is true of other pollutants, we discuss why the mapping from cost ratios
1
2

For example, the proposed Clean Power Plan focuses exclusively on the power sector.
Oil-fired power plants produced less than 1% of the electricity during our sample (EIA 2014).

1

Figure 1: US and European Natural Gas Prices

to carbon prices is substantially more precise. This mapping is important since we have no
national carbon price that we could use to identify the short run marginal cost of abating
carbon. Even where there are regional policies, there is limited variation in carbon prices.
On the other hand, we have recently observed abundant variation in natural gas prices.
Technological advances in drilling (i.e., hydrofracturing) have allowed firms to extract natural
gas from shale formations. This “shale revolution” has resulted in a short run glut of gas:
natural gas production has increased 26 percent from 2005 to 2012. 3 Furthermore, there are
limited options to export substantial quantities of natural gas outside of North America. As
a result, gas prices have dropped from over $12 per million British thermal units (mmBTU)
to less than $2.4 In 2012, gas in the US was less than a third of the cost of gas in Europe
(see Figure 1).5
Using recent variation in fuel prices, we estimate the relationship between CO 2 emissions
The Energy Information Administration (EIA) provides data on monthly natural gas production at
www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/hist/n9010us2m.htm (accessed August 7, 2014).
4
Henry Hub prices were $12.69 per mmBTU in June 2008 and $1.95 in April 2012. The EIA provides
these monthly prices at www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/hist/rngwhhdm.htm (accessed August 7, 2014).
5
The sharp drop in prices in 2008 reflects the recession. Since then, European prices have returned to
levels seen before the recession while US prices remain low due to shale gas production (EIA 2012). These
data are nominal prices from the World Bank Commodity Price Data (Pink Sheet).
3

2

and the coal-to-gas cost ratio using a flexible functional form. We control for several factors,
including electricity load (the quantity consumed), temperature, generation from non-fossil
sources, and net imports from Canada. In addition, we use time period fixed effects to proxy
for macroeconomic shocks, other policies affecting the electricity sector, and power plant
entry and exits. We find that when gas prices fall from $6 to $2, holding coal prices fixed,
we predict a ten percent drop in aggregate CO 2 emissions.
We map this response curve into carbon prices. When baseline prices of natural gas
are low, carbon prices are effective at reducing emissions. In particular, at the Energy
Information Administration’s expected fuel prices over the next decade (EIA 2012), we find
that even a carbon price of $10 ($20) would reduce emissions about four (six) percent. A
mandate of a ten percent reduction would be costly: the carbon price would need to be
approximately $60 per ton of CO2 .
In contrast, when coal holds a sizable cost advantage over natural gas, a marginal change
in the cost ratio has no notable effect on emissions. Moving from a natural gas price of $12 to
$6 has no effect on carbon emissions, holding coal prices constant. Thus, for high natural gas
prices, even a moderate carbon price would have a limited impact on emissions. For example,
if gas prices return to historic levels (like under a ban on hydrofracking or a significant build
out of liquefied natural gas (LNG) exporting terminals), then even a price of $20 per ton of
CO2 would reduce emissions by less than one percent. Even a $60 per ton price would reduce
emissions by only six percent. Finally, we show how a carbon price can result in co-benefits
by reducing local emissions, in aggregate, in an approximately proportional manner.
Carbon prices provide incentives for a multitude of responses beyond fuel switching.
Consumers facing higher electricity prices will conserve energy, for example by using energyefficient technologies. Firms will build power plants that pollute few, if any, carbon emissions.
In addition, companies may invest in order to make existing power plants operate more
efficiently. These options are important to model in considering the overall effect of a carbon
policy in the long run. However some carbon policies, like California’s regulation and RGGI,
are designed to protect consumers from rate increases. Furthermore, these other options

3

take time (power plants are long lived) while policy tends to seek short-term performance. 6
Carbon pricing will lead to new investments and demand response in time, however the
short-run response from fuel switching can be an important component from a political
perspective.
Several recent papers directly examine the short-run effects of a carbon tax on emissions. 7
Newcomer, Blumsack, Apt, Lave & Morgan (2008) construct supply functions based on
static, least-cost optimization: in other words, they must assume price-taking behavior and
ignore technological constraints on operating power plants in order to model a static supply
curve. For electricity markets in the mid-Atlantic (PJM), the upper-Midwest (MISO) and
Texas (ERCOT), they find that a $35/ton tax would result in a 2-2.5% carbon reduction
due to fuel-switching. 8 Cullen (2013a) estimates a dynamic model of power plant production
decisions and finds that a $20/ton tax would have only a negligible effect on emissions in
the Texas electricity market. Our study complements these papers by using a third method
based on reduced-form estimates.
Another related literature examines how the low natural gas prices reduced emissions from
the power sector.9 Holladay & LaRiviere (2014) use hourly data for each of the eight North
American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) regions to estimate the marginal emissions from regional fossil-fired gross generation. They show how their estimates have changed
from a high gas price regime (2005-2008) to a low price regime (2009-2011). Linn, Muehlenbachs & Wang (2013) and Knittel, Metaxoglou & Trindade (2014) show how plant-level
monthly production decisions change with cheap gas. Pratson, Haerer & Patio-Echeverri
6
For example, the EU ETS was criticized for over-allocating permits making the policy ineffective in its
first few years (Ellerman & Buchner 2007). Similarly, RGGI has had extremely low prices which has led
regulators to tighten the cap in 2013.
7
For example, Metcalf (2009) uses MIT’s Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis model and finds that
a $15 carbon price (in 2005 dollars per metric ton) would reduce US CO 2 emissions for all sectors by 8.4%
in 2015.
8
Overall they find reductions of about ten percent in PJM and MISO and about a third as much in
ERCOT, but most of this is due to an assumed price response from consumers (with an assumed elasticity of
-0.1). In practice, it remains unclear how much of the cost increases from carbon policies will be passed on
to end users. For example, California grandfathers permits to utilities explicitly to protect customers from
cost increases.
9
Related government studies include Logan, Heath & Macknick (2012) and EPA (2013).

4

(2013) calculate the average cost of electricity generation for individual fossil plants and
find that, under current regulations, coal plants maintain a cost advantage over gas plants
if the coal-to-gas cost ratio lies below 0.56. Lu, Salovaara & McElroy (2012) regress coal
production (as a share of monthly generation in a given census region) on the cost difference
between natural gas and coal. They find that coal shares are responsive only to coal-to-gas
cost ratios above 0.33 in most regions, and conclude that the drop in natural gas prices from
2008 to 2009 reduced CO 2 emissions from the US power sector by 4.3 percent, or half of the
observed 8.8 percent reduction. 10 Finally, they use their analysis to analyze carbon taxes and
find that a $20/ton of CO2 tax reduces annual electricity-sector emissions by seven percent.
In contrast to this research, our paper accounts for the integrated grid across regions, estimates a flexible functional form of the daily cost ratio, and examines a longer time horizon
with greater heterogeneity in natural gas prices.
We proceed with a brief discussion of the electricity industry in Section 2. Section 3 shows
how cost ratios map into carbon prices. Sections 4, 5, and 6 describe the data, empirical
model, and results, respectively, on the link between fuel costs and carbon emissions. Section
7 uses these estimates to examine the implications for carbon pricing and discusses caveats.
We also examine the examine the co-benefits of carbon prices, namely reductions in local
pollutants, in this section. Finally, we offer our conclusion in Section 8.

2

Background

Coal-fired power plants produce most of the electricity in the US (EIA 2014). On average,
these baseload plants have low operating costs, are slow to adjust, and are costly to start up.
However, there is substantial heterogeneity in the marginal cost of operating these plants.
Some older, less efficient plants operate only during relatively high demand months. Most
gas-fired generators fall into two categories: gas turbine peaker plants and combined cycle
gas turbines (CCGT). Peaker plants have relatively low capital costs and high marginal costs.
Linn, Mastrangelo & Burtraw (2014) find a similar result. When natural gas prices are high relative
to coal prices, the effect of coal prices on electricity production from coal-fired power plants is smaller than
when the prices are close together.
10

5

They operate during high demand hours, as power is prohibitively expensive to store and
demand varies substantially over hours of the day and across seasons. In contrast, baseload
CCGT plants are the most efficient fossil plants at turning the fuel’s energy into power: i.e.,
they have low heat rates (mmBTU/kWh). As such, some gas-fired power plants may have
lower marginal costs than the most efficient coal plants even if coal costs less, per BTU, than
natural gas.
Lower gas prices have been a boon for gas-fired generators in the US. Efficient gas power
plants found themselves in the position to undercut coal-fired power plants. Figure 2 shows
the monthly average electricity generation for power plants burning coal or natural gas from
2001 to the present.11 While coal-based generation have generally been declining since the
start of this century, a notable drop occurred in 2012 when natural gas briefly overtook it as
the dominant fuel source. Note that this fuel switching primarily occurs across plants, not
within a given plant. 12
The degree to which production switches from coal to gas generation will depend on
several factors. From a static dispatch framework, fuel switching depends on the relative
fuel prices, the relative heat rates, the available capacity of gas plants, and the demand
for electricity. In addition, intra-day fluctuations in electricity demand may be important as
some generators are not well suited for starting and stopping production frequently. Start-up
costs, ramping rates, minimum down times, and other intertemporal constraints limit firms’
operation decisions (Mansur 2008, Cullen 2013a).
Furthermore, the transmission grid limits how much power plants can produce. As electricity is not stored, power supply and demand must equate at all times. This is subject to
the network of transmission lines’ capacity constraints, as well as the plants’ intertemporal
constraints (Mansur & White 2012). Therefore, optimal dispatch from a least-cost static
model differs from the dynamic optimization.
Finally, observed production may differ still because power plants face forced outages
11
This figure is based on EIA form 923 data that we describe in Section 4. See the web appendix for a
figure on the generation shares by region, fuel type, and month.
12
See Knittel et al. (2014) for a discussion of fuel switching within these dual-fuel plants.

6

Figure 2: Monthly Generation by Fuel Type

whereby they cannot operate when planned, firms may have imperfect information about
trading opportunities (Mansur & White 2012), and firms may exercise market power (Borenstein,
Bushnell & Wolak 2002, Mansur 2007, Puller 2007, Bushnell, Mansur & Saravia 2008). For
these reasons, our analysis will use regressions to identify how firms actually respond to
relative fuel prices.
The US electricity grid consists of three interconnections: East, West, and ERCOT (see
Figure 3). Electricity produced in each interconnection is synchronized, allowing electricity
to flow freely throughout the interconnection. Very little energy is transferred between
interconnections due to the costs involved in transferring power between asynchronous grids.
Analysis on a finer geographic scale is possible, but presents problems for measuring net
emissions reductions in each area due to energy transfers between sub-regions within an
interconnection. We revisit this issue when discussing co-benefits of carbon pricing from
reduced local pollutants in Section 7.4.

7

Figure 3: NERC Interconnections

3

Mapping Carbon Pricing

Pricing carbon makes natural gas-fired generators more competitive with those burning coal.
For a fossil-fired power plant, the marginal cost of producing electricity ( M C) is a function of
its variable operating and maintenance costs (V O&M ), heat rate (HR), price of fuel (Pf uel ),
2
carbon content( CO
), and carbon price (Pco2 ):13
btu

M C = V O&M + HR ∙ Pf uel + HR ∙

CO2
Pco2 .
btu

(1)

Although pricing carbon dioxide emissions increases marginal costs for both gas and coal
plants, coal contains approximately twice as much CO 2 per unit of energy as natural gas.
Thus, pricing carbon will affect the marginal costs of coal plants more than those of an
equivalent gas plant. As previously mentioned, CCGT plants are more efficient than coal
The V O&M costs include expenses for major overhauls, treating water, pumping water for cooling
towers, replacing filters, etc. In addition to costs shown in equation (1), firms may have had to purchase,
or forgo selling, pollution permits (e.g., sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides permit prices). While these costs
were extremely small relative to fuel costs during most of our sample, our analysis controls for them.
13

8

Figure 4: Carbon Prices and Generator Marginal Costs

plants. These both lead to marginal costs rising more steeply with carbon prices for coal
plants than gas plants. Figure 4 illustrates the change in marginal costs for an average coal
plant relative to gas-fired technologies (CCGT and peaker) as the price of carbon increases. 14
We examine the ratio of fuel costs, rather than the cost difference, for several reasons.
First, the ratio captures how fuel prices translate into marginal costs. Suppose a gas plant
is 25% more efficient than a coal plant. Then, assuming similar VO&M costs, the gas plant
will have the same marginal cost when the cost ratio, PC /PG , equals 0.8. Production would
switch between these generators as prices crossed this point. In fact, for a given cost ratio,
the ordering of generators by marginal costs will be identical regardless of the level of fuel
Typical heat rates for each technology were used to create this illustration. The heat rates used for technology are as follows: coal (10.73 mmBTU/MWH), gas combined cycle (7.07 mmBTU/MWH), gas peaker
(11.2 mmBTU/MW). To calculate emissions costs, emissions factors for the carbon content of gas (117.0
lbs/mmBTU) and coal (210.86 lbs/mmBTU) were based on the rates reported by the Energy Information
administration.
14

9

costs. To illustrate, consider a high cost and low cost scenario. In the low cost scenario,
let PC = $2 and PG = $4. For the high cost scenario, let PC = $3 and PG = $6. In both
cases, the cost ratio is the same. Now order the all the generators on the grid from lowest
marginal cost to highest marginal cost to create an industry cost curve. From Equation (1),
we see that the marginal cost of a generator depends on the product of its fuel cost and heat
rate, the ordering of generators will be identical in each scenario. If generator A has 10%
lower marginal costs than generator B in the low cost scenario, then it will also have 10%
lower marginal costs in the high cost scenario. A second motivation for using the cost ratio
is that it serves as a parsimonious function that translates the two dimensions of fuel costs
(i.e., coal and natural gas) into a single dimensional object that is simple to interpret.
Since coal costs are relatively constant over our time period, estimation by cost ratio is
very similar to using other functional forms, such as differences and interactions of fuel costs.
However, the cost ratio will be useful for connecting the estimated emission reductions to a
counterfactual carbon price. We examine other functional forms in the appendix.
As mentioned previously, charging for carbon dioxide emissions increases the cost of
burning coal more than burning gas. That is, it will increase the coal-to-gas cost ratio. For
example, if coal were priced at $2.25/mmBTU and gas were priced at $5.75/mmBTU, this
would imply a cost ratio of 0.39. Using this as a baseline, we can examine how a price on
carbon would change the cost ratio. For instance, putting a $20/ton price on CO2 would
change the cost ratio from 0.39 to 0.63. 15 Table 1 shows the mapping between carbon prices
and cost ratios under the baseline for carbon prices up to $100/ton CO2 . High carbon prices
can push the cost ratio above one; this means that a unit of energy form coal is now more
expensive than a unit of energy from gas. Carbon prices are only one reason the cost ratio
might change. Table 2 takes an alternative perspective. Rather than using a carbon price
to change the baseline cost ratio, it looks at how lowering the price of gas could achieve a
similar change in the cost ratio. We can replicate the cost ratios under carbon pricing by
15
We use the following emissions factors for the carbon content of gas (117.0 lbs/mmBTU) and
coal (210.86 lbs/mmBTU) based on the rates reported by the EIA (http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/
faq.cfm?id=73&t=11). We weight bituminous, lignite, and sub-bituminous rates based on the aggregate
annual fuel consumption of coal by power plants in 2011 (EIA form-923).

10

Table 1: Cost Ratios with Carbon Price
Carbon
Price
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
$50
$60
$70
$80
$90
$100

Gas Cost
Fuel + Carbon = Total
5.75
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
5.75

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

0.00
0.59
1.17
1.76
2.34
2.93
3.51
4.10
4.68
5.27
5.85

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

$5.75
$6.34
$6.92
$7.51
$8.09
$8.68
$9.26
$9.85
$10.43
$11.02
$11.60

Coal Cost
Fuel + Carbon = Total
2.25
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.25

+ 0.00 = $2.25
+ 1.05 = $3.30
+ 2.11 = $4.36
+ 3.16 = $5.41
+ 4.22 = $6.47
+ 5.27 = $7.52
+ 6.32 = $8.57
+ 7.38 = $9.63
+ 8.43 = $10.68
+ 9.49 = $11.74
+ 10.54 = $12.79

Coal/Gas
Cost Ratio
0.39
0.52
0.63
0.72
0.80
0.87
0.93
0.98
1.02
1.07
1.10

Notes: Fuel costs are in $/mmBTU and carbon price is in $/ton of CO2 .

varying the price of gas between $2-$5/mmBTU.
Unlike other pollutants, the carbon content of a given fuel type is relatively homogeneous.
Furthermore, there are no economically feasible end-of-pipe abatement technologies. In
contrast, the ratio of nitrogen oxides emissions across plants, for example, varies widely
because of differences in technologies and operational decisions. Thus while mapping cost
ratios to carbon emissions is reasonable, we do not recommend using this approach for the
pricing of other pollutants. We revisit this mapping in Section 7.

11

Table 2: Cost Ratios with Low Gas Price

4

Carbon
Price

Gas Cost
Fuel

Coal Cost
Fuel

Coal/Gas
Cost Ratio

$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0

$5.75
$4.33
$3.57
$3.13
$2.81
$2.59
$2.42
$2.30
$2.21
$2.10
$2.05

$2.25
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
$2.25

0.39
0.52
0.63
0.72
0.80
0.87
0.93
0.98
1.02
1.07
1.10

Data

4.1

Data Sources

Our data are compiled from several public sources and cover January 2006 to December 2012.
The Continuous Emissions Monitoring System (CEMS) of the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) measures hourly output of CO 2 , sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ), and nitrogen oxides
(NOx ) from generators larger than 25 megawatts. We aggregate the hourly generator-level
emissions information to construct daily CO 2 emissions. Generators are then aggregated by
interconnection to create a measure of daily, regional CO 2 emissions. We aggregate the other
pollutants by NERC region.
Second, we use data on electricity consumption (or load) provided by the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC). FERC Form 714 provides hourly information on electricity
load by balancing area. We aggregate load to the daily level and sum across areas to arrive
at daily electrical load by interconnection.
Third, we use EIA Form 923 data on production of electricity from non-fossil sources and
prices paid for coal deliveries by power plants. EIA provides monthly electricity production
by NERC region for nuclear and hydro power plants as well as for renewable sources (such

12

as wind, solar and geothermal). We aggregate these data to the interconnection level for
each type of non-fossil monthly electricity production: nuclear, water, and renewables. We
also collect data from the National Energy Board of Canada on monthly net imports of
power into each interconnection in the US. 16 We use data on permit prices for SO 2 from
CantorCO2e and the EPA Clean Air Markets progress reports.
Fuel prices are aggregated by interconnection. In practice, there is some spatial heterogeneity in coal prices and, to a lesser degree, in natural gas prices. How much a power plant
generates will depend on its own marginal costs as well as that of other plants: all fuel prices
affect the order of dispatch. We simplify the vector of all power plants’ fuel costs by looking
at the average price of each fossil fuel. 17
The EIA reports coal prices by transaction (plant, month, contract type, coal type, coal
source, etc.).18 We use this information to create a weighted-average price for each month
and interconnection. In particular, we use data from 2001 to 2012 for spot prices only
(dropping long term contracts over 12 months). For each interconnection, we regress coal
costs on sulfur, ash, and BTU content, an indicator of surface mining, plant fixed effects,
and indicator variables for each month of the sample. We estimate the model using weighted
least squares, where we weight using a transaction’s volume (in tons). The appendix reports
the estimates (see Table A.1) and how they are used to construct a monthly coal price index
for each region, holding coal composition fixed (see Figure A.1).
Finally, we use data from the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) on the spot prices for
natural gas at trading hubs around the country. ICE is an independent open-access electronic
exchange for trading wholesale energy and metals commodities. For each gas hub, they report
the average trading price for transactions on that day. For each interconnection, we weight
the hub prices by the nameplate capacity of surrounding gas generators to arrive at a daily
average spot price of natural gas. Although gas generators may have long term financial
See http://www.neb-one.gc.ca/CommodityStatistics/Statistics.aspx?language=english, accessed August
27, 2014.
17
Note that if these spatial differences are a constant percentage of the average price, then this heterogeneity will be captured in our model, much like the heterogeneity in heat rates.
18
In reverse chronological order, the data sources are EIA-923, EIA-906, EIA-920, FERC 423, and EIA-423.
16

13

contracts for gas, the spot price for natural gas represents the opportunity cost to generators
for using the gas to generate electricity versus selling it on the spot market. The general
trends in the data are illustrated in Figure 1 using monthly averages.
Table 3 reports the mean and standard deviation for each interconnection. The East is
the largest market by far with over four times the load in the West, which in turn is more
than double ERCOT. The East is also the most carbon intensive with emissions over six
times that in other markets. 19 The table also reports the summary statistics on the fuel
prices for each region. All markets show substantial temporal variation in the cost ratio.
While some of the variation in fuel prices is across regions, most of it is over time. The
coal-to-gas cost ratio is 0.43 on average in the East and slightly smaller in the other markets.
Table 3: Summary Statistics
Variable
CO2 Emissions
Load

Units
1000s tons/day

Eastern ERCOT Western
5,005
527
802
(768)
(89)
(119)

GWh/day

7,456
(879)

866
(159)

1,835
(168)

Emissions Rate

Tons/MWh

0.67
(0.04)

0.61
(0.05)

0.44
(0.05)

Coal Price

$/mmBTU

2.50
(0.42)

2.20
(0.34)

1.84
(0.24)

Gas Price

$/mmBTU

5.49
(2.28)

5.10
(2.13)

5.04
(1.95)

Cost Ratio

0.43
(0.88)

0.41
(0.81)

0.35
(0.76)

Observations

2,557

2,557

2,557

In the next section, we use these data to trace out the emission response of the electricity
system to changes in input costs while controlling for important features of the market.
However, we first calculate how much of a reduction in carbon emissions is feasible given the
current stock of power plants.
We report load in gigawatt-hours (GWh) per day and emissions rates in tons of CO 2 per megawatt-hour
(MWh), where a GWh is one thousand MWh and one million kWh.
19

14

Table 4: Potential Shares of Carbon Emissions Reduced from Fuel Switching
Eastern ERCOT
0.42
0.37

Western
0.40

As a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation, we examine whether there is sufficient capacity at natural gas facilities to have a substantial effect on carbon emissions. See the
appendix for details on the methodology. Table 4 reports the share of carbon emissions from
that could be reduced in 2012, assuming a derating factor of 90%. Similar to Lafrancois
(2012), we see that we have enough unused gas capacity to reduce emissions by about 40%.
These results vary over time. 20 In 2001, unused gas capacity was the limiting factor so that
only 25% of emissions could be reduced. Starting in 2003, investment in gas capacity had
grown such that unused gas capacity exceeded coal production in nearly every hour in the
West and in ERCOT, and about 12-29% of the time in the East. 21

5

Empirical Model

We aim to create a simple, yet flexible model that can trace out the response of emissions
to changes in relative fuel that can accommodate the varied technologies on the grid and
their complex interactions in electricity markets. The method used is similar to the literature that econometrically estimates the relationship between emissions and either electricity consumption(Graff Zivin, Kotchen & Mansur 2014), electricity generation (Siler-Evans,
Azevedo & Morgan 2012, Holladay & LaRiviere 2014), and wind production (Callaway &
Fowlie 2009, Cullen 2013b, Kaffine, McBee & Lieskovsky 2013, Novan forthcoming).
The model is a reduced-form regression with daily carbon dioxide emissions ( CO2t ) in an
interconnection as the dependent variable as shown below. We are relatively confident that
the emissions reduction estimated for an interconnection come from that interconnection as
The web appendix shows shares for each year from 2001 to 2012 for derating factors of both 90% and
80%.
21
We use a second measure of hourly generation ( gg
enif t ) based on heat
Pinput data from CEMS to allocate
eiagenif m across hours in a month: gg
enif t = eiagenif m ∙(cemsheatif t /
cemsheatif t ), where cemsheatif t
20

t∈m

is the hourly heat input reported by CEMS. The results are quite similar.

15

little power flows between them. 22 For day t, the estimating equation is:

CO2t = f (CRt ) + g(Xt ) + Zt ψ + Dt γ + t ,

(2)

where CRt is the ratio of the coal price over the gas price, both measured in dollars per
millions of BTU.23 The matrices Xt , Zt , and Dt are sets of controls described below.
For identification, we rely on exogenous shocks to natural gas prices. When selecting
controls included in Xt , we need to include variables that would directly affect the interconnection emissions that might also be correlated with the variation in input fuel costs.
The quantity of electricity demanded, or load, obviously meets this criteria. The quantity
demanded on a given day, although driven by weather and day-specific demand shocks, may
be correlated with the spot price for gas. This may be because electricity generators demand
more gas when electricity demand is high or simply a correlation in the demand for electricity
and the demand of gas outside the electricity sector, such as home heating. For example,
lower electricity demand and emissions due to a negative macroeconomic shock would be
correlated with low prices for natural gas due to the same shock. Failing to account for
electricity demand would tend to overestimate the response of emissions to the price gap.
Thus we include daily electricity demand in the interconnection as a control variable.
In Xt , we also include data on production from non-fossil fuel electricity production. Nonfossils electricity production includes wind, solar, hydro, and nuclear power generators. While
these generators are not likely to change their production in response to gas or coal prices,
they may be correlated with them. For example, wind power installations have been growing
at the same time as technological innovation has led to more shale gas extraction. Likewise,
seasonal variation in the availability of hydroelectric generating capacity may influence the
spot prices of natural gas.
When implementing the estimating equation, we use flexible functional forms for f (.)
and g(.) to trace out the emissions response of the system. Specifically, we use a cubic spline
Novan (forthcoming) provides an example of some power plants in SPP capable of selling into ERCOT.
In addition, DC lines do connect interconnections like from Quebec to New England.
23
Note that gas prices change on a daily basis, while the information on coal prices changes monthly.
22

16

with six knot point for cost ratio and load. We test the robustness of our results to different
numbers of knots and found the results to be stable with four or more.
We also control for other factors, Zt , in more traditional parametric ways. We capture
the within-day distribution of hourly load using the minimum, maximum, and standard deviation. We control for monthly net imports of electricity from Canada, non-fossil electricity
production, and the permit prices of local pollutants (SO 2 and NOx ). Finally, we include
a dummy variable (Dt ) for each quarter in the time series to control for trends in generating capacity, macroeconomic shocks, as well as seasonality in generator availability. The
resulting regression is:

CO2t = s(CRt |β) + s(loadt |θ) + s(unf ossilt |α) + s(tempt |ω) + Zψ + Dγ + t ,

(3)

where the function s(∙) is a cubic spline. In order to account for serial correlation and
heteroscedasticity, we use Newey-West standard errors allowing for a seven-day lag structure.
With the estimated coefficients, we can trace out the emissions response of the electricity
generating system to changes in the relative costs of coal and gas.

6

Results

6.1

Main Results

The results from the estimation for each interconnection are shown in Figure 5. We plot the
percent change in carbon dioxide emissions against the price of natural gas, using the EIA
(2012) expected future coal prices to construct the cost ratio. 24 Dashed lines show the 95%
confidence interval for the estimates using Newey-West corrected standard errors. Control
variables, such as demand and non-fossil electricity production, are held at their average
levels in the sample.
The results show statistically insignificant changes in emission for high gas prices. That
is, when gas prices are above $6 (per mmBTU), changes in gas prices don’t result in switching
24

Changes are relative to the emissions given the EIA expected future natural gas and coal prices.

17

Figure 5: Estimated CO 2 Response to Fuel Prices
(a) Eastern Interconnection

(b) ERCOT Interconnection

(c) Western Interconnection

18

between high polluting plants and cleaner facilities. Not until the gas prices approach $4-$5,
do emissions begin to fall. For the Eastern interconnection, emissions fall by about 10% when
the gas price falls to $2. For ERCOT and the Western interconnection, carbon emissions
fall by about seven and twelve percent, respectively, at this gas price. Keep in mind that
$2 reflects historically low gas prices. This brings much of the gas-fired fleet on par with
coal-fired generators. Though the reduction in emissions is significant, it does not begin
to approach the 40% estimates in Section 4. This suggests that dynamics, transmission
constraints, or other factors excluded from simpler models greatly reduce the emissions
reductions possible from fuel switching.

6.2

Robustness

We examine the robustness of these results in the appendix. Figure A.7 examines the functional form that we use to compare coal and gas prices. Figure A.8 compares the main
results using different number of knots for the cubic splines. In the web appendix, we examine additional robustness tests. We test how sensitive our results are to dropping some
of our control variables. We also study how the response function changes with the length
of time we use for fixed effects. Notably one specification includes month-of-sample fixed
effects that control for all variation in our estimated coal prices. Even within a month, we
observe modest fuel switching due to variation in daily natural gas prices.
We also consider concerns of potential endogeneity. We rely on exogenous variation in
natural gas prices for identification. While we control for the effect that electricity demand
and temperature might have on fuel prices, a random shock to daily emissions, conditional
on electricity demand, could shift the market demand for fuels. For example, suppose a large
coal fired-power plant is forced to shut down for a few days. All else equal, this increases
demand for natural gas and while at the same time emissions fall. In theory, this could
increase the price of natural gas and introduce bias into our the coefficient estimates. This
would imply that our estimates are an underestimate of the true effect. However, we argue
that these biases are likely to be small. First, we have included most of the factors that

19

affect fuel choice like production from non-fossil power plants, net imports, etc. Second,
the storage of electricity and fuels are dramatically different: While power is prohibitively
expensive to store, fuels are storable commodities. Today’s natural gas price reflects current
both weather conditions and electricity load, but also expectations about future demand.
Thus, one day’s demand shock may have limited effect on prices.

7

Discussion of Carbon Price

7.1

Effect on Carbon Emissions

We use the electricity industry’s experience with low gas prices to explore how the industry
may respond to a carbon tax. As a first step, we need to choose a baseline level for fuel prices
from which to compare the effect of various carbon prices. In this section, we assume that
these prices are exogenously determined, with prices returning to the long run average costs
of extracting and processing the fuels. The EIA (2012) forecasts that average delivered coal
prices will be $2.25/mmBTU and gas prices will be $5.75/mmBTU in 2025. This implies a
baseline cost ratio of 0.39, which will serve as our benchmark 25 .
Next we map the emissions response curves that we estimated in Section 6 into carbon
prices using the logic discussed in Section 3. As shown in Table 2, for any cost ratio observed
in the data, there is a matching counterfactual carbon price with the same cost ratio given the
baseline fuel prices. As previously discussed, the ordering of the generators in the industry
marginal cost curve will be identical, whenever the fuel cost ratios are the same. The industry
cost curve under a carbon tax will be proportional to the cost curve in the data with the
same cost ratio.
With fixed baseline fuel costs, we can project our estimates of emissions reductions due
to shocks to gas prices onto their equivalent carbon price. For each region, Figure 6 shows
When calculating carbon tax from fuel prices, we don’t account for the impact that an increasing carbon
tax may have on the equilibrium price of fuels. That is, a higher carbon price will lead to increased demand
for natural gas which could increase the price of gas. Rather, we assume that baseline fuel prices are fixed and
exogenous. Given that incorporating any price response of fuels to a carbon tax would tend to decrease the
emissions reductions for higher carbon taxes, our results represent generous estimates of emissions reductions
from a carbon tax.
25

20

Figure 6: Imputed CO2 Response to Carbon Prices
(a) Eastern Interconnection

(b) ERCOT Interconnection

(c) Western Interconnection

5
21

the estimated emissions reductions that would come from a carbon price (in $/ton of CO2 )
under these assumptions. The figures focus on the cost ratios that correspond to positive
carbon prices under the baseline fuel costs. They show that emissions fall steeply at lower
levels of carbon tax, but then the rate of change decreases for higher levels of carbon tax.
These results indicate that much of the emissions reduction from technology switching can
be captured with a relatively modest price on carbon. High price carbon on carbon do result
in some further reduction in carbon dioxide emissions, but the large impact from high carbon
price is likely to come from retooling the generating infrastructure. Specifically, we find that
even a carbon price of $10/ton would reduce emissions about four percent. However, to
achieve a ten percent reduction, the carbon price would need to be closer to $60/ton.

22

7.2

Effect on Carbon Emissions by Fuel Type
Table 5: CO2 Emissions Abated at $20/ton by Fuel Type*
East
Coal
Gas
Other
Total

ERCOT

West

-6.16 -3.29
(1.09) (1.02)
2.33
1.21
(0.61) (0.58)
-0.37
–
(0.08)
–
-4.21 -2.08

-5.97
(0.45)
0.40
(0.25)
0.18
(0.06)
-5.39

*Percentage of baseline emissions

Table 6: CO2 Emissions Abated at $60/ton by Fuel Type*
East

ERCOT

West

-9.57
(1.38)
2.74
(0.70)
-0.25
(0.10)
-7.07

-13.31
(1.94)
1.84
(1.13)
–
–
-11.47

Coal -11.10
(0.72)
NG 1.64
(0.33)
Other 0.06
(0.08)
Total -9.40

*Percentage of baseline emissions

23

7.3

Carbon Pricing Under High Gas Prices

We can also use our estimates to examine how effective carbon prices would be at reducing
emissions under different initial prices. The results of Section 7.1 are based on EIA predicted
fuel prices. Suppose that the price of natural gas ends up being much higher than expected.
For example, new environmental regulations could increase the cost of shale gas production
or even impose a ban on fracking. Alternatively, gas prices could rise if there is a significant
increase in LNG exports. 26 Before shale gas became a major share of US gas production, the
US and Europe had similar natural gas prices (see Figure 1). While the recession lowered
European gas prices, they returned to pre-recession levels by 2012.
Figure 7 shows the effect of carbon pricing assuming that US fuel prices also returned
to the levels seen in the spring of 2008. 27 The figure shows that, when natural gas prices
are high, carbon prices are much less effective at reducing carbon emissions. For example, a
$20/ton carbon price reduces carbon emissions in the East by about six percent in the base
case (see Figure 6a), but by less than one percent when gas prices are high. In other words,
in order to achieve a carbon cap-and-trade target, a much higher carbon permit price would
be required if gas prices were high.

Note that for prices to rise to the historic rates because of LNG exports would require much larger
foreign prices as liquefying gas is costly.
27
In April of 2008, fuel prices were $2.46/mmBtu for coal and $10.28/mmBTU for natural gas, implying
a coal-to-gas cost ratio of 0.24.
26

24

Figure 7: Emission Response Limited in a High Gas Price Scenario

7.4

Co-Benefits of Carbon Price

By changing the dispatch of power plants, carbon prices are likely to reduce other pollutants
like SO2 and NOx that have local and regional health effects. 28 For each interconnection,
we replicate the estimation and simulation methods of Sections 5 and 7.1 where we replace
the dependent variable in equation (3) with the daily emissions of either SO 2 or NOx within
a given interconnection. We estimate how these emissions depend on the coal-to-gas cost
ratio, which we then convert into a carbon price as above.
Figure 8 shows the aggregate response of SO 2 emissions to carbon prices. We see that a
$20/ton carbon price results in about a 6% drop in emissions in each region. However, the
functions differ at other prices. For example, a 10% drop in SO 2 emissions would require
a carbon price of $40 in the East or the West, but almost double that in ERCOT. Figure
9 shows the response curves for NO x emissions by region. Here a large reduction in NO x
emissions would occur from a much larger carbon price in the East than in the other regions.

Burtraw, Krupnick, Mansur, Austin & Farrell (1998) and Chestnut & Mills (2005) examine the environmental benefits of federal regulations of local pollutants. See Schmalensee & Stavins (2013) for a recent
discussion of these policies.
28

25

26

(b) ERCOT

(c) Western

(a) Eastern

(b) ERCOT

(c) Western

Figure 9: NOx Response to Carbon Price by Interconnection

(a) Eastern

Figure 8: SO2 Response to Carbon Price by Interconnection

However, these figures mask important spatial variation. Unlike CO 2 emissions, the
location of these local emissions matters for estimating the marginal damages. While a
precise estimate of these marginal damages is beyond the scope of this paper, we do examine
the spatial distribution of these emissions. In particular, we modify equation (3) by defining
the dependent variable as the daily emissions (SO 2 or NOx ) within a given subregion of an
interconnection.29 Figure A.12 shows the regional variation in responses.

7.5

Caveats

There are several assumptions required in order for the behavior of generators and their
associated emissions to be identical for observed and counterfactual scenarios with the same
cost ratios. First, although the relative costs of coal and gas mayd be the same in the
observed and counterfactual worlds, the level of costs are not. Coal and gas costs will be
much higher under a carbon price than in the data where we observe average coal costs and
very low gas costs. As such, equilibrium electricity prices will be higher under a carbon tax.
The degree of demand response to these higher prices will also affect the change in carbon
emissions. Only with a perfectly inelastic demand curve will a straight mapping based on
cost ratios be accurate. However, the results of the estimation do highlight the degree to
which technology switching can contribute to emissions reductions under a carbon tax. 30
Second, even if the marginal cost curve under two scenarios imply the same dispatch order,
the profits of an individual generator need not be identical. In particular, (inframarginal)
generators reap higher markups due to the steeper slope of the marginal cost curve in the
high-cost scenario. While this is not an issue when holding the generating infrastructure on
the grid fixed, carbon prices do provide greater incentive for investment in clean generating
technology.
Third, another issue arises from the dynamic considerations in operating a generator.
The online appendix has a map of these NERC subregions as defined in the EPA’s eGrid database. Note
that the independent variables are still at the interconnection level.
30
The analysis also assumes that the behavior of low marginal cost renewable and nuclear generators are
unaffected by higher equilibrium electricity prices. Given that these generators already have incentives to
operate at full capacity whenever possible, this assumptions seems reasonable.
29

27

Generators make operating decisions amid fluctuating intra-day demand. This necessitates
that some generators shut down and restart. Generators will start production only if they
expect to cover their start-up costs while operating. Since the profits of generators will be
different under the two scenarios with the same cost ratios, firms may undertake different
startup decisions. This is lessened if their start-up costs scale with the fuel prices. Although
fuel costs are a central part of start-up costs, they are not the only component. Thus will not
scale perfectly with fuel costs. The degree to which changes in dynamics affect the outcomes
is difficult to judge given our approach. However, structural dynamic estimation of electricity
markets indicates that start-up costs are not a driving factor for aggregate carbon emissions
changes under a carbon tax (Cullen 2013a).
Finally, regulatory uncertainty is another way that these scenarios may differ. Firms
facing natural gas prices can look at how the market is doing and predict where it likely
to go given their model of the long run equilibrium. In contrast, predicting what a permit
price will be in a cap-and-trade regulation, or how regulation may change for any carbon
price is inherently challenging. There are no market forces pulling towards a clear regulatory
outcome. As a result, firms making irreversible capital investments in generation technology,
for example, are likely to behave differently given these differences in uncertainty.
A final comment concerns the interaction of multiple regulations. This paper predicts
changes in emissions for CO 2 and co-benefits in response to carbon prices. If a cap-and-trade
market already exists, for SO 2 for example, then an additional carbon tax cannot effect
aggregate emissions (assuming the cap continues to bind). This does not mean that the
market will be unaffected: a carbon tax reduces demand for SO 2 permits, the permit prices
will fall, and the spatial distribution of emissions will change. Even for the direct effects
on CO2 emissions, the California and RGGI markets are now capping emissions in their
respective areas. During our sample period, RGGI permits were quite low and California
was just starting to trade, making it very unlikely that these policies affect our estimates.
However, going forward, it is important to keep in mind how state, regional, and national
carbon policies interact (Goulder & Stavins 2011).

28

8

Conclusion

This paper provides estimates, based on observed behavior rather than simulations, of the
impact of carbon pricing on electricity-sector emissions. We show how lower gas prices and
a carbon price can affect the relative costs of generators in similar ways. This paper exploits
significant variation in natural gas prices that resulted from a rare combination of factors:
a large recession, the start of the shale revolution, and limited capacity to export gas. In
the near future, the federal government projects an end to these low prices as exports rise
and the economy recovers (EIA 2012). In this paper, we use the recent price variation
to estimate how the electricity sector’s carbon emissions respond to fuel cost shocks, and
examine conditions under which this response to relative fuel prices can inform us about
how a price on carbon dioxide will change emissions in the short run. Understanding how a
carbon price will affect polluting firms in the short run is an important step in demonstrating
the effectiveness of such an instrument for use in the long run. On a longer time horizon,
even greater emissions reductions could be expected as new generation could be built and
consumers could adjust to new equilibrium electricity prices.
Our results indicate that carbon prices will result in a modest effect on emissions: even
a price of $60 per ton of carbon dioxide will reduce emissions only 10%. However, much of
the reduction in carbon dioxide emissions can be captured with a relatively modest carbon
tax: a price of $20 reduces emissions by 6%. Furthermore, carbon prices are much more
effective at reducing emissions when natural gas prices are low. In contrast, modest carbon
prices have negligible effects when gas prices are at levels seen prior to the shale revolution.
Finally, we show how a carbon price can result in co-benefits by reducing local emissions, in
aggregate, in an approximately proportional manner.
Many emissions trading policies including the EU ETS, RGGI, and RECLAIM have
been criticized for their effectiveness in reducing emissions in the short run. 31 While the
overarching objective of climate policy is to reduce aggregate cumulative emissions of green31
Tvinnereim (2014) discusses several reasons why many cap-and-trade policies have had lower permit
prices than expected. Concerns over RECLAIM were due to high prices, non-compliance, and environmental
justice (see Fowlie, Holland & Mansur (2012) for an analysis of these concerns).

29

house gases, much of the focus to date has been on the short-run impacts. We argue that
understanding how firms fuel switch is important in knowing how effective a market-based
instrument can be in the short run, where the policy debate over carbon pricing seems to
focus.

30

References
Borenstein, S., Bushnell, J. B. & Wolak, F. A. (2002), ‘Measuring market inefficiencies
in California’s restructured wholesale electricity market’, American Economic Review
92(5), 1376–1405.
Burtraw, D., Krupnick, A., Mansur, E. T., Austin, D. & Farrell, D. (1998), ‘Cost and
benefits of reducing air pollutants related to acid rain’, Contemporary Economic Policy
16(4), 379–400.
Bushnell, J. B., Mansur, E. T. & Saravia, C. (2008), ‘Vertical arrangements, market structure, and competition: An analysis of restructured US electricity markets’, American
Economic Review 98(1), 237–66.
Callaway, D. & Fowlie, M. (2009), Greenhouse gas emissions reductions from wind energy:
Location, location, location?, Working paper.
Chestnut, L. G. & Mills, D. M. (2005), ‘A fresh look at the benefits and costs of the U.S.
acid rain program’, Journal of Environmental Management 77(3), 252–266.
Cullen, J. (2013a), Dynamic response to environmental regulation in the electricity industry,
Working paper.
Cullen, J. (2013b), ‘Measuring the environmental benefits of wind-generated electricity’,
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(4), 107–133.
URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/pol.5.4.107
EIA (2012), Annual Energy Outlook 2012, Technical report, U.S. Energy Information Administration.
EIA (2014), Electric power monthly, Technical report.
Ellerman, D. & Buchner, B. (2007), ‘The European Union Emissions Trading Scheme: Origins, allocation, and early results’, , Review of Environmental Economics and Policy
1(1), 66–87.
EPA (2013), Inventory of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions and sinks: 1990-2011, Epa 430-r13-001, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Fowlie, M., Holland, S. P. & Mansur, E. T. (2012), ‘What do emissions markets deliver
and to whom? evidence from Southern California’s NOx Trading Program’, American
Economic Review 102(2), 965–993.
Goulder, L. H. & Stavins, R. N. (2011), ‘Challenges from state-federal interactions in US
climate change policy’, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 101(3), 253–
257.
31

Graff Zivin, J. S., Kotchen, M. & Mansur, E. T. (2014), ‘Spatial and temporal heterogeneity of marginal emissions: Implications for electric cars and other electricity-shifting
policies’, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 107(Part A), 248268.
Holladay, J. S. & LaRiviere, J. (2014), The impact of cheap natural gas on marginal emissions
from electricity generation and implications for energy policy, Working paper.
Kaffine, D. T., McBee, B. J. & Lieskovsky, J. (2013), ‘Emissions savings from wind power
generation in Texas’, The Energy Journal 34(1), 155–175.
Knittel, C. R., Metaxoglou, K. & Trindade, A. (2014), Dash for gas: The sequel, Working
paper.
Lafrancois, B. A. (2012), ‘A lot left over: Reducing CO 2 emissions in the United States’
electric power sector through the use of natural gas’, Energy Policy 50, 428–435.
Linn, J., Mastrangelo, E. & Burtraw, D. (2014), ‘Regulating greenhouse gases from coal
power plants under the clean air act’, Journal of the Association for Environmental and
Resource Economics 1(1/2), 97–134.
Linn, J., Muehlenbachs, L. & Wang, Y. (2013), Short-run demand for natural gas in the
U.S. electric power sector, Working paper.
Logan, J., Heath, G. & Macknick, J. (2012), Natural gas and the transformation of the
U.S. energy sector: Electricity, Technical report nrel/tp-6a50-55538, Joint Institute for
Strategic Energy Analysis.
Lu, X., Salovaara, J. & McElroy, M. (2012), ‘Implications of the recent reductions in natural
gas prices for emissions of CO2 from the US power sector’, Environmental Science &
Technology 46(5), 3014–3021.
Mansur, E. T. (2007), ‘Upstream competition and vertical integration in electricity markets’,
Journal of Law and Economics 50, 125–781.
Mansur, E. T. (2008), ‘Measuring welfare in restructured electricity markets’, The Review
of Economics and Statistics 90(2), 369–386.
Mansur, E. T. & White, M. (2012), ‘Market organization and efficiency in electricity markets’, (Working Paper).
Metcalf, G. E. (2009), ‘Designing a carbon tax to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas emissions’,
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3(1), 63–83.
Newcomer, A., Blumsack, S., Apt, J., Lave, L. & Morgan, M. G. (2008), ‘Short run effects of
a price on carbon dioxide emissions from US electric generators’, Environmental Science
& Technology 22(9), 3139–3144.
32

Novan, K. (forthcoming), ‘Valuing the wind: Renewable energy policies and air pollution
avoided’, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy .
Pratson, L. F., Haerer, D. & Patio-Echeverri, D. (2013), ‘Fuel prices, emission standards,
and generation costs for coal vs natural gas power plants’, Environmental Science &
Technology 47(9), 4926–4933.
Puller, S. L. (2007), ‘Pricing and firm conduct in California’s deregulated electricity market’,
Review of Economics and Statistics 89(1), 75–87.
Schmalensee, R. & Stavins, R. N. (2013), ‘The SO 2 allowance trading system: The ironic
history of a grand policy experiment’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(1), 103–121.
Siler-Evans, K., Azevedo, I. L. & Morgan, M. G. (2012), ‘Marginal emissions factors for the
US electricity system’, Environmental Science & Technology 46(9), 4742–4748.
Tvinnereim, E. (2014), ‘The bears are right: Why cap-and-trade yields greater emission
reductions than expected, and what that means for climate policy’, Climatic Change
127(3-4), 447–461.

33

Appendix
Coal Price Regressions
Section 4 discusses the method we use to calculate a coal price index. In this appendix,
we report the regression results for each region (see Table A.1). We also show the national
average for comparison. While the type of coal a power plant purchases may change in
response to natural gas prices, we are concerned that the heterogeneity in coal transactions
within a plant may also reflect noise. So, we construct a coal price index based on the average
coal characteristics in a region as of January 2001. We then add the monthly fixed effects to
the base price, thereby keeping the coal composition constant for a region. This coal price
index in shown in Appendix Figure A.1.
Table A.1: Coal Price Index Regression Results
Variable
Sulfur

National
East
West
-13.59*** -13.59*** -10.51*
(1.38)
(1.36)
(5.77)

ERCOT
1.40
(12.86)

Ash

2.09***
(0.26)

2.69***
(0.33)

-1.53***
(0.35)

0.40
(2.00)

Mine

-7.99***
(1.81)

-10.88***
(1.88)

19.31***
(5.99)

32.33***
(7.13)

Btu

4.40***
(1.40)

4.37***
(1.42)

5.33***
(0.95)

5.24*
(3.09)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Month-Year F.E.
Plant F.E.

34

Figure A.1: Monthly Coal Price Indices

35

Gas Prices and Coal/Gas Cost Ratio
For comparison with the coal prices, Figure A.2 shows variation in gas prices over time for
each of the three regions. Figure A.3 shows the variation in the ratio of the coal to gas price
which is the variable of interest in our estimation procedure. Both gas prices and the ratio
show substantial variation over time and across regions.
Figure A.2: Daily Gas Price Index by Region

36

Figure A.3: Coal/Gas Price Ratio by Region

Simple Model of Potential Fuel Switching
This section of the appendix describes the methodology that we use to calculate the potential
for fuel switching. First we calculate the total electricity generated ( genif t ) in interconnection
i, fuel type f , and hour of sample t:
cemsgenif t
,
genif t = eiagenif m ∙ P
cemsgenif t
t∈m

where eiagenif m is the aggregate monthly net generation reported in EIA form-923 and
cemsgenif t is the hourly gross generation reported by CEMS. In other words, we use the
variation within a month reported by CEMS to distribute the EIA monthly generation.
Next we calculate the nameplate capacity by fuel type, month, and interconnection. We
define unused capacity as the difference between hourly generation and available capacity,
where available capacity is nameplate capacity that is derated to account for the fact that
power plants shut down for routine maintenance of because of forced outages. We test the
robustness of our calculations to several different derating factors (75% to 100% for each 5%
increment).
Finally, we calculate the carbon implications by comparing the unused capacity of natural
37

gas plants within an interconnection and hour with the contemporaneous generation from
coal-fired power plants. For each hour and interconnection, we calculate the generation from
coal generators that could be reallocated to idle natural gas capacity. This to produces
a measure of potential fuel switching. Surprisingly, in most hours, we find that there is
substantial unused gas capacity to completely offset all coal generation, even for low derating
rates. In order to convert generation into potential carbon reductions, we use the emissions
factors mentioned in footnote 15 and the average heat rate by year, interconnection and
P
P
fuel type: (
eiaheatif m /
eiagenif m ), where eiaheatif m is the aggregate monthly heat
m∈yr

m∈yr

input reported in EIA form-923 for interconnection i, fuel type f , and month m in year yr.
Note that this calculation makes many assumptions about transmission capacity, power

plant operation capabilities, information, and incentives that we argued in Section 2 were
unreasonable and motivation for a more careful analysis that we revisit in the following
section. Nonetheless, we report the simple model in order to get a sense of how much unused
gas capacity is available.

Results and Data Distribution
In this section, we take the results shown in figures 5 and 6, and overlay histogram of variable
of interest to show the density of data that identify the curve. We also show the location
of the knot points used in estimation. These are shown for the East electricity generation
region, but the pattern is similar in the West and ERCOT. Figure A.4, shows the results
as gas prices decrease with the coal price fixed at the long run base case as in Figure 5a.
The six knot points spaced according to the distribution of the cost ratio at the 5, 23, 41,
59, 77, 95 percentiles. Importantly, the histogram shows that the data is dense in the areas
where the gas price is relatively low. Identifying the response of generators to low gas prices
is what allows the model to make predictions about the response of generators to a price on
carbon.
Figure A.5 transforms the results be a function of carbon prices as detailed in the body
of the paper. The curve is identical to the one in Figure 6a, but again we have imposed

38

the knot points and the histogram of the data onto the estimated response curve. There are
many data points up through about $60/ton after which the density of the data begins to
be stretched out. Note that only 5 knot points show up in this graph. This because we only
report the results for carbon price less than $80/ton. There are implied carbon prices in
excess of $200/ton, but the data are sparse for higher carbon prices. Thus, we have to rely
more on the function form to identify the behavior of generators for very high carbon prices.
Also, these prices less interesting from a policy perspective. For comparison, the results over
the full range of implied carbon prices is shown in Figure A.6.
Figure A.4: Estimated CO 2 Response to Fuel Prices

39

Figure A.5: Imputed CO 2 Response to Carbon Prices

Figure A.6: CO2 Response for Full Range of Imputed Carbon Prices

40

Robustness to Function of Relative Fuel Costs
Figure A.7 estimates the level of emissions in the East as a function of fuel prices using
three different functional forms of relative fuel prices. They are (1) our main specification
of coal/gas ratio, (2) the inverse ratio of gas/coal, and (3) the price difference of the natural
gas price minus the coal price (in $/mmBTU). All three ratios show very similar mappings
of gas prices to emissions, holding coal prices fixed.
Figure A.7: Robustness to Functional Form of Fuel Costs

41

Robustness to the Number of Knots
The main results use six knots in the cubic splines of several variables, including the cost
ratio. Figure A.8 shows how the predicted emissions in the East change with the number
of knots in comparison to Figure 5a. We see that for four and five knots, the results are
virtually identical to the model with six knots and lie completely within the 95% confidence
of the six knot specification. For the model with only three knots, the emissions response is
overstated at high gas prices, where there are few observations. This model also smoothes
over the sharp drop in emissions around $5/mmBTU. The model with seven knots is more
sensitive to noise in the data that leads to non-monotonicity in the response curve. It is also
almost entirely within the 95% confidence interval of the six knot specification. Overall, the
results are qualitatively and statistically insensitive to the number of knots used to form the
cubic spline.
Figure A.8: Robustness to Number of Knots

42

Electricity Demand
As noted in section 7.5, the analysis does not account for the change in electricity demand
that may occur when equilibrium electricity prices increase under a carbon tax. Although
we cannot impute the demand response to higher counterfactual electricity prices, we can
understand how a price on carbon would affect emissions if demand were lower. We do this
by splitting the sample by the median daily demand in each month of the sample. That
is, we define high demand days in a month to be those days whose demand is higher than
the median demand in that month. Low demand days are those below the median. We do
this by month of sample to avoid selection on seasonality or time trend. That is, we avoid
comparing only winter months to only summer months or the beginning of the sample to
the end of the sample. In a month, some days will be happen to be higher demand due to
weather and other shocks to demand. This limits the difference in demand between the high
and low demand groups, but ensures a comparable sample. The average difference between
the high and low demand sample is about 10% of demand as shown in table A.2. This can
be seen in the kernel densities of the two regimes. Figure A.9 shows the density of demand
has a similar shape but shifts in the high and low demand regimes. Although there is a shift
in the distribution of demand, the distribution of gas/coal cost ratios is almost identical in
the two regimes as shown in figure A.10. We use the same specification used for our main
results to estimate the response of emissions to variation in the cost ration in both the high
demand and the low demand sample. The results, shown in figure A.11, demonstrate that
there is very little difference between the high and low demand samples. Only in ERCOT at
very low gas prices is there a divergence. As we would expect, low demand implies a higher
response to relative prices.
Table A.2: Average Daily Demand (GWH) in High and Low Demand Samples
Low
East
7053
ERCOT 810
West
1758

High
7855
922
1910

43

% Difference
10.2
12.2
8.0

Figure A.9: Distribution of Demand by Demand Regime: Eastern Interconnection

Figure A.10: Distribution of Gas/Coal Ratio by Demand Regime: Eastern Interconnection

44

Figure A.11: CO2 Response in High and Low Demand Periods
(d) Eastern Interconnection

(e) ERCOT Interconnection

(f) Western Interconnection

45

Co-pollutants
This section complements the analysis shown in Figures 8 and 9 of the text by examining
how the effects of SO2 and NOx are disbursed spatially. The different subregions of the US
are defined in the web appendix. Figure A.12 shows how a price of $20 per ton of carbon
dioxide would affect CO 2 , SO2 , and NOx emissions in each region. The method is described
in the text.
We see from the figure that the emissions response varies regionally. The subregions
SRVC (the North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia region), RFCE (the New Jersey,
Maryland, Delaware, and eastern Pennsylvania region), and NEWE (New England) show
the largest reductions of about ten percent for CO2.
However, this does not lead to the largest percent reductions in local pollutants. The
co-benefits (in percentage terms) are largest in SRVC and SRSO (the Alabama and Georgia
region) for NOx , and NEWE, SRVC, and CAMX (California) for SO 2 . Note that California
has very little SO2 . The regional responses of three pollutants are positively correlated across
pollutants. However, they do show very different patterns.

46

47

Figure A.12: Emissions Response to Carbon Price by Subregion

