                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                DEFICITS WITH DISTORTIONARY TAXES:
                     INTERNATIONAL DIMENSIONS




                         Jacob A. Frenkel

                           Assaf Raz-in




                      Working Paper No. 2080




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            November 1986




We thank Thomas Krueger and Alan Auerbach for helpful comments.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations and International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2080
                                                November 1986



          Deficits with Distortionary Taxes: International Dimensions




                                    ABSTRACT


       This paper deals with the international effects of budget deficits

arising      from   distortionary    tax and transfer policies.     The analysis
demonstrates that the consequences of tax policies and the characteristics of

the international transmission mechanism depend critically on the precise

composition of taxes.       Specifically, the international effects of budget

deficits of a given size differ sharply according to the types of taxes used

to generate the deficit. We show that in determining the effects of taxes it

is useful to divide the various distortionary taxes into two groups: those

that stimulate current external borrowing (national dissaving) and those that

stimulate current external lending (national saving). A pro-borrowing tax
policy raises the world rate of interest while a pro-lending tax policy lowers

it. The resulting change in the rate of interest is the channel through which

the effects of budget deficits are transmitted to the rest of the world. The

key propositions are illustrated by a series of examples involving consumption

taxes (VAT), taxes on income of labor and capital and taxes on international

borrowing.




Jacob A. Frenkel                                      Assaf Razin
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                 Tel-Aviv University
1126 E. 59th Street                                   Ramat-Aviv, Tel-Aviv 66978
Chicago, IL 60637                                     ISRAEL
(312) 962-8253                                        (972)-3-420-064
                                        1



       This paper deals with the international effects of budget deficits

arising from tax and transfer policies. In order to focus on issues of public

finance we assume that the path of government spending is given and we examine

the implications of alternative time profiles of taxes and of public-debt issue.

To conduct a meaningful analysis of budget deficits we depart from the pure

Ricardian model (in which the timing taxes does not matter) by allowing for

distortionary taxes, and examine the effects of budget deficits arising from tax

policies under alternative tax systems. We consider deficit policies involving

taxes of different types: consumption taxes, taxes on income from domestic

investment, taxes on income from foreign lending, and taxes on labor income.

       Throughout we assume that capital markets in the world economy are fully

integrated and, therefore, that individuals and governments of different
countries face the same world rate of interest. This feature provides the key

channel through which the effects of policies undertaken in one country are

transmitted to the rest of the world.

       Much of the recent research in macroeconomics and public finance has been

conducted in a closed-economy framework and has emphasized the intertemporal

dimensions of tax policies and their effects on saving, investment labor supply

and growth.    In this context special attention has been given to the implica-

tions of budget deficits.1 Our analysis extends the closed-economy framework to

a two-country model of the world economy. This extension enables the treatment

of questions and issues that could not have been dealt with in a closed-economy

framework.    Furthermore, we show that open-economy considerations lead to
modifications of propositions derived previously in a closed-economy model.2

       The key result of this paper is that the consequences of tax policies and

the characteristics of the international transmission mechanism depend criti-

cally on the precise composition of taxes. Specifically, the international
                                       2


effects of a. budget deficit of a given size differ sharply according to the

types of taxes used to generate the deficit.

       In section I we develop a simple analytical framework suitable for the

analysis of distortionary taxes. This framework is applied in the subsequent

three sections to an examination of the international effects of budget deficits

arising from cuts in consumption taxes, capital-income taxes, and taxes on

international borrowing.     The analytical framework is extended in section V to

incorporate a variable labor supply and to allow for taxes on labor income.

This framework is used in section VI where we examine the effects of budget

deficits arising from a cut in taxes on labor income. The paper concludes in

section VII which contains an integrated summary of the main results.



I. Analytical Framework

       Consider a two-period model of a non-monetary open economy producing and

consuming one aggregate tradable good. The aggregation of goods into a single

aggregate commodity and the abstraction from money are done in order to focus

attention on intertemporal trade, that is, on international borrowing and

lending.      The economy is assumed to be endowed with an initial sequence of

endowments,        and     where the subscripts zero and one designate the cor-

responding periods. The initial endowment may be consumed or, alternatively, it

may be invested in intertemporal production process. Such an investment process

modifies the intertemporal pattern of available outputs (GDP). Formally, output

in period one, Y1, is linked to the initial endowments through Y1 —      + F(10)
where 10 denotes investment in period zero. The function F(10), which trans-

forms current investment into future output, exhibits positive and diminishing

returns.

       The private sector's periodic budget constraints are
                                            3



(1)        (l+r0)C0      (lrko)('o -   'o       + (1rbo)B -
                                                                (1+rl-rbO)Bl

(2)        (l+r1)C1 —    (lrkl)Cj +    F(10)) -       (1+rOrbl)B

In equations (l)-(2) C0 and C1 denote first and second-period consumption, B

(t-1,0) denotes period-t borrowing (which could be positive or negative), 1
measures the losses of firms (negative dividends) corresponding to initial

investment, F(10) measures second period dividends, rt (t—-l,0) denotes the
world rate of interest in period t, and rct rk and rb (t—0,1) denote,
respectively, the ad-valorem tax rates in period t on comsuniption, capital

income and new borrowing.       In this 2-period model, the solvency requirement

ensures that in the second period the private sector settles all debt commit-

ments and does not incur new debt. In equation (1) the coefficient of C0
indicates that the unit cost of consumption is one plus the corresponding ad-

valorem tax.    The coefficient of the level of capital income ("b-b) is one

minus the corresponding ad-valorem tax, reflecting taxes on income from existing

capital (V0)   and   a tax rebate on negative income from current investment. Our

formulation of the tax on international borrowing assumes that the tax applies

to new net private-sector borrowing --
                                                 (B   -
                                                          B).   This could be verified by

noting that the last two terms on the right-hand-side of equation (1) could also

be written as (l-rbO)(B-Bl)rlBPl .                  In    this formulation debt service is

exempt from the tax. An analogous interpretation applies to the second-period

budget constraint in equation (2). We note that in the second period there is

negative new net borrowing (since past debt is repaid and no new debt is
issued); therefore, the term ?b1BO corresponds to a tax rebate. As is evident

from the formulation of equations (l)-(2), the three taxes are linked through an
                                         4


equivalence relation: the effects of each tax can be replicated by a specific
combination of the other two taxes.

       With these taxes, the periodic budget constraints of the government are



                  C0 —   ÷ cO'O +            -         +            -
(3)
                                    rkOO         lo)       rbO(BO       B1)
                                                                              -
                                                                                  (i+r1)B1

(4)
                  G1 r1C1 +           + F(10))     -
                                                       rblBO
                                                               -
                                                                    (l+r0)B

where Ct (t—O,l) denotes government purchases in period t               and where Bt3
(t—-1,O) denotes government borrowing in period t.              Analogously       to the private

sector, solvency requires that, in the second period, the government settles all

debt commitments and does not incur new debt. In this formulation we have

iniplicitely assumed that aside for domestically imposed taxes, the private-

sector and the government can borrow at the same rate of interest in the world

capital market.     We also note that,in conformity with the national income
identities, in each period the difference between aggregate absorption and GNP

equals the net accummulation of external debt (the sum of private and public-

sector debts); this can be verified by adding, for each period, the private-

sector's and the government budget constraints.

       The private-sector seeks to maximize life-time utility subject to the

consolidated life-time constraint, obtained from the periodic budget con-
straints.   Accordingly, adding equation (2), multiplied by (lrbO)/(l+rOrbl),
to equation (1) and dividing the resultant equation by
                                                                   (l+rcO) yields
                                          5




                                  0 + (lrkl)(lrbO)
                         (lrkO) -                            -
(5)       C0 + a1C1                                         Y1
                         (1+r0)        (l+rO)(l+rOrbl)


                   (lrkO) i                     (l+r- irbO)
               +
                              Ii F(I)
                                   0     I
                                          1
                                                                 B1
                   (l+r0) [              Oj           +ro)


where ari —    (lrbO)(l+T C            aIi — 1Tho           (l_rkl)
                                                                      .   For subsequent
              (l+rO-rbl)(l+1-O)               (l+rQrbl) (lrko)
use we denote the world discount factor by        —
                                                      lr0
       Equation (5) is the private-sector consolidated budget constraint which

incorporates the role of taxes. The key point to emphasize is that the discount

factors applicable to the quantities pertaining to the future period (period

one) are the tax-inclusive discount factors. These are the effective discount

factors relevant for private-sector decisions. Accordingly, a1 measures the

effective intertemporal price of C1 in terms of C0. This price reflects the

prevailing tax structure. It is governed by the time profiles of the consump-

tion tax (reflected by the ratio (l+10i)/(l+r0)) and of the international

borrowing tax (reflected by the ratio (lrbO)/(l+rOrbl)).

       Analogously, the effective discount factor applicable for investment
decisions is a11     .   This,    effective discount factor is governed by the time

profiles of the taxes on international borrowing and on capital income. It does

not depend on the time profile of the tax on consumption.

       This dependence of the effective discount factors on the time profiles of

the various taxes reflects the non-Ricardian feature of the model. A budget

deficit arising from a current tax cut (for a given path of government spending)

must be followed by a future tax hike (in order to assure government solvency).

The change in the time profile of taxes alters the effective discount factors.

This provides for the principal channel through which budget deficits affect the
                                        6



intertemporal allocation of consumption and investment. We note that if the

time profile of any given tax is flat (so that             TcO_Tcl or rkO_rkl or
                         then this tax is non-distortionary and its impact is

similar to that of a lump-sum tax. Finally, in our two-country model of the

world economy, the foreign country is assumed to be characterized by a similar

structure and, in what follows, we use an asterisk to denote variables pertain-

ing to the foreign country.



II. The Effects of Cuts in Taxes on Consumption

        Consider the effects of a budget deficit induced by a cut in the tax on

consumption.   We note in passing that this consumption tax is equivalent to a

value-added tax system (VAT) under which investment and exports are exempt. In

order to isolate the effect of this tax cut, we assume that all other taxes are
zero.   We also assume that the path of foreign taxes is flat (so that the for-

eign tax system does not introduce a distortion) and that the foreign government

runs a balanced budget (so that changes in the world rate of interest do not

impact on the foreign government's solvency).

        The analysis is conducted with the aid of Figure 1 in which the upwards

sloping schedule, S', describes the ratio, z, of current to future world GDP net

of investment and of government spending, as an increasing function of the rate

of interest. Formally, this world relative-supply, z, is


                               _* * *        *
                z— Y0-10(a11)+Y0-I0(a11)-G0-G0
                    —             _* * * *            *
                     Y1+F[10(a11)J+Y1+F [10(a11)] -G1-G1


The world relative-supply schedule is a weighted average of the domestic and the
                                           *
foreign relative-supply schedules, S and S , respectively. Accordingly,
                    \
 1+p




1+r
1+r0
                                                             N
1+p *
                                                         C     —
                                                               D
                                                                                 '
                                  F
                                              *
                                          D



                                  1
                                                                                      *
                                                                         C           C
                                                                     z, 0 ,           0
                                                                         C            *
                                                                             1
                                                                                     C1




        Figure   1: The Effects of a Budget Deficit Arising from a Cut
                     in Consumption Taxes.
                                          7


 SW —   /45 + (lp)S* where


                        ______________________     Y1+F(10)-G1
                                   _* *    * *_          *
                        Y1+F(10)-G1+Y1+F 'o0




The positive dependence of z on the rate of interest reflects the fact that a

higher effective rate of interest (a lower effective discount factor) induces

profit-maximizing firms to lower investment.

          On the demand side of the model, private and public goods are assumed to

be separable in the utility functions and the latter are assumed to be homo-
thetic.      This implies that the desired ratio of consumption in the two consecu-

tive periods depends only on the intertemporal price (that is, the rate of
interest).     Accordingly, the downwards sloping schedules in Figure 1 plot the
desired ratios of current to future consumption as decreasing functions of the

rate of interest. The domestic and foreign private-sector relative demands are

             D and D (where D—C0/C1 and D *—C0/C1),
                                                * *
                      *
denoted by                                             respectively, and their
values at the point C0/C1—C/C—1 measure the corresponding subjective rates of
time preference, p and         Evidently, the domestic and foreign relative-demand

functions depend on the corresponding (tax inclusive) effective discount factors

a1 and a, respectively. The world relative demand schedule, DW, indicates
the desired ratio of current to future world
                                                      consumption (C0-4-C)/(C1÷C).
Thus, DW      is a weighted average of the two private sectors' relative demands.

That is, DW_/4D+(1/4)D* where p-C1/(C1+C)

        The initial equilibrium is described in Figure 1 by point A. In this

Figure the vertical axis measures one plus the (tax-free) world rate of
interest.     At the initial equilibrium this quantity is indicated by   1-fr0. The
                                            8


schedules pertaining to the initial equilibrium (D,D*,DW and SW) are drawn for

the given initial configuration of taxes. A reduction in the current tax on
consumption from         to       and a corresponding rise in the future tax from
                                                                                    rd
to r1 (necessary to restore government solvency) raises the effective discount

factor applicable to domestic consumption, arl (that is, lowers the effective

rate of interest) and induces a substitution towards current consumption. Thus,

for each and every value of the world rate of interest, the domestic (relative)

demand schedule shifts to the right from D to D'. The proportional vertical

displacement of the schedule equals the proportional rise in the effective
discount      factor.    This proportion is
                                             [(l+i-i)/(l+r1)] [(l+rO)/(1+r'0)].
Associated with the new domestic relative demand, the new world relative demand

also shifts to the right from Dw to Dw'              Being a weighted average of the

domestic and foreign relative demands, the vertical displacement of Di" is
smaller than that of D.

        The rise in the effective discount factor applicable to consumption
decisions, from arl       to a'rl,   does   not affect the effective discount factor

applicable to investment decisions. Therefore, the relative supply schedule in

Figure 1 remains intact.          Hence the equilibrium world rate of interest rises

from r0 to r6. This higher world rate of interest discourages domestic invest-

ment as well as investment in the foreign country and results in a positive

cross-country correlation of investment.

        In order to determine the incidence of this change in the time-profile of

taxes      on the domestic effective rate of interest we recall that the percentage

vertical displacements of the          D schedule equals the tax-induced percentage

change in the effective discount factor. This change is represented by the
distance     BC    in Figure 1.      Accordingly, in order to determine the new
equilibrium value of the domestic effective rate of interest, we subtract from
                                       9



l+r the distance BC.       This yields l+ in Figure 1. Evidently, the new
equilibrium effective rate of interest        is lower than the initial rate
                                                                               r0
since the vertical displacement of DW is smaller than BC, and since the percent-

age fall in the world discount factor is even smaller than the vertical dis-

placement of Di".

       Since in the new equilibrium the world rate of interest rises, it induces

intertemporal substitution in foreign consumption towards future consumption

and, thereby, results in a higher growth rate of foreign consumption (repre-

sented by the move from point E to point E' in Figure 1). By similar reasoning,

the fall in the domestic effective rate of interest induces intertemporal sub-

stitution in domestic consumption towards current consumption which lowers the

growth rate of domestic consumption (represented by the move from point F to

point F' in Figure 1). Finally, we note that even though the growth rate of

foreign consumption rises, the growth rate of world consumption falls (as repre-

sented by the move from point A to point A' in Figure 1). This decline reflects
the fall in world investment.

       The unambiguous inference concerning the effects of this cut in taxes on

domestic and foreign investment and on the growth rates of consumption (indi-

cated by the ratios      C1/C0 and C/C), does not carry over to the level of
domestic consumption.    In order to determine the effect of the tax cut on the

level of consumption, we need to take account of both the induced changes in the

value of the budget constraint relevant for the economy as a whole, and of
changes in the rate of interest relevant for private-sector decisions. The

budget constraint relevant for the economy as a whole is obtained by combining

the private sector life-time budget constraint (5) with the corresponding

government present-value budget constraint (obtained by dividing equation (4) by

(l+r0) and adding to equation (3)). This consolidated budget constraint is
                                                10


 (6)      C0(a1,W0) + a1C1(a1,W0)


         —            +                                                            —
                          cr1('1jG1) + a1F(10(a1))                      (l+r1)B1
                                                                    -
             (0-G0)                                    -
                                                           10(a1)                      V0


where B1 denotes the historically given initial external debt (B1—B+B)
The left-hand-side of equation (6) is the discounted sum of life-time con-

sumption, and the right-hand-side (defined as V0) is the discounted sum of GDP

net of government spending, investment and initial debt commitment. Both
discounted sums are evaluated by using the discount factor, a1, applicable to

the economy in the world capital markets. Thus V0 is the value of the con-

straint relevant for the economy as a whole. However, as reflected in the

arguments of the consumption functions Ct(ai,W0), the decisions concerning the

intertemporal allocation of consumption are governed by the effective (tax
inclusive) discount factor, a1.

       At the initial world rate of interest, a cut in the current tax on con-

sumption, r0, accompanied by a future rise in the tax,                       raises the effec-
tive discount factor, a1. As seen from equation (6), for a given value of a1,

this rise in a1 does not alter the value of the constraint, V0. The change in

the world rate of interest, however, does alter the constraint according to



                avo       —
(7)                           F(10(a1)) +   (   - G)
                8a1



Hence, it follows that the budget deficit which raises the world rate of

interest, must lower the value of V0, by the amount equal to (period-one) GDP

net of government spending.

       In what follows we use these considerations concerning the induced
changes in    a1, a1 and V0             in order to analyse the effects of the budget
                                         11


deficit on the level of domestic consumption. Points A and B in Figure 2

describe the patterns of consumption and investment prevailing in the initial

equilibrium in which the world rate of interest is r0. The assumption that the

tax on capital income is zero implies that the initial level of investment is

undistorted (hence the tangency at point B between the investment opportunity

schedule and the world "price line" with the slope of l+r0) and that the

consumption expansion locus, OA, corresponds to the situation in which the
initial effective rate of interest, i , equals the world rate, r0. The rise
in the world rate of interest from r0 to r6 shifts the domestic investment

point to       B' (lowering investment), alters the economy-wide budget constraint
from            (with the slope l+r0) to B'V (with the steeper slope l+r6) and
         By0
rotates the consumption expansion locus from OA (corresponding to          to OA'

(corresponding to the lower effective rate,

         The new pattern of consumption is described by point A' in Figure 2. In

the case drawn current consumption rises but this result is not general. For

example if the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is low, then the rota-

tion of the consumption-expansion locus is relatively small and the new equi-

librium can be obtained at a point such as A" at which current consumption
falls.    A key factor determining the effects of the budget deficit on the level

of domestic consumption is whether, in the current period, the country as a

whole lends or borrows internationally. The case shown in Figure 2 corresponds

to a situation in which the domestic economy borrows abroad (the amount
                                                                             B0).
Alternatively if the economy is a net lender (if the consumption point lies to

the left of the investment point) then both the rise in the world rate of
interest and the fall in the effective rate of interest operate to raise the

level of domestic current consumption.
                                        r0r0




0                                  —
                                               V                      V0   C0




    Figure   2: The Effects of a Budget Deficit Arising from a Cut in
                 Consumption Taxes on the Level of Domestic Consumption.



    Data: B10, r0 <    r,   r0 >   r,   B0 > 0
                                       12


       This ambiguity of the effects of the budget deficit on the level of

consumption is enhanced in the more general situation in which the initial time

profile of taxes is not flat. In that case the initial equilibrium is dis-

torted, and the change in the level of consumption also reflects the influence

of the change in the magnitude of the initial distortion.

       By influencing the world rate of interest the domestic budget deficit is

transmitted internationally.    If the foreign economy has a flat tax profile

then, ruling out a backwards bending saving function, the rise in the world rate

of interest operates to reduce current foreign consumption. We conclude that if

the intertemporal elasticities of substitution between current and future con-

sumption are relatively low, then the correlation between changes in domestic

and foreign consumption consequent on the budget deficit may be positive or

negative.   On the other hand if the elasticities of substitution are relatively

high, then the budget deficit results in a negative correlation between domestic

and foreign levels of consumption.

       Finally, in the case for which the foreign saving function does not bend

backwards, foreign absorption (consumption plus investment) falls and, there-
fore, the foreign economy's trade account improves.         This improvement is

mirrored by a corresponding deterioration in the domestic balance of trade.



III. The Effects of Cuts in Taxes on CaDital Income

      We now consider the effects of a deficit arising from a. current cut in

taxes on income from capital. Assuming that all other taxes are zero, this tax

cut must be accompanied by a corresponding rise in future taxes. Accordingly,

suppose that the time profile of taxes be changed from (rkO,rkl) to a steeper

profile (r0.,r1). The initial equilibrium is described by point A in Figure
3.    Since the taxes     rkO and       do not influence the effective discount
                                          *
                                      S

                                                      SW   SW,   S




                                                                            /
                                                                      /
1+r0


l+r
                                                                 /
                                                                 DW
                                                  *
                                 V
                                              D




                                                                                    *F
                                                                        C       C
                                                                      z, 0          0
                                                                        Cl
                                                                                Ci


       Figure   3: The Effects of a Budget Deficit Arising from
                    a Cut in Capital Income Tax.
                                       13


factor applicable to consumption decisions, arl, changes in the time profile of

this tax do not alter the desired ratio of intertemporal consumption. There-

fore, the relative demand schedules in Figure 3 remain intact.

       Turning to the supply side, we note that by lowering the effective
discount factor relevant to investment decisions, a11 , the budget deficit

displaces the domestic relative supply schedule downwards from S to S'. The

proportional displacement is equal to                                       which

measures the percentage change in a11. Recalling that the world relative-
supply schedule S
                  w            .                    *
                    is a weighted average of S and S ,       if
                                                         follows that the

proportional downwards displacement of the world relative supply schedule is

smaller than this quantity since the domestic-weight weight,          is smaller

than unity.

       The new equilibrium obtains at the intersection between the (unchanged)

world relative-demand schedule, DW, and the new world relative-supply sche-

dule, S. This equilibrium is indicated by point A' at which the world rate
of interest falls, from r0 to r5 , and (one plus) the effective interest rate

applicable to domestic investment rises by the proportion (l+)/(1+r6). This

rise is indicated by the distance BC corresponding to the vertical displace-

ment of the domestic relative-supply schedule. In the new equilibrium the rates

of growth of domestic and foreign consumption fall. This is indicated by the

respective moves from points F to F' and E to E'. As a result, the rate of

growth of world consumption must also fall. In view of the fall in the world

rate of interest from r0 to r6, foreign investment rises and, in view of the

                                                       r0 to , domestic
rise in the effective domestic rate of interest from                      invest-

ment falls. Thus, a deficit arising from a cut in taxes on income from capital

crowds-out domestic investment and crowds-in foreign investment.These changes

result in a negative correlation between domestic and foreign investment, and in
                                        14


a positive correlation between domestic and foreign rates of growth of consuxup-

tion.

        In contrast with the ambiguity concerning the effects of a cut in con-

sumption taxes on the level of domestic consumption, the consumption effects of

a cut in taxes on income from capital are unambiguous if the initial tax profile

is flat. For, the fall in the world rate of interest raises current consumption

by increasing wealth (through the increased value of the discounted sum of GDPs)

and by inducing intertemporal substitution. Similarly, if the time profile of

foreign taxes is also flat, the fall in the world rate of interest raises

foreign consumption for the same reasons. It follows that under these cir-

cumstances the domestic budget deficits crowds-in both domestic and foreign

private-sector consumption and results in a positive cross-country correlation

between the levels of consumption.

        It is also noteworthy that, in contrast with the effects of a cut in

consumption taxes, the reduction in taxes on income from capital improves the

domestic-country trade balance.      This improvement of the domestic balance of

trade is the counterpart to the deterioration in the foreign trade account

consequent on the rise in foreign absorption (consumption plus investment).

        Finally, we note that if the initial tax profile is not flat, then the

effects of the cut in capital-income tax on the level of domestic consumption
are not clear cut.      For, in this case the budget constraint relevant for the

economy as a whole is the same as in equation (6) except for one modification:

in the present case the discount factor relevant for investment decisions is the

effective discount factor, a11, rather than the world discount factor, a1. With

this modification, for a given value of      a1, the rise in the effective domestic

discount factor induced by the change in the time profile of taxes on income

from capital alters the value of the constraint,    V0, by
                                        15



 (8)
                 8      [aiF'(Io(ai1))l1I6(aii)   ,         for   given a1



 Since investment depends positively on the effective discount factor and since

 the marginal product of investment diminishes with the rate of investment, it

follows that whether V0 rises, remains unchanged, or falls, depends on whether

a11 is smaller than, equal to, or larger than a1. If initially taxes are zero
then         a11 and, therefore, for given a1 the value of V0 stays intact.
Hence, the change in taxes does not exert a first-order effect on V0 and, as

implied by equation (7), the rise in the world rate of interest lowers the value

of V0 by the amount F(10) +
                              Y1-G1.


IV.    The Effects of Cuts in Taxes on International Borrowing

       The foregoing analysis demonstrated that consumption-tax policies in-
fluence the equilibrium in the world economy by altering the relative-demand

schedules whereas capital-income tax policies influence the equilibrium by
altering the relative-supply schedules.      With fixed labor supply, as evident

from the budget constraints (l)-(2), a tax on international borrowing is equiv-

alent to a combination of consumption and capital-income taxes. It follows that

such a tax policy influences the equilibrium by altering both the relative-
demand and the relative-supply schedules. In this section we analyse such a tax

policy by examining the effects of a budget deficit arising from a current cut

in taxes on international borrowing. In order to focus on this tax we assume
that all other taxes are zero and, for convenience, we assume that the initial

taxes on international borrowing are also zero. As seen from the government

budget constraints, taxes on international borrowing induce both government

revenue from tax collections and government expenditures from tax rebates.
Therefore, we need to determine first whether the deficit arises from a current
                                             16


cut in tax rates or from a current rise in tax rebates. Further, we need to

determine what changes in future tax rates are necessary to maintain the dis-

counted sum of tax revenue unchanged.

       The first-period government budget constraint (3) implies that if, during

the first period, the private sector is a net borrower (that is, B-R1 is

positive) then, obviously, a cut in the current tax rate rbO induces a budget

deficit.   The second-period government budget constraint (4) indicates that the
tax rebate is                  Hence, with positive borrowing, the maintenance of a
                     rblB.
given government revenue (in present value terms) implies that the tax rate
                                                                                   rbl
must also fall according to



                dr
(9)
                  bl_ 0             -1

                drbO         a1B0



       These changes in the time-profile of taxes on international borrowing,

influence the effective discount factors that are applicable to both consumption

and investment decisions.           As is evident from equation (5), in the absence of

other taxes, the two effective discount factors, a and a11, are both equal to

(lrbO)/(l+rOrbl).       Using equation (9) and the definition of a71, it can be
shown that for a given world rate of interest and for zero initial taxes the

change in the effective domestic discount factor is



                d log a71           B1
(10)                         — -                    for   a given a1
                  drbO              B0
                                            17


Thus, with positive borrowing, the current cut in taxes on international borrow-

ing raises the effective domestic discount factor and, correspondingly, lowers

the effective domestic rate of interest.

          The analysis of the effects of the budget deficit on the equilibrium

values of the world rate of interest and on the growth rates of domestic and

foreign consumption is carried out with the aid of Figure 4 in which the initial

equilibrium is shown by point A. The reduction in the domestic tax                on   interna-

tional borrowing, 7b0' raises the effective discount factor applicable to con-

suniption, a71 (that is, lowers the effective rate of interest) and induces a

substitution towards current consumption. Thus, for each and every value of the

world rate of interest, the domestic (relative) demand schedule shifts to the

right from D to D'. As argued earlier the vertical displacement of the sche-

dule equals the proportional change in a71 (represented by the distance BC in

Figure 4).      Associated with the new domestic relative demand, the new world

relative demand (the weighted average of domestic and foreign relative demands)

also shifts to the right from          D
                                        W    to D
                                                 W'
                                                          and its proportional rightwards
                                                      ,



displacement is equal to the fraction p, (representing the domestic-country

weight,      (C1/(C1+C)),    times the percentage rightwards displacement of the D

schedule. Since the weight, i, is smaller than unity, the DW schedule shifts

upwards by a proportion smaller than the change in
                                                            a71.
          The rise in the effective discount factor, a
                                                               rl ,
                                                                      is   associated with an

equi-proportional rise in the effective discount factor applicable to domestic

investment decisions or, equivalently, lowers the corresponding effective rate
of interest.      At the prevailing world interest rate this stimulates current

investment and results in an upwards displacement of the domestic relative-
supply schedule from        S to S'.    This proportional displacement equal the
vertical displacement of the D schedule which equals the percentage rise in the

effective discount factor (represented by the distance BC in Figure 4). As a
                                                          *
                                                      S



                                                              /   SW




                                                                             /   SI

                                                                         /
                                                                                               S



                                                                       /
1±r



1-1-r0



1+
                                                                                      D
                                                                         D

                                                      *
                                                  D

                                                                                                       *
                                                                                      z, C0        C
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                       *
                                                                                          Cl
                                                                                                   Cl


         Figure   4: The Effects of a Budget Deficit Arising from a Cut
                      in Taxes on International Borrowing.



         Data: B > 0, B >
                                             18


result, the world relative-supply schedule shifts to the left from S' to SW,

by a proportion that is equal to the fraction            times the percentage leftwards

displacement of the        S     schedule. Since         is smaller than unity, the S

schedule shifts upwards by a proportion smaller than the percentage rise

cr.        Hence, the new equilibrium obtains at point A' at which the world rate

of interest rises from                            This higher world rate of interest
                                 r0 to r6.
discourages investment in the foreign country.

          To determine the incidence of the change in the tax on the equilibrium

value of the domestic effective rate of interest we subtract from the new

equilibrium value l+r, the tax-induced rise in the effective discount factor.

Diagramatically, this subtraction is indicated by the distance IJ in Figure 4

measuring the vertical displacement of the domestic relative-demand schedule.

As seen, in the new equilibrium the domestic effective rate of interest falls to

,       and,   thereby, domestic investment rises. We thus conclude that the budget

deficit arising from a cut in taxes on international borrowing results in a

negative correlation between domestic and foreign investment.

          The rise in the world rate of interest raises the equilibrium growth rate

of foreign consumption (indicated by the move from point E to point E'). At

the same time, the fall in the effective domestic rate of interest lowers the

equilibrium growth rate of domestic consumption (indicated by the move from
point     F to F'). Thus, as in the case of budget deficits arising from a cut in

consumption taxes, the cut in taxes on international borrowing also results in a

negative correlation between the growth rates of domestic and foreign consump-
tion.

         The effect of the tax cut on the grwoth rate of world consumption depends

on the ralative vertical displacements of the world relative-demand and rela-

tive-supply schedules.         These two displacements are equal to each other if p,
                                         19


 the domestic-country weight in the world relative-demand schedule, DW, equals
 its weight,       in the world relative-supply schedule, S. Recalling that
 p —                            + F(Io)-G)/(C1÷c) it follows that if p —
     C1/(C1+C) and that    —(V1
 then the (second-period) trade account is balanced. In that case the new equi-

 libriuin point, A', lies vertically above the previous equilibrium point, A, and

 the growth rate of world consumption remains unchanged. If, on the other hand,

       exceeds p, then the (second-period) trade account is in a surplus and point
A'     lies to the left of point A. In this case the growth rate of world con-

sumption rises.      The opposite holds if      p falls short of p (the case il-
lustrated in Figure 4).

         As with consumption taxes, the unambiguous inference concerning the
changes in domestic and foreign investment and in the growth rates of consump-

tion that are induced by the tax change does not carry over to the level of
domestic consumption.      The effect of the tax cut on the level of consumption

reflects both the induced changes in the value of the budget constraint relevant

for the economy as a whole and the induced changes in the rate of interest
relevant for private-sector decisions.

         From this point onwards the ahalysis of the effects of the change in

taxes on international borrowing on the levels of domestic and foreign con-

sumption and on the trade balance follows similar lines to the previous analysis

of the effects of changes in consumption taxes. Accordingly, the budget deficit

which raises the world rate of interest lowers foreign consumption (ruling out a

backwards-bending saving function) and, since foreign investment also falls it

follows that foreign absorption (consumption plus investment) falls and the
foreign trade balance improves.       The counterpart to this improvement is a
deterioration in the domestic balance of trade. Finally, the direction of the

change in the level of domestic consumption is not clear cut. It depends on the
                                       20


initial level of international borrowing as well as on the extent of the rise in

domestic investment induced by the fall in the effective domestic rate of

interest.



V. Taxes on Labor Income: The Analytical Framework

       In this section we extend the model to allow for a variable labor supply

and for taxes on labor income. We consider the effects of a budget deficit

arising from a cut in current taxes on labor income. In order to focus on this

effect, we abstract from other taxes. Further, in order to allow for endogenous

labor supply and variable output we modify the utility function and the produc-

tion function.

       Normalizing total endowment of time in each period t to unity, let the

fraction of time spend on labor be i. Correspondingly, the fraction of time

left for leisure is l-. We assume that life-time utility is a function of

four "goods": ordinary consumption, (C0,C1), and leisure consumption

(l2o,l2l).       In order to facilitate the exposition suppose that the utility

function is separable between ordinary consumption and leisure, and let each

sub-utility be homothetic. These assumptions imply that the utility-maximizing

ratio of consumption in the two consecutive periods depends only on the rate of

interest; likewise, the utility-maximizing ratio of leisure in the two   consecu-
tive periods depends only on the ratio of wages (net of tax).

      As in the previous sections, the individual who has access to the world

capital market, maximizes life-time utility subject to the consolidated life-

time budget constraint. With variable labor supply it is convenient to include

in the definition of life-time spending the imputed spending on leisure. Cor-

respondingly, the definition of wealth includes the imputed value of labor

endowment. Thus, the life-time budget constraint is
                                              21


 (11)       C0 + (1-r0)(1-20)w0 ÷


           —                 + rkOKQ -
                (1-r20)w10               10 + ai[(l-ri)w1 + rkl(KO÷K(IO))]


            -                —
                (l+r1)B1

where             and rk denote, respectively, the tax on labor income, the wage

rate and the rental rate on capital in period t (t—0,l), and where            denotes

the initial endowment of capital. As indicated in (11) the individual life-time

(full) income, that is the individual wealth (W0), is the discounted sum of the

value of time endowment (net of taxes) and of capital income (net of initial
debt conunittment).       Capital income in the current period is the rental on
existing capital, rkOKO , minus investment, 10 ; correspondingly, the stock of

capital in the subsequent period is           + K(10).

        Maximization of the utility function subject to the life-time budget

constraint yields the demand functions for ordinary consumption and for leisure

in each period. These demand functions depend on the three relative prices (net

wages in each of the two periods and the discount factor), and on wealth.

Accordingly, the labor supply functions (which are inversely related to the
leisure demand functions ) can be written as



(12)              10 —
                         20[(lr10)w20      ai ,    a1(l-r11)w21   w0)


(13)                —
                         2l1(l-r20)w10     i , a1(1-11)w11)       ; W0)



The assumption that leisure is not a Giffen good implies that a rise in the
current period net wage raises             lo and a rise in the (discounted value of)
                                                    22


future net wage raises 2i. Assuming that the amounts of leisure consumed in

two consecutive periods are gross-substitutes implies that for a given level of

wealth a current tax cut lowers future labor supply while a future tax cut

lowers current labor supply.                This specification will be useful in the sub-

sequent analysis of the effects of changes in the time-profile of taxes on labor

income.

          In each period the level of outputs Y0 and Y1 , depends on labor and

capital inputs. In order to simplify the exposition we assume linear production

functions. Thus, let



                     —
(14)                     a02 + b0K0

(15)                     a11 + b1[K0+K(10)]


The assumption that factor markets are competitive, implies that in equilibrium

the wage rates and the rental rates equal the corresponding marginal produc-

tivities of labor and capital, respectively. Thus,



                  w0 — a0             —                  —                  —
(16)                        ,
                                w21       a1   ,
                                                   rkO       b0   ,
                                                                      rkl       b1


       As usual, profit-maximizing investment implies equality between the

marginal cost of capital,             (l-4-r0) and the marginal return on the investment,

which is the product of the marginal product of investment in capital formation

and the discounted sum of the rental rates on capital. Hence, in the present

two-period model, profit maximization requires that



(17)              rklK'(IO) — 1 +      r0
                                               23


             In order to close the model we note that the present-value budget
constraint of the government is



 (18)                 C0 + a1G1 — r10w1010 +   a1r1w121
                                                                -
                                                                    (i÷r1)1
Combining the private sector life-time constraint (11), with the government

present-value constraint (18), and making use of the supply-side equations (13)-

(15) yields the economy's consolidated budget constraint in which the discounted
sum     of   consumption equals V0, where



(19)                 C0 +        — [a0i0+b0K0-G0-10]


                     +                                  -              —
                         ai[a111+bi(K0+K(10))-G1]           (l+r1)B1       V0


The right-hand-side of equation (19) measures the value of the constraint, V0,

relevant for the economy as a whole. As with the previous case a key property

of the specification of this constraint is that it is evaluated by using undis-

torted prices. Thus, in comparison with the private-sector constraint (11) the

wages used in (19) for evaluating leisure and income are the tax-free wages.

Obviously, the wages which appear as arguments in the consumption and leisure

demand (labor supply) functions,            C0      ,               , and       are the after-tax

wages.

             In order to analyse the equilibrium of the system we assume that the

foreign economy has a similar structure of production, consumption and taxes.

The initial equilibrium of the system is described by point A in Figure 5. As

before, the downwards sloping schedules                     D and      denote the domestic and

foreign relative demands for (ordinary goods) consumption in the two                    periods,
                                           SW



                                                        /
                                                    /
                                                /
                                                F
1+r0




1+r

                                                                    D

                                      *
                                  D




                                                            z, C0
                                                               Cl
                                                                    ,f  Cl


       Figure   5: The Effects of a Budget Deficit Arising from a
                    Cut in Taxes on Labor Income.
                                         24


and the schedule       DW   is the weighted average of the domestic and foreign
relative demands.      The negative slopes of the schedules reflect the intertem-

poral substitution arising from changes in the rate of interest. The positively

sloped schedule, S, reflects the response of z to the rate of interest,
where, as before, z measures the ratio of world GDP net of investment and

government spending in the two consecutive periods. That is,


                                              ** ** * *
                      (a00+b0K0-I0-G0) + (a020+b0K0-10-G0)
(20)             z—                              ** * * * *          *
                      [a121+b1(K0+K(10))-G1] + [a121+b1(K0-1-K (10))-C1]



The S schedule is drawn with a positive slope for convenience. In fact
changes in the rate of interest affect the intertemporal prices of leisure and

of ordinary goods as well as wealth. These changes may alter the supply of
labor in a way that more than offsets the effect of the induced changes in
investment on z.      In that case the S' schedule is negatively sloped but, as

long as it is steeper than the world relative demand schedule, our subsequent

analysis remains intact.



VI. The Effects of Cuts in Taxes on Labor Income

        Consider the effect of a budget deficit arising from a current reduction

in the tax (r0) on labor income (accompanied by a future rise in the tax,

rj1).   Implicit in this formulation is the assumption that there is a negative

relation between the tax rate and the budget deficit so that the tax system

operates on the "efficient" portion of the Laffer curve. The assumption that

the homothetic utility functions are separable between leisure and ordinary

consumption implies that for a given rate of interest the change in the time-

profile of wages (net of taxes) does not alter the desired ratios of ordinary
                                        25


consumption in the two consecutive periods. Thus, the budget deficit does not

alter the position of the relative demand schedules in Figure 5.

        On the other hand, the assumption that the amounts of leisure consumed in

the two periods are gross substitutes, ensures that the rise in the current net

wage and the fall in the future net wage raises the current labor supply, Lo,

and lowers the future labor supply,   .2•. Therefore, as seen from equation (20),

this change in the time-profile of taxes raises the value of z for any given
rate of interest.     This is shown by the righwards shift of the world relative
                       w
s.ipply schedule from S to S
                             w'
                                  in Figure 5.

        The new equilibrium shifts from point A to point A'        ,   the world rate
of interest falls from r0 to r and, the rates of growth of domestic, foreign

and world consumption falls.      The lower rate of interest induces a positive

correlation between growth rates of consumption. It also stimulates investment

in both countries and, therefore, induces a positive correlation between
domestic and foreign rates of investment.

        The budget deficit arising from the change in the time-profile of taxes

on labor income also alters the levels of consumption in both countries. In the

domestic economy the changes in the level of consumption reflect the combination

of the induced changes in labor supply, the wealth and substitution effects

induced by changes in the world rate of interest, and the response of invest-
ment.   In order to illustrate the first two we abstract for the moment from

domestic investment. Consider Figure 6.      Points A and B describe the initial

pattern of domestic consumption and production. The change in the time-profile

of taxes and the lower rate of interest alter the pattern of GDP from point B

to point B', it shifts the economy's budget line from By0 to 3'vc5 and rotates

the consumption-expansion locus from OA to OA'. The assumption implicit in the

construction and rotation of the consumption-expansion loci is that consumption
           Cl




a1 £1+b1K1—G1


a1       -G1




            0                                                            CO
                                       V0

                               a0+b0K0—G0


            Figure   6: The Effects of a Budget Deficit Arising from a
                         Cut in Taxes on Labor Income on the Level of
                         Domestic Consumption.

            Data B =0 r'<r
                         ,
                                       26


and leisure are separable in the utility function and therefore the indifference

map between C0 and C1 (under- lying these loci) is independent of labor supply.

       The new equilibrium pattern of consumption is described by point A'
which, in the case shown in Figure 6, corresponds to a higher level of current

consumption.   This result, however, is not general.        For example, if the

intertemporal elasticity of substitution is relatively low, then the extent of

the rotation of the consumption-expansion locus is small and the new equilibrium

obtains at a point such as A". In that case current consumption falls. As

with taxes on international borrowing, a key factor governing the direction of

the change in the level of consumption is whether the economy as a whole is a

lender or borrower in the world capital market. In the case shown in Figure 6

the economy is a lender; in that case a fall in the rate of interest exerts

conflicting effects on current consumption. If on the other hand the economy is

a borrower (so that the consumption point lies to the right of the production

point), then both the wealth and the substitution effects induced by the fall in

the rate of interest operate to raise the level of current consumption.

       The exposition up to this point abstracted from the role of investment.

With investment, the fall in the rate of interest contributes positively to

wealth by raising the profits on investment [1K(I0)I0]. Furthermore, the

increased profitability of investment encourages borrowing (or discourages
lending).   This diminishes the weight of the factor contributing to a negative

wealth effect associated with a fall in the rate of interest.

       In order to determine the effects of the domestic budget deficit on the

level of foreign consumption, we note that the fall in the world rate of
interest raises the discounted sum of foreign GDP (provided that the foreign

labor supply is not greatly reduced by the fall in the rate of interest). In

addition (ruling out a backwards bending saving function) the fall in the rate
                                         27


of interest induces substitution of current consumption for future consump-

tion.    Hence, if the intertemporal elasticities of substitution are relatively

large, the budget deficit results in a positive correlation between domestic and

foreign consumption.

        Finally, in the present framework the budget deficit may cause an
improvement in the balance of trade. For example, if the foreign labor supply

does not respond appreciably (positively) to the fall in the rate of interest,

and, correspondingly if the foreign GDP (net of government spending) does not

rise much, then the rise in foreign absorption (consumption plus investment)

worsens the foreign trade balance and, correspondingly, improves the domestic
balance of trade.        Thus, in contrast with the previous examples, the budget

deficit causes an improvement in the trade account. This improvement reflects

the rise in current period output induced by the stimulating policy of the lower

taxes on labor income.



VII. Summary

        The foregoing analysis examined the effects of budget deficits on the

world rates of interest, investment, consumption and on the trade balance.

Throughout we assumed that the path of government spending is given so that
budget deficits arise only from tax cuts.3 We have analysed the implications of

four kinds of tax cuts: a cut in consumption taxes (valued-added taxes), a cut

in taxes on income from capital, a cut in taxes on international borrowing, and

a cut in taxes on labor income. In this context we assumed that the initial

paths of domestic and foreign taxes are flat (or zero) and that the foreign

government runs a balanced budget. The cut in current taxes results in a budget

deficit and necessitates a tax hike in future periods in order to restore
                                       28


solvency. We showed that the effects of such a deficit depend critically on the

precise tax that is altered.

       The formulation of the various taxes also suggests that they are in-

terrelated through equivalence relationships.     For example, as indicated by

equations (1),   (2) and the periodic budget constraints underlying (11), a
consumption (VAT) tax is equivalent to a cash-flow income tax (capital income

tax with expensing, plus a labor income tax) plus a tax on foreign borrowing.

The inclusion of the tax on foreign borrowing in this tax-equivalence proposi-

tion is the special feature arising from the openness of the economy. Ob-
viously, this feature is absent from the various tax-equivalence propositions

developed in the context of closed-economy analyses.4

       The mechanism through which the budget deficit impacts on the world

economy operates through wealth effects and through temporal and intertemporal

substitution effects. The latter are of central importance under circumstances

in which taxes are distortionary.       In such cases the substitution effects

induced by tax cuts may operate in opposite directions than the wealth effects

and, as a result, may yield outcomes opposite to those predicted by models (such

as the Keynesian or the overlapping generations models) in which the wealth

effects serve as the principal mechanism through which budget deficits influence

the economy.5

      The important role attached to the intertemporal substitution effects

suggests that the various distortionary taxes can be usefully divided according

to whether they induce excess demand for current goods or for future goods or,

equivalently, whether they stimulate current external borrowing (national

dissaving) or lending (national saving).      Tax policy that induces an excess

demand for current goods by raising current consumption or investment or by
lowering current GDP relative to future GDP is classified as a pro-borrowing
                                       29


policy, and tax policy that creates an excess supply of current goods by

discouraging current consumption or investment, or by raising current GDP
relative to future GDP is classified as a pro-lending policy. Alternatively,

the various tax policies associated with the budget deficit can be classified

into expansionary supply-shift policies and expansionary demand-shift poli-

cies. Accordingly, a deficit arising from a cut in taxes on income from capital

or labor (that is a cut in income tax) reflects supply-shift policies, whereas a

deficit arising from a cut in consumption tax (valued-added tax) reflects
demand-shift policy and the latter is a pro-borrowing policy. With this

classification we note that a budget deficit arising from a cut in taxes on

international borrowing contain elements of both supply and demand-shift

policies. Since, however, the demand-shift component dominates, this tax cut is

a pro-borrowing policy.

       The results of the analysis are summarized in Table 1. It is seen that

the effects of the budget deficit on the world rate of interest,       r0 ,   depend on
whether the deficit arises from a pro-borrowing or a pro-lending tax cut. A cut

in current taxes on consumption and on international borrowing, is a pro-

borrowing tax policy that raises the world rate of interest. On the other hand

a cut in current taxes on capital income and on labor income is a pro-lending

tax policy that lowers the world rate of interest.

       The Table also shows that in the case of consumption and capital-income

taxes domestic investment falls while in the case of taxes on international

borrowing and labor income investment rises.

       The results reported in the Table show that independent of whether the

tax cut is pro-borrowing or pro-lending, the budget deficit always lowers the
growth rate of domestic consumption, g —                       On the other hand, the
                                               (C1/C0)-l   .




international transmission of the effects of the deficit depends on whether the
                                                  TABLE 1


                         ThE EFFECTS OF DOMESTIC BUDGET DEFICITS ARISING
                         FROM A CUT IN TAXES ON INTERNATIONAL BORROWING,
                                 CAPITAL INCOME, AND LABOR INCOME



        -
                                 w           —             *            *               *
                             gC      r,.,
                                         v   r0   g            10   10        C0    C0      (TA)0
Tax Cut On


Consumption                  -       +       -    -    +       -    -         +     -        -


                             +
                         E
International
                                     +       -    -    +       +    -               -        -
                         I
Borrowing                    -




Capital Income               -       -       +    -    -       -    +         +     +        +


Labor Income                 -       -       -    -    -       +    +         ?     +        +


             w                   *
Note:       g    ,   g and g denote, respectively, the world, the domestic and the
            foreign growth rates of consumption.               denotes the effective domestic
            rate of interest applicable to consumption decisions (except for the case
            of a capital income tax for which consumption depends on the world rate
            r0). This effective rate also governs domestic investment decisions
            (except for the case of consumption taxes for which domestic investment
            depends on the world rate of interest r0). If                   > u, then the
            (second-period) domestic trade account is in a surplus and vice versa.
            The ambiguities in the effects of taxes on domestic consumption reflect
            conflicting substitution and wealth effects. Domestic consumption rises
            if the substitution effect dominates the wealth effect. The latter
            depends on the initial borrowing needs position. The assumption
            underlying the direction of the changes in the levels of consumption and
            the trade account is the absence of backwards bending saving functions.
                                       30


deficit arises from a pro-borrowing or pro-lending tax policy. If the tax

policy is a pro-borrowing policy, then the growth rate of foreign consumption

rises and foreign investment falls, and conversely if the tax policy is a pro-

lending policy.

       Table 1 also reports the changes in the growth rates of world consumption

       (l/z)-l (that is. equal to the growth rate of world GDP net of investment

and government spending).     As seen the direction of the change in the growth

rate of world consumption depends on the characteristics of the taxes that are

changed.   Since the various taxes influence the levels of current and future

consumption, investment and GDP, the net effects reflect the interactions among

these changes.    Accordingly, the growth rate of world consumption rises if the

(second-period) domestic trade account is in a surplus and the budget deficit

arises from a cut in taxes on international borrowing. On the other hand the

growth rate of world consumption falls if the tax cut on international borrowing

occurs in the presence of a (second-period) domestic trade-account deficit, or

if the budget deficit stems from a cut in the other taxes.

       Expressed in terms of correlations, Table 1 reveals that a budget deficit

arising from a pro-borrowing tax policy results in negative cross-country

correlations between growth rates of consumption. On the other hand a budget

deficit arising from a pro-lending tax policy results in positive cross-country

correlations between the growth rates of consumption. As for the cross-country

correlations between levels of investment, Table 1 shows that this correlation

is positive if the deficit arises from a cut in taxes on consumption or labor

income, and the correlation is negative if the budget deficit stems from a cut

in taxes on international borrowing and capital income.

      The effects of the budget deficit on the levels of domestic and foreign

consumption and on the balance of trade depend in general on the shape of the
                                       31


initial time-profile of taxes, on the initial borrowing needs of the country

(being positive or negative) and on the size of the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution.   The signs of the effects indicated in the last three columns in

Table 1 are based on the assumption that the initial tax profile is flat and

that the saving functions are not backwards bending. With these assumptions a

budget deficit arising from a pro-borrowing tax policy worsens the balance of

trade, while a budget deficit arising from a pro-lending tax policy improves the

balance of trade.

       We conclude by reiterating the principal message of the paper: a proper

analysis of the effects of budget deficits on the world economy must specify the

details of the tax structure, including the timing of taxes as well as the types

of taxes used to finance the budget.
                                         32


                                     FOOTNOTES




          1Representative research emphasizing intertemporal considerations in a

closed-economy framework is found in Barro (1974, 1979), Feldstein (1974, 1977)

and King (1983). For recent surveys and integrations of the various issues see

Aschauer and Greewnwood (1985) and Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987).

          2Examples of previous analyses of various      aspects of the effects of

distortionary taxes in the context of a small open economy are found in Aschauer

and Greenwood (1985), Greenwood and Kimbrough (1985) and Razin and Svensson

(1983).     By adopting a two-country model we deal with the interdependencies

within the world economy, an issue that could not be addressed in the small-

country framework.      Some aspects of the interdependencies are examined in van

Wijnbergen (forthcoming).

          3Elsewhere we analysed in detail the effects of government spending on

the equilibrium in the world economy and on the international transmission

mechanism; see Frenkel and Razin (1985, l986b).

       41n a recent tax-reform proposal Hall and Rabushka (1983) advocate the

adoption of a consumption-tax system j Fisher (1939). In specifying the
implementation of the consumptiii tax and its virtues over the conventional

income tax they use the closed-economy equivalence relation between a consump-

tion tax and a cash-flow income tax (capital-income tax with expensing plus a

labor-income tax). Being confined to a closed-economy framework, they abstract

from the role that taxes on international borrowing play in this tax-equivalence

relation.     For a comprehensive discussion of the closed-economy tax-equivalence

propositions see Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987).
                                       33


      5For   open-economy analyses emphasizing the pure wealth effects of lump-

sum non-distortionary tax policies see Blanchard (1985), Buiter (1986), Frenkel

and Razin (1986a) and Persson (1985). In these models the pure wealth effects

of budget deficits arise from differences between the time horizon of
individuals and of the economy at large.
                                          34


                                    REFERENCES




Aschauer, David A. and Jeremy Greenwood, "Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal

      Policy" in Brunner, Karl and Alan Meltzer (eds.) The New Monetary
      Economics; Fiscal Issues and Unemployment, Carnegie-Rochester Conference

      Series on Public Policy 23, (Autumn 1985): 91-138.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Dynamic Fiscal Policy, New York:

      Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Barro, Robert J • "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth," Toum1 of Political Economy

      82, No. 6 (November/December 1974): 1095-1117

_______     "On   the Determination of the Public Debt," Journal of Political

      Economy 87, No. 5, Part 1 (October 1979): 940-971.

Blanchard, Olivier, "Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons," Journal of Political

      Economy 92, No. 2 (April 1985): 233-47.

Buiter, Willem H., "Fiscal Policy in Open Interdependent Economies" in Razin,

     Assaf and Efraim Sadka (eds.) Economic Policy in Theory and Practice

     London: Macinillian, 1986.

Feldstein, Martin, (1974a), "Tax Incidence in a Growing Economy with Variable

     Factor Supply," Quarterly Journal of Economics 88, No. 4 (November 1974):
     551-73.

          (1974b), "Incidence of a Capital Income Tax in a Growing economy with

     Variable Savings Rates," Review of Economic Studies 41, No. 4 (October
     1974): 505-13

Fischer, Irving,    "The Double Taxation of Savings" American Economic Review 29,

     (March 1939): 16-33.
                                         35


Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin, "Government Spending, Debt, and International

      Economic Interdependence," Economic Journal 95, (September 1985): 619-36.

_______       (1986a), "Fiscal Policies in the World Economy," Journal of Political
      Economy 94, No. 3 (June 1986): 564-94.

_______   (1986b), "Fiscal Policy and Real Exchange Rates in the World Economy,"
      manuscript, October 1986.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Kent P. Kinibrough, "Captial Controls and Fiscal Policy in

      the World Economy," Canadian Journal of Economics 18, (November 1985):

      743-65.

Hall, Robert E. and Alvin Rabushka, Flat Tax. Simple Tax, New York; McGraw Hill,

      1983.

King, Mervin A.     "The Economics of Saving" Cambridge MA: NBER Working Paper
      Series, No. 1247, October 1983.

Persson, Torsten, "Deficits and Intergenerational Welfare in Open Economies,"

      Journal of International Economics 19, (       1985):   67-84.

Razin, Assaf and Lars E.O. Svennson, "The Current Account and the Optimal

      Government Debt," Journal of International Money and Finance 2, (August

      1983): 215-24.

van Wijnbergen, Sweder, "Taxation of International Capital Flows, the Inter-

      temporal Terms of Trade and the Real Price of Oil", Oxford Economic

     Papers, forthcoming.
