                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               QUANTIFYING CONFIDENCE

                                   George-Marios Angeletos
                                       Fabrice Collard
                                        Harris Dellas

                                      Working Paper 20807
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20807


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2014




We are grateful to the editor, Lars Hansen, and to four anonymous referees for extensive
feedback; and to Stephen Morris, Kristopher Nimark, Morten Ravn, and Juan Rubio-Ramirez for
conference discussions of our paper. We have also benefited from the comments of many
colleagues and from presentations at Bocconi, BU, Harvard, LSE, MIT, UCL, the University of
Zurich, the University of Oslo, the Norwegian Business School, the Minneapolis FRB, the 2013
Hydra Workshop, CRETE 2013, the 2013 Bank of England/CFM conference on
Macroeconomics, the 2014 NBER Summer Institute, the 2014 Minnesota Workshop in
Macroeconomic Theory, the LSE Conference in Honor of Robert Barro, the 10th Dynare
conference, the 2nd Rational Inattention Conference in Oxford, the 11th DSGE Conference in
Chicago, and the 8th Banco de Portugal Conference on Monetary Economics. Angeletos would
also like to express his gratitude to the University of Zurich, the UBS Center for Economics in
Society, and the Excellence Foundation Zurich for their hospitality and support during the
2013-14 academic year, when a significant part of this project was carried out. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by George-Marios Angeletos, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Quantifying Confidence
George-Marios Angeletos, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas
NBER Working Paper No. 20807
December 2014
JEL No. E0

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a tractable method for augmenting macroeconomic models with autonomous
variation in higher-order beliefs. We use this to accommodate a certain type of waves of
optimism and pessimism that can be interpreted as the product of frictional coordination and,
unlike the one featured in the news literature, regards the short-term economic outlook rather than
the medium- to long-run prospects. We show that this enrichment provides a parsimonious
explanation of salient features of the data; it accounts for a significant fraction of the business-
cycle volatility in estimated models that allow for various competing structural shocks; and it
captures a type of fluctuations that have a Keynesian flavor but do not rely on nominal rigidities.


George-Marios Angeletos                          Harris Dellas
Department of Economics, E52-530                 Department of Economics
MIT                                              University of Bern
77 Massachusetts Avenue                          VWI, Schanzeneckstrasse 1
Cambridge, MA 02139                              CH 3012 Bern
and NBER                                         Switzerland
angelet@mit.edu                                  harris.dellas@vwi.unibe.ch

Fabrice Collard
University of Bern
Departement Volkswirtschaftslehre
Schanzeneckstrasse 1
CH-3001 Bern, Switzerland
fabrice.collard@vwi.unibe.ch




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20807
1        Introduction
As a recession sets in, conﬁdence in the prospects of the economy sinks. Firms cut down on employ-
ment and investment as they turn pessimistic about the demand for their products; consumers reduce
spending as they turn pessimistic about their job and income prospects; and the pessimism of one
economic agent appears to justify, if not feed, that of others.
    Workhorse macroeconomic models, especially those used for quantitative purposes, interpret
such phenomena as the coordinated response of the agents to changes in payoff-relevant fundamentals
such as the general level of know-how (technology shocks) or the efﬁcacy of the ﬁnancial sector
(ﬁnancial shocks). This leaves little room for expectations to play an autonomous role in driving
the business cycle. This in turn is because such models assume away, not only multiple equilibria,
but also frictional coordination in the form of higher-order uncertainty.1 Formally, the economy is
modeled as a game in which all players share a common prior and the same information at all times,
face no uncertainty about one another’s beliefs and behavior conditional on the fundamentals, and
reach a perfect consensus about the current state and the future prospects of the economy.
    These are strong assumptions, which are at odds with the heterogeneity of expectations evident
in surveys. Once these assumptions are relaxed, the expectations of economic outcomes—for in-
stance, ﬁrms’ expectations of consumer spending and consumers’ expectations of employment and
income—can diverge from the expectations of fundamentals. This provides a novel explanation of
the discrepancies between the predictions of the baseline RBC model and the data. It also accom-
modates phenomena akin to self-fulﬁlling ﬂuctuations despite the uniqueness of equilibrium. In this
paper, we provide a tractable formalization of these ideas and explore their quantitative potential.

    Two contributions. We make two contributions, one methodological and one applied. We ﬁrst
develop a general method for enriching dynamic, general-equilibrium models with a tractable form
of aggregate variation in higher-order beliefs (i.e., the beliefs of the beliefs of others). We then use this
method to explore the macroeconomic implications of a certain type of waves of optimism and pes-
simism that can be interpreted as the product of frictional coordination and—unlike the one captured
by the literature on news shocks—regards the short-term prospects of the economy.
    We refer to these waves as variation in “conﬁdence” and explore their implications within RBC
and New Keynesian models of either the textbook or the medium-scale DSGE variety.2 We show that
they offer a parsimonious yet potent explanation of the business-cycle data. We also argue that they
help capture a form of “demand-driven ﬂuctuations” that does not rely on nominal rigidities and does
not have to manifest as comovement between inﬂation and real economic activity.

    Background and methodological contribution. We build heavily upon the macroeconomic lit-
erature on incomplete information and higher-order uncertainty. This literature goes back at least
to Phelps (1971) and Townsend (1983) and has been revived recently by the inﬂuential contribu-
    1
        Higher-order uncertainty refers to the uncertainty that the agents face about the beliefs of others.
    2
        RBC is acronym for Real Business Cycles, DSGE for Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium.



                                                                  1
tions of Morris and Shin (2001) and Woodford (2002). Within this literature, the closest precursor
to our paper is Angeletos and La’O (2013), which has shown how higher-order uncertainty can help
unique-equilibrium models accommodate forces akin to animal spirits and coordination failures.3
    We borrow from this literature the insight that higher-order beliefs can deviate from ﬁrst-order
beliefs, but use heterogeneous priors instead of complex learning dynamics to engineer ﬂuctuations
in the gap between ﬁrst- and higher-order beliefs. This approach entails a certain departure from
Rational Expectations. But it also allows us to bypass the computational complications that have
hindered progress in this literature on the quantitative front,4 and to develop a general method for
augmenting macroeconomic models with rich, yet tractable, higher-order beliefs.
    In order to illustrate this point, consider the baseline RBC model. The equilibrium dynamics of
this model can be summarized by a policy rule of the form Xt = G(Kt , At ), where At is the technol-
ogy shock, Kt is the capital stock, and Xt = (Yt , Nt , Ct , Kt+1 ) is a vector that collects the relevant
macroeconomic outcomes, namely output, employment, consumption, and investment or, equiva-
lently, the next-period capital stock. Adding incomplete information to this model allows higher-order
beliefs to diverge from ﬁrst-order beliefs but also increases the model’s state space and considerably
complicates its solution. By contrast, our heterogeneous-prior formulation captures a similar type of
beliefs-driven ﬂuctuations with only a minimal change in the state space: the equilibrium policy rule
takes the form Xt = G(Kt , At , ξt ), where ξt is an exogenous random variable which, by construction,
encapsulates the deviation of higher-order beliefs from ﬁrst-order beliefs.
    This gain in tractability is not limited to the baseline RBC model. For a large, essentially arbi-
trary, class of linear DSGE models, our approach guarantees a minimal increase in the state space
and delivers the solution of the beliefs-augmented model as a relatively simple transformation of the
solution of the original model. The beliefs-augmented model can thus be simulated, calibrated, and
estimated with essentially the same facility as the original one.5

    Applied contribution. By construction, the ξt shock represents variation in the gap between the
ﬁrst- and the higher-order beliefs of the exogenous fundamental (TFP). In equilibrium, this translates
into waves of optimism and pessimism about aggregate output, employment, spending, and so on.
We refer to these waves as variation in “conﬁdence” and to ξt as the “conﬁdence shock.”
   3
      See Angeletos and Lian (2016a) for a survey and evaluation of this literature. Let us also emphasize that we have
in mind situations in higher-order uncertainty is both present and of consequence. This differentiates our paper, and the
aforementioned literature more broadly, from both Lucas (1972), who considers a setting in which higher-order uncertainty
is present but inconsequential, and Sims (2003), who abstracts from whether and how rational inattention can be conductive
to higher-order uncertainty.
    4
      These complications were ﬁrst highlighted by Townsend (1983). They include the need for large state spaces in order
to keep track of the dynamics of higher-order beliefs and the ﬁxed point between the law of motion of the state and the
agents’ ﬁltering problem. For detailed expositions of these complications and complementary attempts to make progress
on the quantitative front, see Nimark (2017) and Huo and Takayama (2015a,b).
    5
      The aforementioned gain may carry a cost: we abstract from the restrictions that the common-prior assumption, together
with appropriate evidence, may impose on the magnitude and persistence of higher-order uncertainty. We elucidate this
issue in Subsection 3.3 and argue that it may not matter for the applied contribution of our paper.



                                                             2
     A distinct attribute of these waves is that they regard the short-term economic outlook. For in-
stance, a negative innovation in ξt causes the ﬁrms to become pessimistic about proﬁtability and re-
turns over the next few quarters, and the consumers to become pessimistic about wages and income
over the same horizon, without any change in expectations of either the exogenous fundamentals at
any horizon or the endogenous outcomes in the medium to long run.
     This property underlies our preferred interpretation of the ξt shock as a vehicle for autonomous
variation in expectations about the short-term economic outlook. It also distinguishes our contribution
from the literature on news and noise shocks (Jaimovich and Rebelo, 2009; Lorenzoni, 2009; Barsky
and Sims, 2011). That literature stresses beliefs of productivity and income in the medium to long
run, a feature that, in the absence of appropriate bells and whistles, cannot generate realistic business
cycles. By contrast, the emphasis on expectations about the short run allows our mechanism to
produce realistic business cycles even within the textbook RBC model.
     To understand why, augment the RBC model with our mechanism and consider a negative inno-
vation in ξt . As ﬁrms expect the demand for their products to be weak in the short run, they ﬁnd
it optimal to lower their demand for labor and capital. In the eyes of households, this translates
into a transitory fall in wages, capital returns, and overall income. Because this entails relatively
weak wealth effects and relatively strong substitution effects, households react by working less and
by reducing both consumption and saving. Variation in “conﬁdence” thus generates strong posi-
tive comovement between employment, output, consumption, and investment at the business-cycle
frequency, without commensurate movements in labor productivity and TFP at any frequency.
     These predictions are in line with the comovements observed in the US data and cannot be easily
replicated by alternative theories. We provide support for these claims by carrying out two empirical
exercises. In the ﬁrst, we consider the conditional moments in the data after removing the effects of
an empirical proxy of the technology shock. One can think of the ﬁltered data as representing the
“residuals” between the data and the predictions of the baseline RBC model. Our theory does well
on this front: not only does it capture the comovements in these residuals, but it also outperforms
other parsimonious extensions of the RBC model. A similar picture emerges when considering the
wedges along the lines of Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007).
     In the second exercise, we estimate medium-scale DSGE models that include our conﬁdence
shock alongside several other shocks and also contain familiar bells and whistles from the DSGE
literature, such as the speciﬁc types of consumption and investment adjustment costs popularized
by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007). This exercise lacks
parsimony—in particular, it allows business-cycle comovements to be accounted for by the combi-
nation of a plethora of shocks—but corresponds closer to standard practice. Despite the presence of
multiple, competing shocks, the conﬁdence shock emerges as the main driver of the business cycle,
accounting for about one half of the volatility in the key macroeconomic quantities (GDP, hours,
investment, consumption) and for the bulk of their comovements.
     This ﬁnding is robust across two speciﬁcations. The ﬁrst includes sticky prices, lets monetary
policy follow a realistic Taylor rule, and is estimated using both real and nominal variables. The

                                                   3
second assumes ﬂexible prices, abstracts from monetary policy and inﬂation, and is estimated using
only real quantities. Irrespective of the speciﬁcation, the posterior odds of the model that excludes the
conﬁdence shock are considerably smaller than those of the model that contains it. Last but not least,
our mechanism allows for ﬂuctuations that resemble those produced by aggregate demand shocks
but do not require commensurate movements in inﬂation, a feature that seems consistent with the
data and helps bypass the empirical failures of old and new Philips curves.
    Because a direct, empirical counterpart to the conﬁdence shock is hard, if possible at all, to ob-
tain,6 these ﬁndings only provide indirect support for our theory. They nevertheless indicate the
quantitative potential of three elements that are missing from the DSGE literature: frictional coordi-
nation in the form of higher-order uncertainty; a prominent role for waves of optimism and pessimism
about the short-term economic outlook; and demand-driven ﬂuctuations outside the inﬂation-output
nexus of the New Keynesian framework. Our contribution combines all three of these elements.
Future work may narrow the focus to one or another of these elements.

    Layout. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up the baseline model.
Section 3 explains the recursive formulation of the equilibrium and our solution method. Section 4
derives, evaluates, and interprets the empirical properties of the baseline model. Section 5 extends
the analysis to two richer, estimated, models. Section 6 concludes.


2       An RBC Prototype with Tractable Higher-Order Beliefs
In this section we set up our baseline model: an RBC prototype, augmented with a tractable form of
higher-order belief dynamics. We ﬁrst describe the physical environment, which is quite standard.
We then specify the structure of beliefs, which constitutes the main novelty of our approach.

   Geography, markets, and timing. There is a continuum of islands, indexed by i, and a mainland.
Each island is inhabited by a ﬁrm and a household, which interact in local labor and capital markets.
The ﬁrm uses the labor and capital provided by the household to produce a differentiated intermediate
good. A centralized market for these goods operates in the mainland, alongside a market for a ﬁnal
good. The latter is produced with the use of the intermediate goods and is itself used for consumption
and investment. All markets are competitive.
   Time is discrete, indexed by t ∈ {0, 1, . . .}, and each period contains two stages. The labor and
capital markets of each island operate in stage 1. At this point, the ﬁrm decides how much labor
and capital to demand—and, symmetrically, the household decides how much of these inputs to
supply—on the basis of incomplete information regarding the concurrent level of economic activity
    6
     A well-known empirical measure of expectations is the University of Michigan Index of Consumer Sentiment. This index
comoves with, and in fact leads, the business cycle. Furthermore, this index is uncorrelated with utilization-adjusted TFP
at all leads and lags. While these facts are in line with our theory, they do not rule out the possibility that the comovement
of that index with the business cycle is driven by some other fundamental. The inherent difﬁculty is that the deﬁnition of
what is a fundamental and what is not depends on the model under consideration.



                                                              4
on other islands. In stage 2, the centralized markets for the intermediate and the ﬁnal goods operate,
the actual level of economic activity is publicly revealed, and the households make their consumption
and saving decisions on the basis of this information.

         Households. Consider the household on island i. Her preferences are given by
                                                   ∞
                                                   ∑
                                                         β t U (cit , nit )
                                                   t=0

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, cit is consumption, nit is employment (hours worked), and U
is the per-period utility function. The latter takes the form U (c, n) = c 1−γ−1 − n1+ν where γ ≥ 0 is the
                                                                               1−γ       1+ν


inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution and ν ≥ 0 is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity
of labor supply. Balanced growth requires γ = 1, a restriction that we impose in our quantitative
exercises; letting γ ̸= 1 helps accommodate a useful example in Section 3. The household’s budget
constraint is Pt cit +Pt iit = wit nit +rit kit +πit , where Pt is the price of the ﬁnal good, iit is investment,
wit is the local wage, rit is the local rent on capital, and πit is the proﬁt of the local ﬁrm. Finally, the
law of motion for capital is ki,t+1 = (1 − δ)kit + iit , where δ ∈ (0, 1) is the depreciation rate.

         Intermediate-good producers. The output of the ﬁrm on island i is given by

                                                   yit = At n1−α α
                                                             it kit

where At is the aggregate TFP level and kit is the local capital stock. The ﬁrm’s proﬁt is πit = pit yit −
wit nit − rit kit . For future reference, note that variation in expectations of pit translates in variation in
expectations of the returns to capital and labor.

      Final-good sector. The ﬁnal good is produced with a Cobb-Douglas technology, so that log Yt =
∫1
 0   log yit di. By implication, the demand for the good of island i satisﬁes

                                                         pit   Yt
                                                             =     .                                                  (1)
                                                         Pt    yit

Without any loss, we henceforth normalize the price level so that Pt = 1.7

    The technology shock. TFP follows a random walk: log At = log At−1 + vt , where vt is the period
t innovation. The latter is drawn from a Normal distribution with mean 0 and variance σa2 .

    A tractable form of higher-order uncertainty. We open the door to a gap between ﬁrst- and
higher-order beliefs by removing common knowledge of At in stage 1 of period t: each island i
observes only a private signal of the form zit = log At + εit , where εit is an island-speciﬁc error.
We then engineer the desired variation in higher-order beliefs by departing from the common-prior
assumption and letting each island believe that the signals of others are biased: for every i, the prior
of island i is that εit ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) and that εjt ∼ N (ξt , σ 2 ) for all j ̸= i, where ξt is a random variable
     7
    This only applies to the present model, which abstract from nominal rigidity and monetary policy. In the New Keynesian
variant studied in Section 5, Pt is determined jointly with the real allocations.


                                                              5
that becomes commonly known in stage 1 of period t and that represents the perceived bias in one
another’s signals. These priors are commonly known: the agents “agree to disagree”.
    We have in mind a sequence of models in which ﬁrst- and higher-order beliefs converge to Dirac
measures as σ → 0. But instead of studying the case with σ ≈ 0, we only study the case with σ = 0.
This guarantees that the agents act as if they were perfectly informed about the underlying state of
Nature and that the pair (At , ξt ) is a sufﬁcient statistic for the entire hierarchy of beliefs about both
current and future fundamentals. Together with the assumption that the aggregate capital stock (the
endogenous state variable) becomes common knowledge at the end of each period, this guarantees
that the model admits a tractable recursive solution, as shown in Section 3.

    The conﬁdence shock. We ﬁnally let ξt follow an AR(1) process: ξt = ρξt−1 + ζt , where ρ ∈ [0, 1)
and ζt is drawn from a Normal distribution with mean 0 and variance σξ2 . This helps mimic an
elementary property of common-prior settings: in such settings, any innovation in the gap between
ﬁrst- and higher-order beliefs can last for a while but must eventually vanish as old information gets
replaced by new. See Subsection 3.3 for an example that illustrates this point.

    Remarks and Interpretation. Our heterogeneous-prior speciﬁcation puts strains on the rationality
of the agents. First, it lets the impact of ξt on n-th order beliefs increase with n. Second, it ties the
persistence of higher-order beliefs to the persistence of the ξt shock. Finally, it implies a systematic
bias in equilibrium expectations: although the ﬁrms and the consumers predict correctly the sign of
the equilibrium impact of ξt on the relevant economic outcomes, they systematically overestimate its
magnitude, and they also fail to learn from their past mistakes.
    One does not have to take these properties literally. Common-prior settings such as those studied
in Angeletos and La’O (2013), Benhabib, Wang, and Wen (2015), Huo and Takayama (2015a), Ni-
mark (2017), and Rondina and Walker (2014) can accommodate similar ﬂuctuations in higher-order
beliefs. In effect, what is “bias” in our setting becomes “rational confusion” in those settings. Further-
more, higher-order beliefs can be persistent in both cases, although the persistence is endogenous to
the learning that takes place over time in the latter case. We illustrate these points in Subsection 3.3
by establishing an observational equivalence, from the point of view of aggregate data, between a
special case of our model and a common-prior variant.
    Most importantly, the subsequent analysis will reveal that the empirical performance of our theory
hinges, not on the precise micro-foundations of the belief waves considered, but rather on the property
that the beliefs regard ﬁrm proﬁtability and household income in the short run as opposed to the
medium and long run. We thus encourage the reader to adopt a ﬂexible interpretation of ξt as a
modeling device that helps capture more generally this kind of belief waves.8
   8
     We can imagine at least two variants of our framework that can also capture such waves. The one replaces our
heterogeneous-prior speciﬁcation with Knightean uncertainty (ambiguity) about the information of others and allows for,
possibly endogenous, variation in the level of this uncertainty; such a model could build a bridge between our work and a
literature on ambiguity and robust control (Hansen and Sargent, 2007, 2012; Woodford, 2010). The other allows directly for
irrational shifts in expectations of proﬁtability and income in the short run; such a model would ﬁt well with the narratives
in Akerlof and Shiller (2009) and Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2016).


                                                             6
3     Equilibrium characterization and solution method
In this section, we characterize the equilibrium of the model and present our solution method. We
also use an example to illustrate the idea that our heterogeneous-prior formulation can be seen as
convenient proxy for belief ﬂuctuations in common-prior settings with rich information structures.


3.1   Recursive equilibrium

As behavior is forward looking, the optimal choices any agent (or island) makes at any point of time
depend on her beliefs, not only of the concurrent behavior of others, but also of their behavior in
the future. This suggests a high-dimensional ﬁxed-point relation between actual behavior and the
expectations that agents form at any time about future economic outcomes, including expectations
of the future terms of trade (the prices of the island-speciﬁc goods), wages, and interest rates. In
general, the introduction of higher-order uncertainty can perturb this kind of expectations in a sufﬁ-
ciently signiﬁcant manner as to render a low-dimensional recursive representation infeasible. With
our formulation, however, such a representation is feasible and, indeed, relatively straightforward.
    To start with, note that the equilibrium allocations on any given island can be obtained by solving
the problem of a ﬁctitious local planner. The latter chooses local employment, output, consumption
and savings so as to maximize local welfare subject to the following resource constraint:

                                   cit + ki,t+1 = (1 − δ)kit + pit yit                                   (2)

Note that this constraint depends on pit and, thereby, on aggregate output, objects that are endogenous
in general equilibrium but are taken as given by the ﬁctitious local planner (or, equivalently, in the
partial equilibrium of the given island). This dependence captures the type of aggregate-demand
externalities and other general-equilibrium effects that are at the core of DSGE models.
    To make her optimal decisions at any given point of time, the aforementioned planner must form
beliefs about the value of pit (or, equivalently, of Yt ) at all future points of time. These beliefs encap-
sulate the beliefs that the local ﬁrm forms about the evolution of the demand for its product and of
the costs of its inputs, as well as the beliefs that the local consumer forms about the dynamics of local
income, wages, and capital returns. The fact that the various beliefs are tied together underscores the
cross-equations restrictions that discipline the exercises conducted in this paper: if expectations were
“completely” irrational, the beliefs of different endogenous objects would not be tied together. The
observable implications of these restrictions will be revealed in what follows. For now, we emphasize
that ξt matters for equilibrium outcomes because, and only because, it triggers comovement in the
expectations of the various actors in our model.
    In a recursive equilibrium, these expectations can be tracked with the help of a small number of
functions, which themselves encapsulate the ﬁxed-point relation between behavior and beliefs. For
the model under consideration, this means that we can deﬁne a recursive equilibrium as a collection
of four functions, denoted by P, G, V1 , and V2 , such that the following is true:


                                                     7
   • P(z, ξ, K) captures the price (the terms of trade, or equivalently, the demand) expected by an
     island in stage 1 of any given period when the local signal is z , the conﬁdence shock is ξ , and
     the capital stock is K ; and G(A, ξ, K) gives the aggregate capital stock next period when the
     current realized value of the aggregate state is (A, ξ, K).

   • V1 and V2 solve the following Bellman equations:
                                                                                                    
                    V1 (k; z, ξ, K) = max V2 (m̂; z, ξ, K) −           1
                                                                      1+ν n
                                                                           1+ν                      
                                                                                                    
                                               n                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                          s.t.       m̂ = p̂ŷ + (1 − δ)k
                                                                                                          (3)
                                                     ŷ = zk α n1−α                                 
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                     p̂ = P(z, ξ, K)
                                                                ∫                                   
                                                     1−γ −1            ′  ′ ′  ′      ′ ′           
                 V2 (m; A, ξ, K) = max                1−γ + β V1 (k ; A , ξ , K )df (A , ξ |A, ξ)
                                                   c
                                     ′   c,k
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                         s.t.      c + k′ = m                                             (4)
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                   K ′ = G(A, ξ, K)

   • P and G are consistent with the policy rules that solve the local planning problem in (3)-(4).

     To interpret (3) and (4), note that V1 and V2 denote the local planner’s value functions in, re-
spectively, stages 1 and 2; m denotes the quantity of the ﬁnal good acquired in stage 2; and the hat
symbol over a variable indicates the stage-1 belief of that variable. Next, note that the last constraint
in (3) embeds the belief that the price of the local good is governed by the function P, while the other
two constraints are the local production function and the local resource constraint. The problem in
(3) therefore describes the optimal employment and output choices in stage 1, when the local cap-
ital stock is k , the local signal of the aggregate state is (z, ξ, K), and the local beliefs of “aggregate
demand” are captured by the function P. The problem in (4), in turn, describes the optimal consump-
tion and saving decisions in stage 2, when the available quantity of the ﬁnal good is m, the realized
aggregate state is (A, ξ, K), and the island expects aggregate capital to follow the policy rule G.
     The decision problem of the local planner treats the functions P and G as exogenous. In equi-
librium, however, these functions must be consistent with the policy rules that solve this problem.
Let n(k, z; ξ, K) be the optimal choice for employment that obtains from (3) and g(m; A, ξ, K) be the
optimal policy rule for capital that obtains from (4). Next, let y(z; A, ξ, K) ≡ An(z, ξ, K)1−α K α be
the output level that results from the aforementioned employment strategy where the realized TFP is
A and the local capital stock coincides with the aggregate one. The relevant equilibrium-consistency
conditions can then be expressed as follows:

                                     y(z + ξ, z, ξ, K)
                          P(z, ξ, K) =                                                                    (5)
                                       y(z, z, ξ, K)
                                      (                          X
                                                                         )
                        G(A, ξ, K) = g y(A, A, ξ, K) + (1 − δ)K ; A, ξ, K .                               (6)

    To interpret condition (5), recall that in stage 1 each island believes that, with probability one, TFP
satisﬁes A = z and the signals of all other islands satisfy z ′ = A + ξ = z + ξ . Together with the fact that

                                                          8
all islands make the same choices in equilibrium and that the function y captures their equilibrium
production choices, this implies that the local beliefs of local and aggregate output are given by,
respectively, ŷ = y(z, z, ξ, K) and Ŷ = y(z + ξ, z, ξ, K). By the demand function in (1), it then follows
that the local belief of the price must satisfy p̂ = Ŷ /ŷ , which gives condition (5). To interpret condition
(6), recall that all islands end up making identical choices in equilibrium, implying that the available
resources of each island in stage 2 coincide with Y + (1 − δ)K , where Y is the aggregate quantity
of the ﬁnal good (aggregate GDP). Note next that the realized production level of all islands is given
by y(A, A, ξ, K) and, therefore, Y is also given by y(A, A, ξ, K). Together with the fact that g is the
optimal savings rule, this gives condition (6).
     Summing up, an equilibrium is a ﬁxed point of the Bellman equations (3)-(4) and the consistency
conditions (5)-(6). In principle, one can obtain the global, non-linear, solution of this ﬁxed-point
problem with numerical methods. As in the DSGE literature, however, we ﬁnd it useful to concentrate
on the log-linear approximation of the solution around the deterministic steady state.


3.2      Log-linear Solution

To obtain the log-linear solution, we ﬁrst log-linearize the equilibrium equations around the deter-
ministic steady state. With a slight abuse of notation, we henceforth re-interpret all the variables in
terms of the log-deviations of these variables from their steady-state values.
    The terms of trade faced by island i are pit = Yt − yit . The associated marginal revenue products
of labor and capital are, respectively, M RP Lit ≡ pit + yit − nit and M RP K it ≡ pit + yit − kit . The
optimal behavior of island i is thus characterized by the following system:

                                            νnit = Eit [M RP Lit ] − γEit cit                                          (7)
                               (                )
                             γ E′it ci,t+1 − cit = (1 − β(1 − δ))E′it [M RP K i,t+1 ]                                  (8)
                                        pit + yit = (1 − s)cit + sιit                                                  (9)
                                              yit = At + αkit + (1 − α)nit                                            (10)
                                           ki,t+1 = δiit + (1 − δ)kit                                                 (11)
                αβδ
where s ≡ 1−β(1−δ)     denotes the steady-state investment-to-GDP ratio. The interpretation of these
conditions is straightforward: (7) is the labor-supply condition; (8) is the Euler condition; (9) is the
resource constraint; and (10) is the production function; and (11) is the law of motion for capital.
    To convey the basic idea behind our solution method, consider momentarily a special case that
can be solved by hand: let utility be linear in consumption and assume away capital (γ = α = 0). In
this case, the equilibrium can be reduced to the following ﬁxed-point relation:

                                                 nit = Eit [χAt + ωNt ],                                              (12)

where χ ≡ 1+ν 1
                 and ω ≡ 1+ν1
                               ∈ (0, 1).9 Equilibrium employment can therefore be understood as the
solution to a static beauty-contest game, of the type found in Morris and Shin (2002) and Angeletos
  9
      To obtain condition (12), note ﬁrst that, when α = 0, investment is zero, output is given by yit = At + nit , and the


                                                             9
and Pavan (2007).10 In this game, a player is an island, her action is local employment, the funda-
mental is the underlying TFP, χ measures the direct effect of the fundamental on individual outcomes
holding constant the aggregate outcomes, and ω measures the degree of strategic complementarity.11
Importantly, an island responds to ξt because, and only because, this shock inﬂuences its beliefs
about aggregate employment (and thereby its beliefs about its terms of trade).
   To solve (12), start by guessing the following policy rule at the individual level:

                                                   nit = Λz zit + Λξ ξt                                                   (13)

Aggregation gives Nt = Λz z̄t + Λξ ξt . Next, note that, due to our speciﬁcation of priors,

                              Eit [At ] = zit   and     Eit [z̄t ] = Eit [At + ξt ] = zit + ξt .

It follows that Eit [Nt ] = Λz zit + (Λξ + Λnz )ξt . Using this fact in (12), we infer that whenever i expects
the others to play according to the rule given by (13), his best response is to set

                                         nit = (χ + ωΛz ) zit + ω(Λξ + Λz )ξt .

Matching the coefﬁcients obtained above with those in the proposed policy rule implies that the latter
is part of an equilibrium if and only if the following is true:

                                    Λz = (χ + ωΛz )         and    Λξ = ω(Λξ + Λz ).

Solving these two equations for the coefﬁcients Λz and Λξ gives

                                          χ    1                          ω       1
                                  Λz =       =            and     Λξ =       Λz = 2 .                                     (14)
                                         1−ω   ν                         1−ω     ν
We infer that there exists a unique equilibrium and that the policy rule for local employment in this
equilibrium is given by (13) along with (14). Finally, using the fact that zit = At with probability one,
we conclude that the realized aggregate level of output is given by

                                            Yt = At + Nt = ΛA At + Λξ ξt ,

with ΛA = 1 + Λz and with (Λz , Λξ ) given as in (14).
    Two properties of this solution are worth noting. First, the coefﬁcient ΛA , which governs the
response of Yt to At , is the same as the one in the version of the model that imposes common knowl-
edge of At and shuts down the ξt shock. Second, the coefﬁcient Λξ , which governs the effect of
the ξt shock, is proportional to ΛA by a factor that is itself increasing in ω . That is, the impact of
resource constraint reduces to cit = pit + yit , Using these facts into the labor-supply condition (9) gives (1 + ν)nit =
Eit [pit + yit ]. Finally, using pit = Yt − yit and Yt = At + Nt results into condition (12).
   10
      The term “beauty contests” is often used to refer to a class of coordination games with linear best responses.
   11
      In the example under consideration, ω happens to coincide with χ, but this is not generally true. It is therefore best to
think of ω and χ as two distinct objects.



                                                             10
the conﬁdence shock relative to that of the technology shock increases with the degree of strategic
complementarity. This is because ξt matters only by inﬂuencing the beliefs of the actions of others.
    Go back now to the general case (α, γ > 0). The presence of an endogenous state variable
(capital) and of forward-looking behavior implies that the economy can be thought of as a dynamic
game in which the best response of a player (or island) today depends both on past outcomes and on
expectations of future outcomes. This complicates the ﬁxed-point problem that needs to be solved.
The essence, however, is similar to that in the above example.
    We thus start by guessing the following policy rules at the island level:

                       nit = Λnk (kit − Kt ) + ΛnK Kt + Λnz zit + Λnξ ξt                                (15)
                       cit = Γck (kit − Kt ) + ΓcK Kt + Γcz zit + Γcz z t + Γca At + Γcξ ξt             (16)
                     kit+1 = Ωkk (kit − Kt ) + ΩkK Kt + Ωkz zit + Ωkz z t + Ωka At + Ωkξ ξt             (17)

where Λn , Γc , and Ωk are coefﬁcients that remain to be determined. We then proceed to solve for the
equilibrium values of these coefﬁcients by solving the ﬁxed-point problem between the individual
policy rules and the associated aggregate outcomes imposed by conditions (7)-(11).
    To generate data from the model, we set zit = z̄t = At and compute the aggregate outcomes
implied by (15)-(17). This gives Nt , Ct and Kt+1 as functions of the vector (Kt , At , ξt ), verifying that
the latter is the state variable for the aggregate outcomes. Note that setting zit = z̄t = At corresponds
to invoking the objective truth. However, to solve the ﬁxed-point problem between the individual
policy rules (or strategies) and the aggregate outcomes, we have to treat zit , z̄t and At as distinct
objects. This is necessary in order to keep track of the difference between the ﬁrst- and the higher-
order beliefs of the underlying fundamental and, thereby, between objective and subjective beliefs.
    The details are spelled out in Online Appendix O.5. The bottom line is that we can obtain the
solution of our model as a tractable transformation of that of the standard RBC model. Furthermore,
this solution has two key properties. First, the coefﬁcients (ΛnK , ΓcK , ΩkK ) and (ΛnA , ΓcA , ΩkA ), which
determine the impact of the capital stock and the technology shock on aggregate outcomes coincide
with those in the standard RBC model. Second, the coefﬁcients (Λnξ , Γcξ , Ωkξ ), which determine the
impact of the conﬁdence shock, can be solved as functions of the aforementioned coefﬁcients and
a few other coefﬁcients, which themselves capture the degree of strategic complementarity in the
economy. These properties mirror those noted in the example above.
    The solution strategy described above and the aforementioned properties extend to a large class of
linear DSGE models; see Online Appendix O.5. The beliefs-augmented model can thus be simulated
and estimated with the same ease as the original model. This facilitates the quantitative explorations
conducted in Sections 4 and 5.


3.3   Heterogeneous vs Common Priors

As already mentioned, the main advantage of our approach relative to common-prior, incomplete-
information models is its ﬂexibility and its straightforward applicability to macroeconomic models.

                                                      11
A potential cost is that it bypasses the restrictions that the common-prior assumption imposes on the
size and dynamics of higher-order uncertainty. We now use an example to illustrate this trade off
and to corroborate the claim that our heterogeneous-prior speciﬁcation can be thought as a proxy for
higher-order uncertainty in common-prior settings.
    In particular, we show that the tractable example considered in the previous section is observa-
tionally equivalent to a common-prior variant, in a sense that will be made precise below. We then
derive the restrictions that the common-prior variant imposes on the volatility and the persistence of
the kind of belief-driven ﬂuctuations we are interested in.
    We start by showing that the special case of our model that was solved by hand in the previous
section (namely, the one with α = γ = 0) is observationally equivalent, in a sense that will be made
precise below, to a common-prior variant. This variant is obtained by introducing heterogeneity in
TFP and letting trade be done according to random, pairwise, matching across the islands. As in
Angeletos and La’O (2013), these modiﬁcations allow ﬂuctuations to obtain from correlated noise in
the rational beliefs that islands form about their pairwise terms of trade.
    Let us ﬁll in the details. TFP in island i is given by Ait = At + ai , where At is the aggregate TFP
shock and ai is an island-speciﬁc ﬁxed effect. The former follows a random walk with the same vari-
ance as in the heterogeneous-prior economy; the latter is distributed in the cross-section of islands
according to a Normal distribution with mean zero and variance σ̃a2 . The aggregate TFP shock is
assumed to be common knowledge. Nevertheless, higher-order uncertainty is still present because
each island is uncertain about the productivity and the information of its trading partner when choos-
ing employment and production. In particular, the information that island i has in the morning of
period t about its current-period match is summarized by the following two signals:

                                     zit = am(i,t) + ξ˜t        and        wit = ξ˜t + ui,t ,

where m(i, t) denotes the trading partner of island i in period t, ui,t is orthogonal to am(i,t) , i.i.d.
across islands and unpredictable on the basis of past information, and ξ˜t is an aggregate shock that is
orthogonal to the aggregate TFP shock and that follows an AR(1) process. More speciﬁcally,

                                                      ξ˜t = ρ̃ξ˜t−1 + σ̃ξ ζ̃t

where ζ̃t ⇝ N (0, 1), σ̃ξ > 0, and ρ̃ ∈ [0, 1]. Literally taken, zit is i’s private signal about the idiosyn-
cratic TFP of its trading partner; this signal is contaminated by common noise, given by ξ˜t ; and wit is
a private signal that is informative about this noise.12 Clearly, the ξ˜t shock plays the same role in this
common-prior setting as the ξt shock in our heterogeneous-prior setting.
    In the absence of the aforementioned shocks, the two economies reduce to the same underlying
RBC benchmark and thus give rise, in equilibrium, to the same observables at the aggregate level. Let
Yt∗ denote the level of output in that benchmark. From the results of the previous subsection, we have
that the equilibrium level of output in the heterogeneous-prior economy is given by Yt = Yt∗ + Λξ ξt ,
  12
       This signal can be recast as a signal extracted from past trades; see Angeletos and La’O (2013) for details.


                                                               12
with Λξ as in (14). And since ξt is an AR(1) process, we conclude that the “output gap” relative to the
RBC benchmark is also an AR(1) process:

                                      Yt − Yt∗ = φ(Yt−1 − Yt−1
                                                            ∗
                                                               ) + ψεt ,                                      (18)

where εt ⇝ N (0, 1) is i.i.d. over time and independent of the technology shock,13 and where
                                                                      ωσξ
                                      φ=ρ           and        ψ=            .                                (19)
                                                                    (1 − ω)2

Consider next the common-prior economy and let θ̃ ≡ (ρ̃, σ̃ξ , σ̃u , σ̃a ) collects its informational param-
eters. Its solution is far from trivial, but can be obtained by adapting Theorem 1 in Huo and Takayama
(2015b).14 We thus have that the output gap in this economy also follows an AR(1) process as in (18),
except that now φ and ψ are given by the following:
                                [                                                                      ] 
                 (      )         (                                ) √(                           )2     
        φ = Φ θ̃, ω ≡ 2       1     1            1−ω σ̃a2 +σ̃u2
                                                                 2  −   1        1−ω σ̃a2 +σ̃u
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                2    −4  
                                                                                                         
                                    ρ̃ + ρ̃ + ρ̃ σ̃a2 σ̃u   2 σ̃ξ       ρ̃ + ρ̃ + ρ̃ σ̃a2 σ̃u
                                                                                            2 σ̃ξ        
                                                                                                         
                  (     )                                                                                  (20)
        ψ = Ψ θ̃, ω ≡ (                 ωΦ(θ̃,ω)           ) σ̃a                                         
                                                                                                         
                                            2            2                                               
                                                                                                         
                                        ρ̃σ̃ +Φ(θ̃,ω)σ̃u
                              ρ̃ 1−ω 2 a 2
                                            ρ̃σ̃ +ρ̃σ̃ 2
                                                                                                         
                                           a    u



   By comparing (19) and (20), we can readily prove that the two economies are observationally
equivalent in the following sense.

Proposition 1 Let θ ≡ (ρ, σξ ), Θ̃ ≡ [0, 1] × R3+ , and Θ ≡ [0, 1] × R+ ; and let C(θ̃) and H(θ) denote,
respectively, the common-prior economy parameterized by θ̃ and the heterogeneous-prior economy
parameterized by θ. Then:
    (i) For any θ̃ ∈ Θ̃, there exists a θ ∈ Θ such that H(θ) implies the same stochastic process for the
output gap and all the macroeconomic quantities as C(θ̃).
    (ii) The converse is also true: for any θ ∈ Θ, there exists a θ̃ ∈ Θ̃ such that C(θ̃) implies the same
stochastic process for the output gap and all the macroeconomic quantities as H(θ).

    The intuition behind this result is that the two economies feature exactly the same variation in
the expectations of the relevant economic outcomes: in either economy, a positive (resp., negative)
output gap obtains if and only if the ﬁrms and the households of each island are optimistic (resp.,
pessimistic) about the terms of trade, or the demand, that their island is likely to face in the short
run. What differs between the two economies is the way these waves of optimism and pessimism are
captured: in one economy, they are engineered with the help of a speciﬁc departure from rational
expectations; in the other, they are instead sustained by rational confusion. Accordingly, whereas the
higher-order belief shock is allowed to be common knowledge in the heterogeneous-prior economy,
  13
    Note that εt ≡ σ1ξ ζt , with ζt being the innovation in the conﬁdence shock.
  14
    The result contained in Huo and Takayama (2015b) abstracts from the aggregate TFP shock. By adding such a shock
but assuming that it is always common knowledge, we guarantee that the same solution applies to the gap Yt − Yt∗ .



                                                          13
it has to be imperfectly observed in the common-prior one. Nevertheless, by choosing the parameters
that govern the dynamics of that shock and of the quality of learning in the latter economy, we can
always match the stochastic process for the aforementioned expectations in the former economy, and
can therefore also generate the same observables at the aggregate level.
    This result is subject to the following qualiﬁcation: the ability to replicate a heterogeneous-prior
economy with a common-prior one relies on the freedom to choose a sufﬁcient high σ̃a in the latter.
This is because the level of fundamental, or ﬁrst-order uncertainty in the common-prior economy—
parameterized here by σ̃a —imposes certain bounds on the persistence and the volatility of higher-
order beliefs and, equivalently, on φ and ψ . For the heterogeneous-prior economy to respect the same
bounds, ρ and σξ must satisfy certain restrictions. Proposition 2 below describes the bounds on φ
and ψ ; Corollary 1 gives the corresponding restrictions on ρ and σξ .

Proposition 2 For any φ ∈ [0, 1) and any ω ∈ (0, 1), let

               B(φ, ω) ≡          max               {Ψ (ρ̂, σ̂u , σ̂ξ , 1, ω) s.t. Φ (ρ̂, σ̂u , σ̂ξ , ω) = φ} .
                           ρ̂∈[0,1],σ̂u ≥0,σ̂ξ ≥0

A process for the output gap as in condition (18) can be obtained in the equilibrium of a common-
prior economy C(θ̃) if and only if (i) 0 ≤ φ < 1 and (ii) 0 ≤ ψ ≤ B(φ, ω)σ̃a .

Corollary 1 A heterogeneous-prior economy H(θ) can be replicated by a common-prior economy
C(θ̃) if and only if (i) 0 ≤ ρ < 1 and (ii) σξ ≤ (1−ω)
                                                   ω
                                                      2 B(ρ, ω)σ̃a .



    Part (i) of Proposition 2 states that the beliefs-driven ﬂuctuations in the common-prior economy
are necessarily transitory. This would be true even if we allowed ρ̃ > 1, meaning an explosive process
for the ξ˜t shock. The reason is that these ﬂuctuations are sustained only by rational confusion, which
itself fades away as additional information arrives over time. Part (ii), on the other hand, provides a
tight upper bound on the volatility of these ﬂuctuations. This bound is proportional to σ̃a , because, as
already explained, this parameter pins down the level of ﬁrst-order uncertainty, which in turn binds
the level of higher-order uncertainty.
    Corollary 1 converts the above properties into restrictions on the parameters of the heterogeneous-
prior speciﬁcation. Part (i) justiﬁes our earlier assertion that letting ρ < 1 helps capture within our
framework the property that the ﬂuctuations sustained by higher-order uncertainty have to be transient.
Part (ii), on the other, provides an upper bound on σξ .
    To recap, we have established two lessons in the context of the example considered. First,
the heterogeneous-prior setting is observationally equivalent to a common-prior variant in terms of
beliefs-driven ﬂuctuations. Second, the common-prior setting imposes a joint restriction between the
magnitude and persistence of these ﬂuctuations and the underlying fundamental uncertainty. Trans-
lating this restriction to the heterogeneous-prior setting yields a bound on σξ .
    How tight is this bound? In Online Appendix O.1, we use a back-of-the-envelope exercise to
argue the following: if we were to approach the US data with the simple model considered in this


                                                              14
subsection, the bound would be large enough to allow for the entire business cycle to be driven by
the conﬁdence shock. And although a similar result is not readily available for the estimated models
of Section 5, we suspect that our quantitative ﬁndings are consistent with realistic common-prior
models. The recent work of Huo and Takayama (2015b) seems to corroborate this conjecture.


4        Empirical Properties of the Conﬁdence Shock
We now use a parametrized version of our model to illustrate the comovements induced by the conﬁ-
dence shock on the key macroeconomic quantities. We also explain why these patterns are consistent
with salient features of the data and why they are not shared by other parsimonious extensions of the
RBC model.15 We ﬁnally elaborate on the sense in which the conﬁdence shock can be thought of as
an aggregate demand shock whose ability to generate realistic business cycles does not require either
the presence of nominal rigidities or the comovement of the real quantities with inﬂation.


4.1      Parameterization and IRFs

The parameters are set as follows: the discount factor is 0.99; the elasticity of intertemporal substitution
is 1; the Frisch elasticity of labor supply is 2; the capital share in production is 0.3; the depreciation
rate is 0.015; and the persistence of the conﬁdence shock is ρ = 0.75. The last choice is somewhat
arbitrary, but can motivated as follows. First, the implied forecast errors have a half life of less than a
year, which is broadly in line with survey evidence in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012). Second,
the value of ρ assumed here is close to the one estimated in the next section in the context of two
medium-scale, DSGE models. Finaly, to the extent that the ﬂuctuations induced by ξt in our model
resemble either the “demand shock” identiﬁed in Blanchard and Quah (1989) or the “main business
cycle shock” identiﬁed in Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2017), our parametrization is consistent
with the evidence in those papers as well.16
    Figure 1 reports the Impulse Response Functions (IRFs) of the model’s key quantities to a positive
innovation in ξt . It is evident that the shock causes output, hours, consumption and investment move
in the same direction. But why?
    We address this question in two steps. In the rest of this subsection, we explain how the variation
in higher-order beliefs of the exogenous fundamental (TFP) translates into variation in the expectations
of the aggregate economic activity and the terms of trade. In the next subsection, we clarify how the
empirical performance of the theory hinges on the horizon of the latter kind of expectations.
    Start by inspecting conditions (7)-(11), which determine the equilibrium behavior. The following
property is evident: the optimal behavior of an island depends on its higher-order beliefs of aggregate
    15
    The performance of our mechanism within richer, medium-scale, DSGE models is addressed in Section 5.
    16
    Note that we have not speciﬁed σa and σξ , the standard deviations of the two shocks. This is not necessary for the
purposes of this section, because we focus on comovement patterns and do not attempt to match the overall volatility in
the data. See, however, the remarks in footnote 21.



                                                         15
                        Output                    Consumption                Investment                  Hours Worked                 Productivity
               1                                                     4                         1.5                           1
                                        0.4                                                                                0.5
% deviation


                                                                     3                          1
                                        0.3
              0.5                                                    2                                                       0
                                        0.2                                                    0.5
                                                                     1                                                     -0.5
                                        0.1
                                                                     0                          0
               0                         0                                                                                  -1
                    0     10       20         0      10         20       0      10        20         0       10       20          0      10          20
                        Quarters                   Quarters                   Quarters                     Quarters                    Quarters


                                    Figure 1: Impulse responses to a positive conﬁdence shock


TFP only through its ﬁrst-order beliefs of its terms of trade, which in turn coincide with its ﬁrst-order
beliefs of aggregate output. This reveals the ultimate modeling role of the ξt shock, which is to capture
extrinsic variation in the expectations of the relevant economic outcomes.
    This perspective applies more generally. In the class of models we are interested in, the equi-
librium expectations of the endogenous outcomes can be expressed as a function of the hierarchy
of beliefs about the underlying fundamentals regardless of the information structure. However, dif-
ferent assumptions about the information structure lead to different predictions about the stochastic
properties of the expectations of economic outcomes. In the standard practice, these expectations
are spanned by the expectations of fundamentals because higher-order beliefs collapse to ﬁrst-order
beliefs. By contrast, our approach leaves room for autonomous variation in the expectations of eco-
nomic outcomes by letting the higher-order beliefs to deviate from the ﬁrst-order beliefs.


4.2                 The Key Mechanism: Beliefs about the Short-Term Economic Outlook

So far, we have argued that it is best to think of ξt shock as a modeling device for introducing au-
tonomous variation in the expectations of the relevant economic outcomes. This is important, but it
is not the whole story. Because behavior is forward looking, the horizon of these expectations is a
crucial determinant of how actual outcomes respond to shifts in them. We now build on this basic
observation to explain why the comovement patterns seen in Figure 1 hinge on the property that the
ξt shock captures expectations of the short-term economic outlook, as opposed to expectations of the
medium- or long-run prospects.
    To reveal the short-term nature of the belief waves triggered by the ξt shock, we present the effects
of the shock on the “term structure of expectations”. Consider, in particular, the forecasts that island
i forms in period t about about its terms of trade k periods ahead, namely, Eiτ [pi,τ +k ], for all k ≥ 1.
As already noted, these forecasts are tied to the forecasts that the ﬁrms make about their sales, that
the households form about their income, and that everybody forms about aggregate output. Figure 2
draws the average forecast at different horizons (namely, for k ∈ {1, . . . , 12}), both at the moment the
shock hits the economy (solid line) and four quarters later (dashed line).


                                                                             16
                                    1.5
                                                              On impact
                                                              One year later
                                     1


                                    0.5


                                     0
                                          2       4      6       8    10       12
                                              Forecast Horizon in Quarters


                  Figure 2: Forecasts of terms of trade, following a conﬁdence shock


     As is evident in the ﬁgure, a positive innovation in ξt raises the expected expected terms of trade
in the next few quarters without moving the corresponding expectations at longer horizons. The same
point applies to the forecasts of the aggregate levels of output, hours, consumption and investment. As
time passes, the optimism fades away and the curve in Figure 2 shifts down. Nevertheless, the curve
remains downward-sloping, underscoring that the waves of optimism (and pessimism) accommodated
in our paper regard exclusively the short-term economic outlook.
     This property is key to understanding the comovement patterns seen in Figure 1. In the eyes of
the ﬁrms, a positive innovation in ξt means a short-lived increase in the expected demand for their
product. To take advantage of this, the ﬁrms raise their demand for both labor and capital, pushing
the wage and the rental rate of capital up. As a result, the households experience a transitory increase
in their income and in the returns to labor and capital. Because this entails only a small increase in
permanent income, the wealth effect on labor supply is easily dominated by the competing substitu-
tion effect. This guarantees that hours, and hence also output and income, increase in equilibrium.
Finally, because the boom is expected to be transitory, the households ﬁnd it optimal to consume only
a fraction of the realized increase in their income and to save the rest. All in all, the shock therefore
causes a joint increase in hours, output, consumption and investment, and without a commensurate
shift in TFP and labor productivity, just as seen in Figure 1.
     As noted in the introduction, this mechanism is different from the one in the literature on news and
noise shocks (Beaudry and Portier, 2006; Jaimovich and Rebelo, 2009; Lorenzoni, 2009; Barsky and
Sims, 2011). To illustrate the difference, consider Barsky and Sims (2012), an example of that literature
that accommodates both news and noise shocks. Aggregate TFP is given by At = At−1 + γt−1 + εa,t ,
where γt = ργ γt−1 + εγ,t , ργ ∈ (0, 1), and εa,t ∼ N (0, σa2 ) and εγ,t ∼ N (0, σγ2 ) are independent of
one another and serially uncorrelated. Furthermore, the representative agent observes At perfectly,
but only receives a noisy signal of γt . Finally, this signal is given by zt = γt + ηt , where ηt ∼ N (0, ση2 )
is uncorrelated over time and independent of the current and past values of the innovations εa,t and
εγ,t . In this formulation, εγ,t moves both the expectations and the actual realizations of future TFP,



                                                         17
whereas εη,t moves the expectations without moving the actual realizations. The former represents a
news shock, the latter a noise shock.

                                     News Shock                                              Noise Shock
                  0.6                                                    0.04

                                                                         0.03
                  0.4
                                                                         0.02
                  0.2
                                                                         0.01
                    0                         On impact                     0
                                              One year later
                  -0.2                                                   -0.01
                         0     2    4     6      8     10      12                0     2    4     6     8    10     12
                             Forecast Horizon in Quarters                            Forecast Horizon in Quarters


        Figure 3: Forecasts of output at different horizons, following a news and a noise shock.

    Figure 3 reports the impact of these shocks on the expectations of aggregate output at different
horizons, both right after the realization of the shock (solid line) and four quarters later (dashed line).
The left panel corresponds to the news shock, the right to the noise shock. By comparing the two
panels, we see that the two shocks have qualitatively similar effects on impact. As time passes and
more information arrives, the agents can tell whether the initial shift in their beliefs was due to a true
increase in the long-run level of TFP or due to noise. This explains why the effects of the news shock
get reinforced with the passage of time, while those of the noise fade away. The nature of optimism,
however, is the same across these two cases—and it is very different from the one seen in Figure 2.
While the conﬁdence shock shifts the expectations of the short-term economic outlook, the news and
noise shocks shift expectations of the medium- and long-run prospects.
    It is precisely this difference that accounts for the superior quantitative performance of our mecha-
nism. As already explained, the conﬁdence shock triggers small shifts in expected permanent income
and large shifts in the expected short-run returns to capital and labor. The opposite is true with the
kind of news and noise shocks studied in the extant literature. When a positive news or noise shock
hits the economy, the ﬁrms do not change their demand for labor and capital because they perceive
no immediate change in their short-term returns, but the households reduce both their supply of labor
and their saving because they expect higher wages and higher income in the future: a positive news
shock is a good time both to consume more and to take a vacation. As a result, the equilibrium levels
of employment and investment move in the opposite direction than that of consumption, which in
turn explains why these shocks fail to generate realistic business cycles within baseline versions of
either the RBC or the New Keynesian model.17
  17
    To overcome this challenge, Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009) augment the baseline RBC model with adjustment costs that
makes investment today increase in anticipation of higher investment in the future; and with a particular form of internal
habit that generates a negative income effect on leisure in the short run. Lorenzoni (2009), on the other hand, abstracts
from investment, adds nominal rigidity, and lets monetary policy induce pro-cyclical output gaps. Yet, this mechanism


                                                                    18
4.3    Conditional Moments

We have shown that the conﬁdence shock produces transitory comovements in the key macroeco-
nomic quantities, without commensurate movement in TFP and labor productivity. We have also
offered the economic intuition for this result. But is this prediction consistent with the data?
    One could imagine answering this question by obtaining an empirical counterpart of ξt from
surveys of higher-order beliefs of TFP. However, such surveys are not available. But even if they
were available, they would only help under a literal, narrow interpretation of ξt , which is not our
preferred way to think about the applied contribution of our paper. Instead, we believe that this
contribution is maximized by interpreting ξt as a proxy for autonomous variation in the ﬁrst-order
beliefs of the endogenous economic outcomes over the business cycle—think of the expectations
that the ﬁrms form about the demand for their products, or those that the consumers in turn form
about their employment and income.
    Because these expectations are part of the equilibrium and are jointly determined with the actual
outcomes, it is unclear how one could identify ξt through, say, a SVAR approach analogous to those
used in the identiﬁcation of technology and monetary shocks. Lacking a better alternative, we thus
proceed to evaluate the empirical performance of our theory in a more indirect way, by comparing
two sets of conditional moments: those generated in our model by the conﬁdence shock alone; and
those observed in the data after ﬁltering them from the effects of an empirical proxy of the technology
shock. We view this comparison of conditional moments as a crucial test of any parsimonious theory
that aspires to improve upon the baseline RBC model: if such a theory fails to account for the TFP-
ﬁltered “residuals” of the data, then it fails to achieve this objective.
    We obtain the relevant component of the data in one of two ways. In the one, we regress each
variable of interest on the current level and the four lags of TFP, as measured by Fernald (2014),
and extract the residuals. In the other, we include all the variables in a SVAR; identify the technology
shock as in Galí (1999), that is, as the only shock that exerts an effect on labor productivity in the long-
run; and then take the residuals from the projection of the data on the identiﬁed technology shock.
Although none of these approaches offers a bullet-proof identiﬁcation of the technology shock, they
generate macroeconomic variables that can be used to test parsimonious theories that seek to explain
the business cycle with a single shock besides the standard technology shock.
    The ﬁrst two columns of Table 1 report the relevant moments in the data, namely, the business-
cycle correlations and the relative volatilities of the aforementioned residuals, under the two speciﬁ-
cations described above.18 The third column reports the relevant moments in our model, namely, the
correlations and relative volatilities induced by the conﬁdence shock. The information contained in
is not sufﬁciently strong to offset the negative comovement of the underlying ﬂexible-price quantities once investment is
added to that model, unless additional “bells and whistles” are added to the model.
   18
      The moments have been computed on bandpass-ﬁltered series at frequencies corresponding to 6–32 quarters. This
ﬁlter is preferable to the simpler HP ﬁlter because it removes not only low-frequency trends but also high frequency “noise”
such as seasonal ﬂuctuations and measurement error; see Stock and Watson (1999). Note, though, that the picture that
emerges from Table 1 is not sensitive to the choice of the ﬁlter.



                                                            19
                                Table 1: Conditional Comovements (6-32 quarters)
                        Filtered Data          Our Theory                         Alternative Theories
                          (a)       (b)          ξ shock            I shock     C shock      News shock        E shock

   σn /σy               1.05       1.29            1.43              1.44         1.44            0.74           0.59
   σc /σy               0.63       0.41            0.25              1.21         1.19            0.35           0.19
   σi /σy               3.35       4.04            3.92              8.93         8.93            5.06           4.26
   σy/h /σy             0.45       0.63            0.44              0.51         0.49            0.37           0.43
   corr(c, y)            0.86       0.80            0.85             -0.92       -0.94           -0.17           0.65
   corr(i, y)            0.94       0.95            0.99              0.98        0.99            0.97           0.99
   corr(n, y)            0.91       0.88            0.99              0.98        0.98            0.95           0.99
   corr(c, n)            0.80       0.93            0.81             -0.98       -0.99           -0.46           0.51
   corr(i, n)            0.86       0.82            0.99              0.99        0.99            0.99           0.99
   corr(c, i)            0.73       0.76            0.78             -0.98       -0.98           -0.40           0.55
   corr(y, y/n)          0.12      -0.23           -0.96             -0.79       -0.84            0.78           0.97
   corr(n, y/n)         -0.31      -0.66           -0.98             -0.91       -0.92            0.56           0.92
 Note: Columns (a) and (b) refer to the residuals that obtain, respectively, from the projection of the data on current and
 past TFP and from the removal of the technology shock identiﬁed in the same was as in Galí (1999). All other columns
 refer to theoretical predictions.


this column is, of course, the same as the one contained in the IRFs of the conﬁdence shock: the shock
causes hours, output, consumption and investment to comove, without commensurate comovement
in labor productivity. The next three columns report the corresponding moments for three other can-
didate shocks, which are often used in the literature as proxies for demand shocks: a discount-rate,
or consumption-speciﬁc, shock; an investment-speciﬁc shock, and a news shocks.19 The last col-
umn considers a transitory shock to the efﬁciency wedge; this can be thought of as a proxy for the
supply-side effects of ﬁnancial or uncertainty shocks.20
    The main lesson that emerges from inspection of Table 1 is that the conﬁdence shock does a
good job in matching the conditional patterns in the data both absolutely and relatively to the other
shocks. This is because none of the aforementioned demand shocks is able to generated positive
comovement between hours, consumption, and investment within the baseline RBC model; and the
efﬁciency-wedge shock can generate such comovement only by predicting a positive comovement
between hours and labor productivity, which is exactly the opposite of what is observed in the data.
    As shown in Online Appendix O.1, the same picture emerges if we consider a New Keynesian
  19
     To obtain the predictions of each of these alternative shocks, we maintain the parameterization of preferences and
technologies and merely replace the conﬁdence shock with the considered alternative.
  20
     Such a shock is not removed by the speciﬁcation used by Galí (1999), because that approach identiﬁes only permanent
technology shocks. It may also not be removed by our speciﬁcation based on regressing the macroeconomic quantities on
current and past TFP to the extent that there is measurement error in the available TFP measure.


                                                            20
variant that adds sticky prices and lets monetary policy follow a realistic Taylor rule. In principle, these
modiﬁcations help improve the empirical performance of the aforementioned kind of demand shocks
by letting these shocks induce procyclical output gaps, that is, by letting output increase relative to its
ﬂexible-price counterpart in response to positive demand shock. Yet, unless one adds various bells
and whistles, the predicted output gaps are not large enough to undo the counterfactual comovement
properties of the underlying ﬂexible-price allocations.
     Of course, these ﬁndings do not mean that no other model can match the conditional moments
reported in the ﬁrst two columns. For instance, DSGE models such as Smets and Wouters (2007) are
able to do so by attributing the aforementioned residuals to the joint contribution of several shocks,
despite the fact that none of these shocks can by itself generate the right comovement patterns. Nev-
ertheless, these ﬁndings illustrate in a simple and transparent manner that our theory does better
relative to a number of comparable, parsimonious formalizations of either demand- or supply-driven
ﬂuctuations—a property that we view as valuable.
     Additional support is provided by the evidence in a companion paper (Angeletos, Collard, and
Dellas, 2017), where we use a SVAR approach to document that the bulk of the business-cycle volatil-
ity in output, hours, investment and consumption in US data can be accounted for by a single shock
whose IRFs look very much like those seen in Figure 1. A similar picture is also painted in Section 5,
where the conﬁdence shock emerges as the main driver of the business cycle within medium-scale
DSGE models that contain multiple other shocks.21


4.4    Wedges, Output Gaps, and Aggregate Demand

We conclude this section by offering two additional perspectives on the empirical performance of
our theory and its interpretation.
   Suppose ﬁrst that one approaches the data generated by our model through the lenses of the RBC
model augmented with various wedges, as suggested by Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007). In
  21
     Throughout this section, we have focused attention on comparing features of the data to theoretical counterparts that
do not require us to parameterize the standard deviation of either the conﬁdence shock or the technology shock: the IRFs
seen in Figure 1, and the conditional correlations and relative volatilities reported in Table 1 are invariant to the choice of
σξ and σa . But what about the ability of our baseline model to capture the unconditional moments of the data? Clearly, this
depends on the choice of σξ and σa . Suppose we pick σξ and σa so as to minimize the distance between the unconditional
volatilities of hours, output, consumption and investment predicted by our baseline model from those found in the data.
This exercise yields σa = 0.79 and σξ = 5.77; it also attributes almost all of the volatility of hours to the conﬁdence shock.
We ﬁnd these properties of our baseline model problematic for two reasons. First, σξ is too large compared to σa , a property
that questions the plausibility of the interpretation of ξt as a bias in the signals of aggregate TFP. (We thank a referee for
pointing this out.) Second, our prior is that coordination frictions cannot possibly explain so much of the business cycle.
In Section 5, we alleviate the ﬁrst concern, not only by allowing for other shocks to absorb part of the volatility in the data,
but also by modifying the degree of strategic complementarity. This concern can also be alleviated by re-interpreting ξt
as a shock to higher-order beliefs of idiosyncratic fundamentals, and thereby to ﬁrst-order beliefs of idiosyncratic terms of
trade, along the lines discussed in Angeletos and La’O (2013), Huo and Takayama (2015), and Subsection 3.3 of our paper.
Regarding the second concern, we are open to the idea that our mechanism is proxying for other forces, whose effects are
similar to those of the conﬁdence shock but whose micro-foundations remain to be discovered.


                                                              21
Online Appendix O.1, we show that the conﬁdence shock manifests itself as a combination of wedges
in the equilibrium conditions that characterize the behavior of the households and of the ﬁrms. This
is true whether we consider the total wedges between the marginal rates of substitution and the
corresponding marginal rates of transformation, or their household-side and ﬁrm-side components.
What is more, the predicted wedges are consistent with those estimated in the data.
     These ﬁndings speak to our theory’s ability to capture the “residuals” between the data and the
predictions of the baseline RBC model. More generally, they illustrate how higher-order uncertainty
offers a theory of beliefs-driven wedges. The wedges emerge because, and only because, the agents
in the model use a distorted expectations operator relative to the complete-information, common-
prior, fully-rational benchmark. The magnitude and correlation structure of these wedges is tied to
the underlying structure of the market interactions and the degree of strategic complementarity. For
instance, were we to shut down trade across islands in our own model, strategic complementarity
and wedges would vanish.22
     Suppose next that one tries to interpret the data generated by our model through the lenses of the
New Keynesian framework. In our setting, prices are ﬂexible. Yet, because ﬁrms make their input
choices prior to observing the demand for their products, a drop in conﬁdence can manifest itself as
an increase in the realized markup. Furthermore, the resulting recession will register as a negative
output gap insofar as the latter is measured relative to the frictionless RBC benchmark, a property
clearly illustrated by the example in Subsection 3.3. Consequently, an adverse conﬁdence shock in
our setting looks like a negative demand shock in the New Keynesian model.
     Nonetheless, there is an important difference: in our setting, ﬂuctuations in this output gap can
arise without any variation in inﬂation. This is because our mechanism does not need to satisfy the
restriction between the output gap and inﬂation imposed by the New Keynesian Philips Curve, or
its ancestors. We view this as an advantage of our theory because the aforementioned restriction
receives little support from the data, as the empirical Philips-curve literature has demonstrated; see
Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller, and Stock (2014) for a review. The evidence provided in a companion
paper (Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas, 2017) also speaks against this restriction and in favor of a
mechanism like the one accommodated here: in that paper, we use a SVAR approach to document
that the bulk of the business-cycle variation in output can be explained by a structural shock that can
be thought of as an “non-inﬂationary demand shock” in the sense that it triggers strong comovement
between employment, output, consumption and investment at the business-cycle frequencies without
commensurate comovements in either TFP and labor productivity or inﬂation at any frequency.23 Last
but not least, the inﬂation-output implications of Phillips curves are hard to reconcile with the Great
Recession, where the severe contraction in output and employment was not accompanied by severe
deﬂation.
  22
     These points indicate a close relation between our paper and recent work that considers other forms of belief distortions,
such as Ilut and Saijo (2016), Bhandari, Borovicka, and Ho (2016), and Pei (2017).
  23
     The empirical IRFs of the shock identiﬁed in our companion paper are actually quite similar to the theoretical IRFs of
the conﬁdence shock in the present paper.



                                                             22
    With this backdrop, we like to interpret our conﬁdence shock as a form of demand shock that does
not hinge either on nominal rigidity or on the inﬂation-output nexus of the Keynesian paradigm.24
One may, however, object to this interpretation on the following grounds. In our model, employ-
ment and output are ﬁxed in the morning of each period, whereas consumption and investment are
determined in the afternoon. In this sense, supply is determined ﬁrst and prices adjust to make sure
that demand meets supply. By contrast, the Keynesian paradigm assumes that prices are determined
ﬁrst and supply adjusts to meet demand.
    We now show that changing the timing of decisions in our model so that demand is determined
ﬁrst does not change the nature of the business-cycle ﬂuctuations generated by the conﬁdence shock.
We establish this by requiring that consumption and investment be ﬁxed in the morning of each period
and letting employment and output adjust in the afternoon. This timing protocol makes our model
seem more in the spirit of the Keynesian view that “demand drives supply”. Yet, as is evident in Figure
4, the observable implications differ very little across the two protocols.

                        Output                    Consumption                Investment                  Hours Worked                 Productivity
               1                                                     4                         1.5                           1
                                        0.4                                                                                0.5
% deviation




                                                                     3                          1
                                        0.3
              0.5                                                    2                                                       0
                                        0.2                                                    0.5
                                                                     1                                                     -0.5
                                        0.1
                                                                     0                          0
               0                         0                                                                                  -1
                    0     10       20         0      10         20       0      10        20         0       10       20          0      10          20
                        Quarters                   Quarters                   Quarters                     Quarters                    Quarters

              Figure 4: Impulse Responses to a Positive Conﬁdence Shock, under Different Timing Protocols

    The solid red lines in Figure 4 repeat the IRFs of the baseline model (previously reported in Figure
1). The blue crosses report the IRFs of the variant in which consumption and investment are deter-
mined ﬁrst. With the exception of consumption, where there is only a modest difference, the IRFs of
the two models line up almost perfectly on top of each other. Not surprisingly, this similarity extends
to the kind of business-cycle moments we reported earlier in Table 1.
    Let us explain why. In the baseline, supply-ﬁrst version of our model, a positive conﬁdence shock
causes employment and output to increase in the morning. The overall spending therefore has to
increase in the afternoon. Its composition, however, is free to adjust. The only reason that consump-
tion and investment co-move at that point is that the optimism applies only to the short run—which is
also the reason why employment increases in the ﬁrst place during the morning. In the demand-ﬁrst
variant, consumption and investment are determined ﬁrst. The only reason that they both increase in
response to a positive conﬁdence shock is, once again, that the shock causes the agents to become
          24
   In this regard, our work is related to that of Beaudry and Portier (2013), which offers a different theory of non-inﬂationary,
demand shocks but does not explore its quantitative potential.



                                                                             23
optimistic about the short run. If, instead, the shock caused the agents to become optimistic about
income in the medium to long run, the agents would like to borrow against their future income, so
consumption and investment would move in the opposite direction.
    We conclude that the predictions of our theory are not unduly sensitive to the timing protocol
and, in this sense, to whether output is supply- or demand-determined. Each protocol, however,
is useful for different purposes. On the one hand, the protocol used in our baseline model is the
same as the one assumed in the related works of Angeletos and La’O (2013), Benhabib, Wang, and
Wen (2015), Huo and Takayama (2015b), and Ilut and Saijo (2016). On the other hand, the variant
introduced here better captures the Keynesian spirit of demand-driven ﬂuctuations; it seems more
consistent with the idea of sluggish adjustment in aggregate demand;25 and it boosts the degree of
strategic complementarity, helping generate larger ﬂuctuations in the macroeconomic quantities out
of the same volatility in higher-order beliefs.26 For all of these reasons, we opt for the new protocol
in the quantitative explorations conducted in the next section.


5        Extension and Estimation
In this section, we apply our method to two medium-scale DSGE models, which are estimated using
US data. This requires the introduction of various bells and whistles, which are standard in the DSGE
literature but are at odds with our desire for parsimony. The main goal of this section is therefore, not
to write and estimate our preferred models, but rather to illustrate the robustness of our theoretical
mechanism as we move from the baseline RBC model to richer DSGE models, and as we switch on
and off the role of nominal rigidities and monetary policy.


5.1      Two medium-scale models

We start with a brief description of the main features of the two models. A more detailed description
and the relevant equations can be found in the Appendix.
   In order to accommodate price-setting behavior, we let each island contain a large number of
monopolistic ﬁrms, each of which produces a differentiated commodity. These commodities are
combined through a CES aggregator into an island-speciﬁc composite good, which in turn enters the
production of the ﬁnal good in the mainland through another CES aggregator. The elasticity parameter
    25
      Such sluggishness is captured in the DSGE literature with habit persistence in consumption and adjustment costs in
investment of the type considered in the next section.
   26
      To understand why, consider the knife-edge case in which the income and the substitution effects of higher terms of
trade on labor supply cancel each other out. This eliminates the macroeconomic effects of the conﬁdence shock in the
supply-ﬁrst version of the model: as the income and substitution effects of the conﬁdence shock offset each other, labor
and production do not move in the morning, implying that consumption and investment also do not move during the
afternoon. In the demand-ﬁrst version, however, the conﬁdence shock continues to generate a realistic business cycle: the
expectation of better terms causes consumption and investment to increase in the morning, requiring higher employment
and production in the afternoon.



                                                          24
in the ﬁrst aggregator is denoted by η and pins down the monopoly markup; the one in the second
aggregator is denoted by ϱ and controls, in conjuction with all the other preference and technology
parameters, the degree of strategic complementarity across the islands.27
    In one of the two models, ﬁrms are free to adjust their price in each and every period, after
observing the realized demand for their product (the ﬂexible-price model). In the other, ﬁrms can only
adjust prices infrequently, in the familiar Calvo fashion (the sticky-price model). The latter models
also contains a conventional Taylor rule for monetary policy.
    In order to let other business cycle drivers compete with our mechanism we include several,
additional shocks: a permanent and a transitory TFP shock; a permanent and a transitory investment-
speciﬁc shock; a news shock regarding future productivity; a transitory discount-rate shock; a government-
spending shock; and, in the sticky-price model, a monetary shock.28
    We ﬁnally introduce adjustment costs in investment and habit persistence in consumption, of the
type assumed in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007). Although
these modeling features lack compelling micro-foundations, they have become standard in the litera-
ture because they serve, not only as sources of persistence, but also as mechanisms that help improve
the empirical performance of certain shocks, including monetary, investment-speciﬁc, discount-rate,
and news shocks. Their inclusion make our results more easily comparable to those in the literature
and also and gives these competing shocks a better chance to outperform the conﬁdence shock.


5.2    Estimation

We estimate our models using Bayesian maximum likelihood in the frequency domain, focusing on
business-cycle frequencies. The method is described in the Appendix. Here, we discuss brieﬂy the
rational behind this empirical strategy, the data used, and the priors and the posteriors.

    Rationale. The models described above—like other business-cycle models—cater to business-
cycle phenomena and therefore omit shocks and mechanisms that may account for medium- to long-
run phenomena, such as trends in demographics and labor-market participation, structural transfor-
mation, regime changes in productivity growth or inﬂation, and so on. Because of this omission,
estimating our models by simple maximum likelihood is likely to lead to erroneous inferences about
their business-cycle properties. This is because the estimation will guide the parameters of the model
  27
      The baseline model is nested with η = 0 and ϱ = 1. Letting η > 0 accommodates monopoly power. Letting ϱ ̸= 1
helps parameterize the degree of strategic complementarity.
   28
      The motivation for the inclusion of these particular shocks is as follows. First, previous research has argued that
investment-speciﬁc technology shocks are at least as important as neutral, TFP shocks (Fisher, 2006). Second, mone-
tary, ﬁscal, and transitory discount-rate or investment-speciﬁc shocks, as well as news shocks, have been proposed as
formalizations of the notion of “aggregate demand shocks” within the NK framework. Third, transitory TFP, investment-
speciﬁc, or discount-rate shocks are often used as proxies for ﬁnancial frictions that lead to, respectively, misallocation, a
wedge in the ﬁrm’s investment decisions, or a wedge in the consumer’s saving decisions; see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Trabandt (2015) for a recent example of these short-cuts. Fourth, the introduction of multiple transitory shocks, whatever
their interpretation, increases the chance that these shocks will pick up the transitory ﬂuctuations in the data.



                                                             25
towards matching all the frequencies of the data, as opposed to only those that pertain to business-
cycle phenomena. In a nutshell, there is a risk of contamination of the estimates of a model by
frequencies that the model was not designed to capture.
    This problem was ﬁrst discussed by Hansen and Sargent (1993) and Sims (1993) in the context of
seasonal adjustment, but the logic applies more generally. Sala (2015) has recently documented the
relevance of this problem for standard DSGE practice: estimating the model of Smets and Wouters
(2007) over different frequency bands leads to different estimates of the model’s impulse responses and
of the underlying parameters, a fact that underscores the importance of making a judicious selection
of the band of frequencies used to estimate the model.
    Figure 5 indicates that this concern may be particularly relevant in the context of the exercise
carried out in this section. This ﬁgure inspects the spectral density of hours.29 The red line corre-
sponds to the raw data; the blue line results from application of a bandpass ﬁlter that keeps only the
business-cycle frequencies, namely those ranging from 6 to 32 quarters. The ﬁgure reveals substantial
movements at the medium and long-run frequencies. Such movements may originate from changes
in demographics or in the labor-market participation of women, structural transformation, and other
mechanisms which our models have neither hope nor ambition to capture.

                                                              7
                                                              6
                                    Square Root of Spectrum




                                                              5
                                                              4
                                                              3
                                                              2
                                                              1
                                                              0
                                                               2   6              32      80      200
                                                                           Quarters
                                      Raw Data,                        Bandpass Filtered Data, 6-32 Quarters.


                            Figure 5: Spectral Density of Hours, 1960Q1-2007Q4.

    There are two possible ways to try to mitigate the problem. One is to add the missing mechanisms
that would enable the model(s) to account for all the frequencies at once. Another is to estimate the
model(s) on the basis of only the business-cycle frequencies. We follow the latter route because of
two reasons. First, while we believe that our mechanism and the models considered in this paper
are useful for understanding business-cycle phenomena, we are relatively less conﬁdent about the
“right” choice of mechanisms that can account for the medium- to long-term phenomena; adding the
  29
    The spectrum is computed as the smoothed periodogram, a Hamming window with a bandwidth parameter of 15 is
used, and the x-axis is represented in periods rather than frequencies to ease interpretation. A similar ﬁgure appears in
Beaudry, Galizia, and Portier (2015), although that paper uses it towards a different goal: to motivate a model that actually
connects the short to the medium rum.



                                                                            26
“wrong” mechanisms could aggravate the mis-speciﬁcation problem. Second, we believe that low
frequencies of the data contain relative little information about the business-cycle properties of the
model, especially those that regard the conﬁdence shock or any other transitory shock; inclusion of
the low frequencies is therefore more likely to contaminate, than to improve, the estimation of the
business-cycle properties.

    Data. The data used in the estimation includes GDP, consumption, investment, hours worked, the
inﬂation rate, and the federal fund rate for the period 1960Q1 to 2007Q4; a detailed description is in
Online Appendix O.2. The ﬁrst four variables are in logs and linearly de-trended; the remaining two
are in percentage points.Our sticky-price model is estimated on the basis of all these six variables while
ﬂexible-price model is estimated on the basis of real quantities only (GDP, consumption, investment,
and hours). The rationale is that the latter model is not designed to capture the properties of nominal
data.
    Remark on ϱ and σξ . A challenge faced in the estimation of the two models is the following. Con-
sider the parameter ϱ. Holding constant all the other parameters, this parameter governs the degree of
strategic complementarity across the islands. In so doing, this parameter also governs the magnitude
of the response of the macroeconomic quantities to the conﬁdence shock, without however affecting
their covariation structure. It follows that this parameter cannot be identiﬁed separately from σξ , the
standard deviation of the conﬁdence shock, on the basis of the macroeconomic times-series alone.
    For our main estimation exercise, we ﬁx ϱ exogenously at 0.75; this yields an estimate for σξ that is
lower than the estimated volatility in aggregate TFP. In Online Appendix O.4, we motivate this choice
with an exercise that tries to identify both parameters jointly by combining the macroeconomic times
series with the time series of the University of Michigan Index of Consumer Sentiment and by making
an assumption about how to extract the expectations that are relevant for our theory from that index.
This leads to an estimate of ϱ that is in the neighborhood of 0.75 and to results that are similar to those
reported below.
    However, we do not wish to push this exercise too far, because it hinges on delicate assump-
tions about the mapping between that index and our theory. We thus invite the reader to adopt a
broader perspective in thinking about what the estimation results mean for our theory. Namely, that
they illustrate that the considered models can match the data with plausible assumptions about the
magnitude of the underlying higher-order uncertainty, but leave unanswered the delicate question of
whether and how additional discipline in the estimation of the conﬁdence shock could be provided
from sources outside the standard macroeconomic time series.

    Priors and posteriors. The priors and the estimated values of all the parameters are reported
in Table 8 in Online Appendix O.3 and broadly in line with the literature. Posterior distributions
were obtained with the MCMC algorithm. The estimated values of the preference, technology, and
monetary parameters are similar to those found in the extant literature, an indication that the only
essential difference from the state of the art is the accommodation of the conﬁdence shock.



                                                    27
                   5.3    Results

                   Here we review the main ﬁndings. Online Appendix O.3 contains additional results.

                       The conﬁdence shock. Figure 6 reports the estimated IRFs to a positive conﬁdence shock. The
                   solid blue lines correspond to the ﬂexible-price model, the red dashed lines to the sticky-price model.
                   As far as real quantities are concerned, the IRFs are similar across the two models, as well as similar
                   to those in our baseline model. The introduction of investment-adjustment costs and consumption
                   habit adds a hump but does not alter the comovement patterns found in the baseline model. This
                   underscores the robustness of the key positive implications of our mechanism as we move across RBC
                   and NK settings, or, as we add various bells and whistles.

                    Output                     Consumption                Investment                Hours Worked                  Inflation               Nom. Int. Rate
                                                                  3
                     Flex. Price                                                               1
          1                           1                                                                                  1                          1
                     Sticky Price                                 2
% dev.




                                                                                              0.5
         0.5                         0.5                          1                                                     0.5                        0.5

                                                                                               0
                                                                  0
          0                           0                                                                                  0                          0
               0       10       20         0       10        20       0       10         20         0     10       20         0     10        20         0     10       20
                     Quarters                    Quarters                   Quarters                    Quarters                  Quarters                   Quarters


                                                        Figure 6: Theoretical IRFs to Conﬁdence Shock

                       The top half of Table 2 reports the estimated contribution of the conﬁdence shock to the volatility
                   of the key macroeconomic variables at business-cycle frequencies (6–32 quarters). Despite all the
                   competing shocks, the conﬁdence shock emerges as the single most important source of volatility in
                   real quantities. For example, the conﬁdence shock accounts for 55% of the business-cycle volatility
                   in output in the ﬂexible-price model, and for 51% in the sticky-price model.


                                                 Table 2: Contribution of Conﬁdence Shock (6–32 Quarters)

                                           Variances                  Y           C             I          N            π            R
                                           Flexible Prices        54.72        70.21      41.60         68.32        –              –
                                           Sticky Prices          51.28        61.95      38.50         64.15      11.64          40.84
                                           Covariances            (Y, N )      (Y, I )    (Y, C )       (N, I )    (N, C )        (I, C )
                                           Flexible Prices        74.88        53.74      78.49         66.41      105.08         94.73
                                           Sticky Prices          68.10        50.83      70.95         58.29      104.26         94.89



                      The bottom half of Table 2 completes the picture by reporting the estimated contribution of the
                   conﬁdence shock to the covariances of output, hours, investment, and consumption. The conﬁdence

                                                                                         28
shock is, by a signiﬁcant margin, the main driving force behind the comovement of all these vari-
ables, underscoring once again the ability of our theory to capture this comovement. In particular,
conﬁdence shock explains more that one hundred percent of the covariance between hours and
consumption, precisely because, as anticipated in the previous section, many of the other structural
shocks tend to generate the opposite comovement than the one seen in the data.
    Are these ﬁndings too good to be true? It depends on how one reads them. In our eyes, they do
not mean that our theory is the “true” explanation of the business cycle. They nevertheless reinforce
the lessons of the previous section: not only is our theory consistent with salient features of the data,
but it is also more potent than other, more familiar, structural interpretations of the data.


                                     Table 3: Moments (6-32 quarters)
                        Data       FP       SP       SW           Data       FP       SP      SW
                        Standard Deviations                      Correlations with Output
               Y        1.41 1.28 1.36              1.42
               I        5.12 4.46 4.88              4.86          0.94      0.88     0.86     0.74
               N        1.56 1.59 1.66              0.97          0.87      0.82     0.83     0.81
               C        0.76 0.82 0.91              1.11          0.85      0.78     0.77     0.67
               Y /N     0.76 0.91 0.90              0.84          0.07     -0.02    -0.03     0.74
               π        0.23     –    0.25          0.34          0.21        –     0.37      0.13
               R        0.35     –    0.34          0.35          0.33        –     0.54      0.06
                        Correlations with Investment             Correlations with Hours
               N        0.82 0.79 0.82 0.67
               C        0.73 0.56 0.47 0.30                      0.83       0.65     0.58     0.59
               Y /N     0.07 -0.14 -0.21 0.47                    -0.43     -0.58    -0.56     0.22
               π        0.09      –     0.41 0.18                 0.44        –     0.48      0.23
               R        0.23      –     0.60 0.23                 0.61        –     0.70      0.21
              Note: FP and SP stand for our estimated ﬂexible- and sticky-price models, respectively.
              SW stands for the model in Smets and Wouters (2007).


    Business-cycle moments. Table 3 reports some key moments of the data (ﬁrst column); those
predicted by our estimated models (second and third column); and, for comparison purposes, those
predicted by the model in Smets and Wouters (2007) (fourth column). Inspection of this table leads
to the following conclusions. First, both of our models do a good job on the real side of the economy.
Second, our sticky-price model does a good job in matching also the nominal side of the data. Finally,
our sticky-price model appears to outperform the model of Smets and Wouters (2007) in terms of
matching the moments of the real quantities as well as the correlations of the nominal variables with
output and hours. Of course, this does not mean that our model is as good as theirs in, say, matching
the responses to identiﬁed monetary shocks or in out-of-sample forecasting. It nevertheless indicates


                                                       29
that the inclusion of our mechanism in New Keynesian models does not interfere with their ability
to capture the nominal side of the data and that our mechanism itself is robust to the introduction of
realistic nominal rigidities.


5.4   On Demand-Driven Business Cycles

We conclude this section by exploring how our mechanism, viewed as a formalization of demand-
driven business cycles, compares to that of the New Keynesian model.
    To this goal, Table 4 reports the posterior odds of four models, starting from a uniform prior and
estimating them on the real data only. The models differ on whether they assume ﬂexible or sticky
prices, and on whether they contain the conﬁdence shock or not. We concentrate on the real data,
not only because the ﬂexible-price models are not designed to capture the nominal variables, but
also because we wish to evaluate both kinds of models on the basis of the comovements of the real
quantities. Once we drop the nominal data for this exercise, the nominal parameters of the sticky-
price models are not well identiﬁed. We have thus chosen to ﬁx these parameters at the values
that obtained when the models were estimated on both real and nominal data. We nevertheless re-
estimate the preference and technology parameters and the shock processes in order to give each
model a fair chance to match the data on the real quantities.

                           Table 4: Posterior Odds of Model A vs Model B

                                          Model A →            sticky prices
                           Model B ↓                          without with
                           ﬂex prices, without conﬁdence       1.00    1.00
                           ﬂex prices, with conﬁdence          0.36    0.84
                           sticky prices, without conﬁdence      –     0.90


    Consider ﬁrst the pair of models that abstract from the conﬁdence shock. In this case, the sticky-
price model wins: the posterior odds that the data are generated by that model are nearly 100%. But
once the ﬂexible-price model is augmented with the conﬁdence shock, the odds of the sticky-price
model fall below 50%, to 36%. By this metric, our mechanism appears to be more potent than the
NK mechanism when the two are viewed in isolation. Finally, the sticky-price model that contains
the conﬁdence shock wins 90-10 over the the sticky-price model that excludes it. By this metric, the
inclusion of our mechanism improves signiﬁcantly the empirical performance of the NK model.
    We interpret these results as follows. Insofar as we abstract from monetary phenomena, our
approach emerges as a potent substitute for the NK formalization of demand-driven ﬂuctuations.
Perhaps more fruitfully, our approach can complement the NK framework by offering what, in our
view, is a more appealing structural interpretation of the observed business cycles—one that attributes
the “deﬁciency in aggregate demand” during a recession in part to a coordination failure and to lack
of conﬁdence.

                                                  30
6        Conclusion
By relying on the rational-expectations solution concept together with the auxiliary assumption that all
agents share the same information about the aggregate state of the economy, standard macroeconomic
models impose a rigid structure on how agents form beliefs about endogenous economic outcomes
and how they coordinate their behavior. In this paper, we propose a certain relaxation of this structure
and explore its quantitative implications.
    In particular, we develop a method for augmenting macroeconomic models with a tractable form
of higher-order belief dynamics. We argue that this method helps proxy for the effects of incomplete
information and frictional coordination and can be used to accommodate a certain kind of waves
of optimism and pessimism about the the short-term outlook of the economy. We document the
quantitative importance of such waves within the context of RBC and New Keynesian models of both
the textbook and the medium-scale variety.
    We believe that our paper adds to the understanding of business-cycle phenomena along the
following dimensions:

     • It highlights the distinct role played by expectations of the short-run prospects of the economy,
       as opposed to expectations of productivity and growth in the medium to long run.

     • It offers a parsimonious explanation of salient features of the macroeconomic data and does so
       in a manner that appears to outperform alternative narratives found in the literature.

     • It offers a formalization of the notion of demand-driven ﬂuctuations that is both conceptually
       and empirically distinct from the one found in the New Keynesian paradigm.

     • It leads to a structural interpretation of the observed recessions that attributes a signiﬁcant role
       to “coordination failures,” “lack of conﬁdence,” or “market sentiment.”

    These ﬁndings naturally raise the question of where the variation in conﬁdence comes from. Hav-
ing attributed this variation to a conﬁdence shock that is both exogenous to economic activity and
orthogonal to other structural shocks, we can not offer a meaningful answer to this question.30 Nev-
ertheless, our analysis has revealed the potential importance of two previously overlooked forces,
namely frictional coordination and belief waves regarding the short-term economic outlook, and so
it can provide the impetus for future research on these subjects.
    There is an emerging literature in this area. Ilut and Saijo (2016) and Angeletos and Lian (2016b)
consider models that feature a similar kind of belief-driven wedges as the one found here, except
that these wedges are allowed to covary with conventional structural shocks; this has the interesting
implication that a drop in conﬁdence may be triggered by an adverse ﬁnancial shock, while a boost
    30
   This limitation is not speciﬁc to this paper: any formal model must ultimately attribute the business cycle to some
exogenous trigger, whether this is a technology shock, an uncertainty shock, or a sunspot.




                                                         31
in conﬁdence may be accomplished by a ﬁscal stimulus. Huo and Takayama (2015b) obtain quanti-
tative ﬁndings that are broadly consistent with ours while maintaining the common-prior assumption.
Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2017) provide VAR-based evidence that the business cycle in the US
data can be explained by a shock that has similar properties to the one we have accommodated in
our theory. Levchenko and Pandalai-Nayar (2015) provide additional corroborating evidence in an
international context.
    Finally, it is worth iterating how the belief waves formalized and quantiﬁed in this paper compare
to those found in the existing literature on news and noise shocks. Our conﬁdence shock resembles
the noise shocks of that literature in that both types of shocks are transitory. Yet, our mechanism
captures a very different type of beliefs. In that literature, recessions are periods in which the agents
expect the economy to do badly for a long time, and more so in the long run than in the short run;
in our paper, they are periods in which the agents expect the economy to recover after a few years.
Future work could shed further light on which formalization, and accompanying narrative, is more
relevant empirically.




Appendix A. Estimated Models
In this appendix we ﬁll in the details of the two models considered in Section 5; we next describe
the estimation method, the assumed priors, and the obtained posteriors; we ﬁnally review a few
additional ﬁndings that were omitted from the main text.

    The details of the two models. As mentioned in the main text, the two models share the same
backbone as our baseline model, but add a number of structural shocks along with certain forms of
habit persistent in consumption and adjustment costs in investment, as in Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007). To accommodate monopoly power and sticky
prices, we also introduce product differentiation within each island. We ﬁnally assume that there
exists a lump sum transfer that eliminates the effects of the markup rate in steady state.
    Fix an island i ∈ [0, 1]. Index the ﬁrms in this island by j ∈ [0, 1] and let yijt denote the output
produced by ﬁrm j in period t. The composite output of the island is given by
                                               (∫       1     1
                                                                      )1+η
                                                             1+η
                                       yit =                yijt dj           ,
                                                    0

where η > 0 is a parameter that pins down the monopoly power. The aggregate quantity of the ﬁnal
good, on the other hand, is given by
                                               (∫   1                 ) 1−ϱ
                                                                         1
                                                             1−ϱ
                                        Yt =                yit  di           ,
                                                0


                                                            32
where ϱ > 0 is a parameter that ultimately governs the degree of strategic complementarity.
  The technology is the same as before, so that the output of ﬁrm j in island i is

                                             yijt = exp(ζta )(uijt kijt )α n1−α
                                                                            ijt ;

but now TFP is given by the sum of a permanent and a transitory component. More speciﬁcally,

                                                           ζta = aτt + apt ,

where aτt is the transitory component, modeled as an AR(1), and apt is given by
                                                                               p
                                                      apt = apt−1 + ant−1 + εt

where εpt is the unanticipated innovation and ant−1 captures all the TFP changes that agents anticipated
in earlier periods. The latter is given by an AR(1) process of the form

                                                        ant = ρn ant−1 + εnt

where εnt is the innovation to the anticipated component of TFP.31 In line with our baseline model,
the conﬁdence shock is now modeled as a shock to higher-order beliefs of apt .
    To accommodate for a form of habit in consumption as well as discount-rate shocks, we let the
per-period utility be as follows:
                                                                      (                           )
                                                                                             n1+ν
                         u(cit , nit ; ζtc , Ct−1 )   =   exp(ζtc )    log(cit − bCt−1 ) − θ  it
                                                                                             1+ν

where ζtc is a transitory preference shock, modeled as an AR(1), b ∈ (0, 1) is a parameter that controls
for the degree of habit persistence, and Ct−1 denotes the aggregate consumption in the last period.32
    To accommodate permanent shocks to the relative price of investment as well as transitory shocks
to government spoending, we let the resource constraint of the island be given by the following:
                                               ip                         ip
                               cit + exp(ζt )iit + Gt + exp(ζt )Ψ(uit )kit = pit yit
          ip                                                                                            ip
where ζt measures the cost of investment, Gt is government spending, and exp(ζt )Ψ(uit ) is the
                                                                      ip
cost of utilization per unit of capital. The latter is scaled by exp(ζt ) in order to transform the units
                                                                                                     ip
of capital to units of the ﬁnal good, and thereby also guaranteed a balanced-growth path. ζt is
                                 ip    ip     ip
modeled as a random walk: ζt = ζt−1 + εt . Literally taken, this represents an investment-speciﬁc
technology shock. But since our estimations do not include data on the relative price of invest, this
shock can readily be re-interpreted as a demand-side shock. The utilization-cost function satisﬁes
uΨ′′ (u)/Ψ′ (u) = 1−ψ
                    ψ
                       , with ψ ∈ (0, 1). and government spending is given by Gt = Ḡ exp(G̃t ), where
  31
     We have experimented with alternative forms of diffusion, as well as with speciﬁcations such as ζtn = εn  t−4 , and we
have found very similar results.
  32
     Note that we are assuming that habit is external. We experimented with internal habit, as in Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (2005), and the results were virtually unaffected.


                                                                 33
                                                           ip
Ḡ is a constant and G̃t = ζtg + 1−α
                                  1
                                     apt − 1−α
                                            α
                                                ζt . In this equation, ζtg denotes a transitory shock, modeled
as an AR(1), and the other terms are present in order to guarantee a balanced-growth path.
     Finally, to accommodate adjustment costs to investment as well as transitory investment-speciﬁc
shocks, we let the law of motion of capital on island i take the following form:
                                                   (         (       ))
                                             it                  iit
                            kit+1 = exp(ζt )iit 1 − Φ                   + (1 − δ)kit
                                                               iit−1
We impose Φ′ (·) > 0, Φ′′ (·) > 0, Φ(1) = Φ′ (1) = 0, and Φ′′ (1) = φ, so that φ parameterizes the
curvature of the adjustment cost to investment. ζtit is a temporary shock, modeled as an AR(1) and
shifting the demand for investment, as in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010).
    The above description completes the speciﬁcation of the ﬂexible-price model of Section 5. The
sticky-price model is then obtained by embedding the Calvo friction and a Taylor rule form monetary
policy. In particular, the probability that any given ﬁrm resets its price in any given period is given by
1 − χ, with χ ∈ (0, 1). As for the Taylor rule, the reaction to inﬂation is given by κπ > 1, the reaction
to the output gap is given by κy > 0, and the parameter that controls the degree of interest-rate
smoothing is given by κR ∈ (0, 1); see condition (31) below.
    In the sticky-price model, the log-linear version of the set of the equations characterizing the
general equilibrium of the economy is thus given by the following:
                                                              [                                 ]
       Eit [ζtc + ν ñit ] = ζtc − 1−b
                                     1          b
                                        c̃it + 1−b C̃t−1 + Eit s̃it + ϱỸt + (1 − ϱ)ỹit − ñit            (21)
                                 [                                                                       ]
           [           ]            λ̃it+1 + β(1 − δ)q̃(it+1 +
       Eit λ̃it + q̃it = Eit                                                                           )   (22)
                                     +(1 − β(1 − δ)) s̃it+1 + ϱỸt+1 + (1 − ϱ)ỹit+1 − ũit+1 − k̃it+1

                   ỹit = at + α(ũit + k̃it ) + (1 − α)ñit                                              (23)
        Zt +    1
               1−ψ ũit   = s̃it + ϱỸt + (1 − ϱ)ỹit − k̃it                                              (24)
                                                                 ip
    ϱỸt + (1 − ϱ)ỹit = sc c̃it + (1 − sc − sg )(ζt + ı̃it ) + sg G̃t + αũit                            (25)
                 k̃it+1 =   δ(ζtit    + ı̃it ) + (1 − δ)k̃it                                              (26)
                                                                           ip
                    q̃it = (1 + β)φı̃it − φı̃t−1 − βφE′it ı̃it+1 + ζt − ζtit                              (27)
                   λ̃it =   ζtc   −    1
                                      1−b c̃it   +    b
                                                     1−b C̃t−1                                            (28)
                                                                           [                ]
                   R̃t = ζtc − (1 + ν)ñit − seit − ϱYt − (1 − ϱ)yit − E′it λ̃it+1 − π̃it+1               (29)
                                                                 ip
                   x̃it = sc c̃it + (1 − sc − sg )(ζt + ı̃it ) + sg G̃t                                   (30)
                                                  (                       )
                   R̃t = κR R̃t−1 + (1 − κR ) κπ π̃it + κy (x̃it − x̃Fit ) + ζtm                          (31)
 χ(1 + χ(1 − β))π̃it = (1 − χ)(1 − βχ)s̃it + βχ(1 − χ)Π̃t + βχE′it π̃it+1                                 (32)

where uppercases stand for aggregate variables, λit and sit denote, respectively, the marginal utility
of consumption and the realized markup in island i, π̃it ≡ p̃it − p̃it−1 and Π̃t ≡ P̃t − P̃t−1 denote,
respectively, the local and the aggregate inﬂation rate, xit denotes the measured of GDP on island i,
XitF denotes the GDP that would be attained in a ﬂexible price allocation, and sc and sg denote the
steady-state ratios of consumption and government spending to output.

                                                                      34
     The interpretation of the above system is straightforward. Conditions (21) and (22) give, respec-
tively, the consumption and investment decisions. Conditions (23) and (24) characterizes the equi-
librium employment and utilization levels. Condition (25) gives the local resource constraint. Con-
ditions (26) and (27) give the local law of motion of capital and the equilibrium price of capital.
Condition (28) and (29) give the marginal utility of consumption and the optimal bond holdings de-
cision. Condition (30) gives the measured aggregate GDP. Conditions (31) gives the Taylor rule for
monetary policy. Finally, condition (32) gives the inﬂation rate in each island; aggregating this con-
dition across islands gives our model’s New Keynesian Phillips Curve. The only essential novelty in
all the above is the presence of the subjective expectation operators in the conditions characterizing
the local equilibrium outcomes of each island.
     Finally, the ﬂexible-price allocations are obtained by the same set of equations, modulo the fol-
lowing changes: we set sit = 0, meaning that the realized markup is always equal to the optimal
markup; we restate the Euler condition (29) in terms of the real interest rate; and we drop the nominal
side of this system, namely conditions (31) and (32).
   Estimation. As mentioned in the main text, we follow Christiano and Vigfusson (2003) and Sala
(2015) and estimate the model using a Bayesian maximum likelihood technique in the frequency
domain. This method amounts to maximizing the following posterior likelihood function:

                                        L(θ|YT ) ∝ f (θ) × L(θ|YT )

where YT denotes the set of data (for t = 1 . . . T ) used for estimation, θ is the vector of structural
parameters to be estimated, f (θ) is the joint prior distribution of the structural parameters, and L(θ|Yt )
is the likelihood of the model expressed in the frequency domain. Note that the log-linear solution
of the model admits a state-space representation of the following form:

                                            Yt = My (θ)Xt
                                       Xt+1 = Mx (θ)Xt + Me εt+1

Here, Yt and Xt denote, respectively, the vector of observed variables and the underlying state vector
of the model; ε is the vector of the exogenous structural shocks, drawn from a Normal distribution with
mean zero and variance-covariance matrix Σ(θ); My (θ) and Mx (θ) are matrices whose elements are
(non-linear) functions of the underlying structural parameters θ; and ﬁnally Me is a selection matrix
that describes how each of the structural shocks impacts on the state vector. As shown in Whittle
(1951), Hannan (1970) and Harvey (1991), the likelihood function is asymptotically given by

                                 1∑ (                         (                       ))
                                       T
               log(L(θ|YT )) ∝ −   γj log(det SY (ωj , θ) + tr SY (ωj , θ)−1 IY (ωj )
                                 2
                                      j=1

where ωj = 2πj/T , j = 1 . . . T and where IY (ωj ) denotes the periodogram of YT evaluated at
frequency ωj . SY (ω, θ) is the model spectral density of the vector Yt , given by
                           1
            SY (ω, θ) =      My (θ)(I − Mx (θ)e−iω )−1 Me Σ(θ)Me′ (I − Mx (θ)′ eiω )−1 My (θ)′′
                          2π

                                                    35
Following Christiano and Vigfusson (2003) and Sala (2015), we include a weight γj in the computation
of the likelihood in order to select the desirable frequencies: this weight is 1 when the frequency falls
between 6 and 32 quarters, and 0 otherwise.

     Priors. The following parameters are estimated in both models: the inverse labor supply elastic-
ity, ν ; the capital share, α; the utilization elasticity parameter, ψ ; the habit persistence parameter, b;
the parameter governing the size of investment adjustment costs, φ; and the standard deviations and
persistences of all the structural shocks. In the sticky-price model, the Calvo parameter, χ, and pa-
rameters of the Taylor rule, κR , κπ , and κy , are also estimated. The priors used for all these parameters
are reported in Table 8 in Online Appendix O.3 and are broadly consistent with those used in the
DSGE literature. The prior for the conﬁdence shock was set in line with the other shocks. Finally, the
following parameters are ﬁxed: the discount factor, β , is 0.99; the depreciation rate, δ , is 0.025; the
parameter, η , is such that the monopoly markup is 15%; and the parameter ϱ is 0.75 for the reasons
explained in the main text.

    Posteriors. Posterior distributions were obtained with the MCMC algorithm, with an acceptance
rate of 37%. We generated 2 chains of 200,000 observations each. The posteriors for all the param-
eters are reported in the last four columns of Table 8. The posteriors for the preference, technology,
and monetary parameters are broadly consistent with other estimates in the literature.

    IRFs and Variance/Covariance Decompositions. The IRFs of our estimated models with respect
to all the structural shocks are delegated to Online Appendix O.3: see Figures 8–9 therein. With the
exception of the conﬁdence shock, which is novel, the IRFs to all the other shocks are comparable to
those found in the literature.
    The estimated contribution of the shocks to, respectively, the variances and the co-variances of
the key variables at business-cycle frequencies is reported in the same appendix, in Tables 9 and 10.
For comparison purposes, we also include the estimated contributions that obtain in the variants of
the models that remove the conﬁdence shock. Three ﬁndings are worth mentioning.
    First, unlike the case of the conﬁdence shock, the variance/covariance contributions of some of
the other shocks changes signiﬁcantly as we move from the ﬂexible-price to the sticky-price model.
    Second, in the models that assume away the conﬁdence shocks, the combination of permanent
and transitory investment shocks emerge as the main driver of the business cycle. This is consistent
with existing ﬁndings in the DSGE literature (e.g., Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti, 2010) and
conﬁrms that, apart from the inclusion of the conﬁdence shock, our exercises are quite typical.
    Finally, in all models, neither the investment-speciﬁc shocks, nor the news or discount-rate shocks
are able to contribute to a positive covariation between all of the key real quantities (output, con-
sumption, investment, hours) at the same time. This illustrates, once again, the superior ability of our
mechanism to generate the right kind of comovement patterns.




                                                    36
References
Abraham, Arpad and Kirk White. 2006. “The Dynamics of Plant-Level Productivity in U.S. Manufac-
 turing.” Working Paper 06-20, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.

Akerlof, Georges and Robert Shiller. 2009. Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the Econ-
 omy, and Why it Matters for Global Capitalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Angeletos, George-Marios, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. 2017. “An Anatomy of the Business
 Cycle.” miméo, MIT.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La’O. 2013. “Sentiments.” Econometrica 81 (2):739–779.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Chen Lian. 2016a. “Incomplete Information in Macroeconomics:
 Accommodating Frictions in Coordination.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2, vol. 2, edited
 by John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig, chap. 14. 1065–1240.

———. 2016b. “A (Real) Theory of Keynesian Multipliers.” MIT mimeo .

Angeletos, George-Marios and Alessandro Pavan. 2007. “Efﬁcient Use of Information and Social
 Value of Information.” Econometrica 75 (4):1103–1142.

Barsky, Robert B. and Eric R. Sims. 2011. “News Shocks and Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics 58 (3):273–289.

———. 2012. “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of Innovations in Consumer Conﬁ-
 dence.” American Economic Review 102 (4):1343–77.

Beaudry, Paul, Dana Galizia, and Franck Portier. 2015. “Reviving the Limit Cycle View of Macroe-
  conomic Fluctuations.” Working Paper 21241, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier. 2006. “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations.” American
  Economic Review 96 (4):1293–1307.

———. 2013. “Understanding Noninﬂationary Demand-Driven Business Cycles.” In NBER Macroe-
 conomics Annual 2013, Volume 28. 69–130.

Benhabib, Jess, Pengfei Wang, and Yi Wen. 2015. “Sentiments and Aggregate Demand Fluctuations.”
  Econometrica 83:549–585.

Bhandari, Anmol, Jaroslav Borovicka, and Paul Ho. 2016. “Identifying Ambiguity Shocks in Business
  Cycle Models Using Survey Data.” Working Paper 22225, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Danny Quah. 1989. “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and
  Supply Disturbances.” American Economic Review 79 (4):655–73.


                                               37
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2016. “Understanding Booms and Busts in
  Housing Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 124 (4):1088–1147.

Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2007. “Business Cycle Accounting.” Econo-
 metrica 75 (3):781–836.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidities and
 the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1):1–45.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. 2015. “Understanding the Great
 Recession.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1):110–67.

Christiano, Lawrence J. and Robert J. Vigfusson. 2003. “Maximum likelihood in the Frequency Do-
 main: the Importance of Time-to-Plan.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (4):789–815.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about Infor-
 mation Rigidities?” Journal of Political Economy 120 (1):116 – 159.

Fernald, John G. 2014. “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity.” Work-
  ing Paper Series 2012-19, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Fisher, Jonas D. M. 2006. “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-Speciﬁc Technology
  Shocks.” Journal of Political Economy 114 (3):413–451.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efﬁ-
  ciency: Selection on Productivity or Proﬁtability?” American Economic Review 98 (1):394–425.

Galí, Jordi. 1999. “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain
 Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review 89 (1):249–271.

Hannan, Edward J. 1970. Multiple Time Series. Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics. Wiley, John
 & Sons.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent. 1993. “Seasonality and Approximation Errors in Rational
 Expectations Models.” Journal of Econometrics 55 (1-2):21–55.

———. 2007. Robustness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

———. 2012. “Three types of ambiguity.” Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (5):422–445.

Harvey, Andrew C. 1991. Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter. Cam-
 bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Huo, Zen and Naoki Takayama. 2015a. “Rational Expectations Models with Higher Order Beliefs.”
 miméo, Yale University.


                                                 38
———. 2015b. “Higher Order Beliefs, Conﬁdence, and Business Cycles.” miméo, Yale University.

Ilut, Cosmin and Hikaru Saijo. 2016. “Learning, Conﬁdence and Business Cycle.” Working Paper
   22958, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jaimovich, Nir and Sergio Rebelo. 2009. “Can News about the Future Drive the Business Cycle?”
   American Economic Review 99 (4):1097–1118.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2010. “Investment Shocks and
  Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (2):132–145.

Levchenko, Andrei A. and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. 2015. “TFP, News, and “Sentiments”: The Inter-
  national Transmission of Business Cycles.” Working Paper 21010, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Lorenzoni, Guido. 2009. “A Theory of Demand Shocks.” American Economic Review 99 (5):2050–
  84.

Lucas, Robert Jr. 1972. “Expectations and the neutrality of money.” Journal of Economic Theory
  4 (2):103–124.

Mavroeidis, Sophocles, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, and James H. Stock. 2014. “Empirical Evidence
 on Inﬂation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Journal of Economic Literature
 52 (1):124–88.

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin. 2001. “Rethinking Multiple Equilibria in Macroeconomic
 Modeling.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15. National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Inc, 139–182.

———. 2002. “Social Value of Public Information.” American Economic Review 92 (5):1521–1534.

Nimark, Kristoffer. 2017. “Dynamic Higher Order Expectations.” miméo, Cornell University.

Pei, Guangyu. 2017. “Ambiguity, Pessimism and Economic Fluctuations.” mimeo, University of
  Zurich.

Phelps, Edmund. 1971. “Inﬂation Expectations and Economic Theory.” In Inﬂation and the Canadian
  Experience. Kingston, Ontario: Industrial Relation Centre, Queen’s University, 31–47.

Rondina, Giacomo and Todd B. Walker. 2014. “Dispersed Information and Confounding Dynamics.”
  miméo, University of Colorado, Boulder.

Sala, Luca. 2015. “DSGE Models in the Frequency Domains.” Journal of Applied Econometrics
  30 (2):219–240.



                                              39
Sims, Christopher A. 1993. “Rational Expectations Modeling with Seasonally Adjusted Data.” Journal
  of Econometrics 55 (1-2):9–19.

———. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (3):665–690.

Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
 DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review 97 (3):586–606.

Townsend, Robert M. 1983. “Forecasting the Forecasts of Others.” Journal of Political Economy
  91 (4):546–587.

Whittle, Peter. 1951. Hypothesis Testing in Time Series Analysis. Almqvist & Wiksells.

Woodford, Michael. 2002. “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy.” In
 Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: in Honor of Edmund S.
 Phelps. Princeton University Press.

———. 2010. “Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy with Near-Rational Expectations.” American Eco-
 nomic Review 100 (1):274–303.




                                                40
                                    Quantifying Conﬁdence:
                                      Online Appendices
                 George-Marios Angeletos                 Fabrice Collard             Harris Dellas

                                                December 3, 2017



O.1      Additional Material for Sections 3 and 4
In this appendix, we provide few results that complement the analysis in Section 3 and 4.


Heterogeneous vs Common Priors (continued)

In Subsection 3.3 of the main text, we established an observational equivalence between a special
case of our heterogeneous-prior model and a common-prior variant featuring idiosyncratic uncer-
tainty. We now elaborate on the bounds that this mapping can impose on the magnitude and the
persistence of the ξt shock in our setting.
     Suppose that we had data that allowed the estimation of the AR(1) process described in condition
(18). Suppose next that we possessed information on the value for σ̃a , perhaps from micro-economic
observations. This information could be used in Proposition 2 to derive the bounds on (φ, ψ) and
then, using Corollary 1, to get bounds on (ρξ , σξ ).
     Figure 7 depicts these bounds. To construct this ﬁgure, we let ν = 0.5 and σ̃a = 0.2. The latter
value is based on the observation that σ̃a determines the uncertainty that islands face about their terms
of trade (demand for their products), and may thus be proxied by the idiosyncratic risk that the typical
ﬁrm faces about its productivity and sales.33 In the left panel of the ﬁgure, we plot the set of the (φ, ψ)
pairs that satisfy the bounds in Proposition 2, under the assumed value for σ̃a . Using Corollary 1, we
can translate this set into corresponding values for (ρξ , σξ ).
     In the right panel of the ﬁgure, we plot a more useful transformation of this set: instead of mea-
suring σξ on the vertical axis, we measure the corresponding value of σy , where σy henceforth stands
for the standard deviation of the business-cycle component of output (i.e., of output bandpass ﬁltered
over 6-32 quarters) that is accounted by the conﬁdence shock. Finally, the dot indicates the values
of φ (in the left panel) and of σy (in the right panel) that obtain when we ﬁx ρξ = 0.75 and calibrate
the volatilities of the conﬁdence shock and the technology shock in the model so as to match the
volatilities of aggregate output and employment in the data. The ﬁgure shows that under a plausible
value for σ̃a , the range of values for σξ that would be consistent with the restrictions imposed by a
common-prior speciﬁcation is very large.
  33
    Empirical estimates of the volatility of ﬁrm-level productivity suggest setting σ̃a between 0.2 to 0.43 (Abraham and
White, 2006, Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson, 2008). In a similar setting as ours, Huo and Takayama (2015b) use a value
of 0.14.


                                                           1
                        0.16                                            0.10
                        0.14
                        0.12                                            0.08
                        0.10                                            0.06
                        0.08




                                                                   σy
                    ψ
                        0.06                                            0.04
                        0.04                                            0.02
                        0.02
                        0.00                                            0.00
                           0.0   0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0           0.0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1.0
                                             ϕ                                               ρξ
                           Figure 7: The bounds on persistence and volatility


    Note that the relevant bound remains large even for lower values of σ̃a , say 4%. Such a value
would not appear implausibly large even if we conﬁned ﬁrst-order uncertainty to concern aggregate
fundamentals. For instance, this value is only about twice as large as the standard deviation of the
quarterly innovations in the aggregate Solow residual. Furthermore, as the behavior in the richer
models used in the quantitative exercises in this paper is forward-looking, it seems more appropriate
to think about a present-value measure of the uncertainty in fundamentals, as opposed to merely the
quarter-by-quarter changes. Therefore, even though we can not extend the results of this subsection
to such richer models, we feel conﬁdent that our quantitative ﬁndings are consistent with realistic
common-prior models. The recent work of Huo and Takayama (2015b) seems to corroborate this
conjecture. That said, there is no reason to view our approach exclusively as a proxy for incomplete
information and rational confusion.


The Conﬁdence Shock in the Baseline New Keynesian Model

In Section 4 of the main text, we compared the comovement patterns generated by the conﬁdence
shock to those of a few alternative shocks within the context fo the baseline RBC model. We now
extend the comparison to the baseline New Keynesian model. The latter is obtained from the former
by adding monopoly power, sticky prices, and a Taylor rule for monetary policy.
    Table 5 revisits the exercise conducted in Table 1. The preferences, the technology and the con-
ﬁdence shock remain as before; the monopoly distortion is offset by a subsidy; the Calvo parameter
is set to 0.75; and the Taylor rule is speciﬁed as Rt = ϕπ πt with ϕπ = 1.5.
    The following key ﬁndings emerge. First, the good and superior to other shocks empirical per-
formance of the conﬁdence shock survives as we move from the RBC model to the New Keynesian
model. Second, with the exception of the monetary shock, none of the competing shocks is able to
generate realistic comovements patterns in the relevant quantities. Finally, the similarity between the
real effects of the conﬁdence shock and those of the monetary shock provide further justiﬁcation for
our claim that the conﬁdence plays similar role in the RBC framework as demand shocks




                                                                   2
                              Table 5: Conditional Comovements (6-32 quarters)
                        Filtering         Our Mechanism                      Alternative Mechanisms

                       (a)      (b)        (c)       (d)         I shock   C shock    News     E shock    M shock

     σn /σy           0.87     1.07       1.43      1.43          1.44       1.44      0.87      0.70       1.44
     σc /σy           0.56     0.52       0.25      0.22          0.44       1.01      0.16      0.19       0.13
     σi /σy           3.54     3.65       3.92      4.10          6.09       8.26      4.80      4.30       4.52
     σy/n /σy         0.40     0.63       0.44      0.44          0.47       0.49      0.18      0.33       0.45

     corr(c, y)        0.86    0.85        0.85      0.76        -0.83      -0.94     -0.16      0.60        0.38
     corr(i, y)        0.94    0.95        0.99      0.99        0.99        0.99      0.99      0.99       0.99
     corr(n, y)        0.91    0.82        0.99      1.00        0.99        0.98      0.99      0.99       1.00
     corr(c, n)        0.86    0.75        0.81      0.70        -0.90      -0.99     -0.25      0.47        0.31
     corr(i, n)        0.85    0.81        0.99      1.00        1.00        1.00      1.00      1.00       1.00
     corr(c, i)        0.75    0.79        0.78      0.67        -0.90      -0.98     -0.27      0.50        0.29
     corr(y, y/n)     -0.03    0.21       -0.96     -0.96        -0.90      -0.86     0.76       0.94       -0.97
     corr(n, y/n)     -0.43    -0.40      -0.98     -0.98        -0.95      -0.93     0.67       0.87       -0.99

     σπ /σy           0.16      0.42        –       0.07          0.22       0.04      0.07      0.03       0.10
     σR /σy           0.24      0.72        –       0.10          0.34       0.06      0.10      0.05       0.02
     corr(y, π)       0.21     -0.90        –       0.96          0.99       0.42      0.37      0.84       0.99
     corr(y, R)       0.38     -0.81        –       0.96          0.99       0.42      0.37      0.84       -0.38
     Note: Columns (a) and (b) refer to the residuals that obtain, respectively, from the projection of the data on
     current and past TFP and from the removal of the technology shock identiﬁed in the same was as in Galí (1999).
     Column (c) refers to the predictions of our baseline model and column (d) to those of its NK variant. All other
     columns refer to alternative NK models.


Belief-Driven Wedges

In this section we derive the predictions of our theories about the wedges. We consider both the
overall wedges between the marginal rates of substitution and the corresponding marginal rates of
transformation, and their decomposition in household- and ﬁrm-side wedges.
    Let us ﬁll in the details. First, denote with M RSNt ≡ νNt + γCt the measured marginal rate of
intra-temporal substitution between leisure and consumption; with M RSCt,t+1 ≡ γ (Ct+1 − Ct ) the
measured marginal rate of inter-temporal substitution in consumption; with M P Lt ≡ Yt − Nt the
measured marginal product of labor; and with M P Kt = Yt − Kt the measured marginal product of
capital. Next, deﬁne the wedges τtnh , τtkh , τtnf , and τtkf so that the following conditions hold:

                M RSNt = wt − τtnh                 Et [M RSCt,t+1 ] = (1 − β(1 − δ))(Rt − τtkh )                       (33)
                  M P Lt = wt + τtnf                  Et [M P Kt+1 ] = Rt + τtkf .                                     (34)

This means that τtnh and τtkh can be interpreted as taxes payed by the household on labor income
and on the return to savings, while τtnf and τtkf can be interpreted as taxes payed by the ﬁrm on the
use of labor and capital. We ﬁnally measure the total labor wedge by τ n ≡ τtnh + τ nf and the total
capital wedge by τ k ≡ τtkh + τ kf .

                                                            3
    When the data is generated by the plain-vanilla RBC model, all the wedges are zero. At the other
extreme, the wedges can be arbitrary stochastic processes if the data is generated by a medium-scale
model that lets each of the optimality conditions of the RBC model be perturbed by a different shock.
Our model is in between these two extremes, arguably closer to the plain-vanilla RBC model than to
DSGE models such as Smets and Wouters (2007): the wedges differ from zero but they are all linear
functions of the underlying conﬁdence shock.
    Furthermore, as shown next, ξt > 0 maps to τtnh > 0, τtkh > 0, τtnf < 0, and τtkf < 0. That is,
whenever there is a boost in conﬁdence, it is as if the household faces a positive tax on its supply
of labor and savings, while the ﬁrm faces a positive subsidy on its use of labor and capital services.
The ﬁrst property reﬂects the excessive optimism that the households have about their income during
a conﬁdence-driven boom; the second property reﬂects the excessive optimism that the ﬁrms have
about the demand for their product and their terms of trade. Finally, the combination of these forces
gives rise to a procylical labor wedge and a countercylical capital wedge, in line with the US data.
    The labor wedge on the household side. Consider ﬁrst τtnh , which is is deﬁned as the equivalent
of a labor-income tax faced by the as-if representative household:

                                  τtnh ≡ wt − M RSNt = wt − (Ct + νNt )

In the equilibrium of our model, the household of every island i equates the local wage to the local
expectation of its marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure:

                                              wi,t = Eit [ci,t ] − νni,t .

In addition, the realized outcomes satisfy wi,t = wt , ni,t = Nt , and ci,t = Ct for all i. It follows that

                                   τtnh = Eit [ci,t ] − Ct = Eit [ci,t ] − cit   ∀i,

which reveals that τtnh captures the excessive optimism (during a boom) or pessimism (during a re-
cession) of the households about their own consumption. Condition (13) in the main text, together
with the fact that kit = Kt for all i, implies that cit = ΓcK Kt + Γcz zit + Γzc z t + Γca At + Γcξ ξt and therefore
Eit [cit ] = ΓcK Kt + (Γcz + Γcz + Γca )At + (Γcξ + Γcz )ξt . Realized consumption, on the other hand, is given
by Ct = ΓcK Kt + (Γcz + Γcz + Γca )At + Γcξ ξt . Combining, we infer that

                                                     τtnh = Γcz ξt

The adopted parameterization implies τtnh = 0.0152ξt .
   The labor wedge on the ﬁrm side. Consider next τtnf , which is deﬁned as the equivalent of a
payroll tax faced by the as-if representative ﬁrm:

                                    τtnf ≡ M P Lt − wt = (Yt − Nt ) − wt

In the equilibrium of our model, the ﬁrm of every island i equates the local wage to the local expec-
tation of the marginal revenue product of labor:

                       wi,t = Eit [M RP Lit ] = Eit [pit + yit − nit ] = Eit [Yt ] − nit   ∀i

                                                           4
In addition, the realized outcomes satisfy wit = wt and nit = Nt for all i. It follows that

                                                τtnf = Yt − Eit [Yt ]    ∀i,

which reveals that τtnf captures the excessive optimism or pessimism of the ﬁrms about aggregate
income and the resulting demand for the local good. Using conditions (12) and (15) from the main
text along with the production function, we have that Yt = ΓyK Kt + Γya At + Γyz z t + Γyξ ξt and therefore
Eit [Yt ] = ΓyK Kt + (Γya + Γyz )At + (Γzy + Γyξ )ξt . It follows that

                                                      τtnf ≡ −Γyz ξt

For our parameterization, we have τtnf = −0.2548ξt .
    The capital wedge on the ﬁrm side. Consider now τtkf , which is deﬁned as the equivalent of an
investment tax faced by the as-if representative ﬁrm:

                           τtkf ≡ Et [M P Kt+1 ] − Rt = Et [Yt+1 ] − Kt+1 − Rt ,

where Et is the rational (or objective) expectation operator. In the equilibrium of our model,

            Rt = E′it [M RP Ki,t+1 ] = E′it [pi,t+1 + yi,t+1 − ki,t+1 ] = E′it [Yt+1 ] − ki,t+1                 ∀i,

where Ei,t is the subjective expectation operator in the morning of period t. It follows that

                                           τtkf = Et [Yt+1 ] − E′it [Yt+1 ]     ∀i,

which reveals that τtkf captures the excessive optimism or pessimism of the ﬁrms about aggregate
income and demand next period. Using similar steps as before, we can show that

                                                     τtkf = −Γzy ρξt

where Γyz is the elasticity of the realized income of each island with respect to the realized average
signal. For our calibration, we have τtkf = −0.1911ξt .
    The savings wedge on the household side. Consider τtkh , which is deﬁned as the tax on the returns
to savings faced by the as-if representative household:

                                                                                 γ
                 τtkh ≡ Rt −      1−β(1−δ) Et [M RSCt,t+1 ]
                                     1
                                                                  = Rt +      1−β(1−δ) Et [Ct+1       − Ct ]

In the equilibrium of our model,

                                         ′                               γ      ′
                               1−β(1−δ) Eit [M RSCi,t,t+1 ]           1−β(1−δ) Eit [ci,t+1      − ct ],
                                  1
                        Rt =                                     =

where E′it is the subjective operator in the afternoon of period t. It follows that
                                  (                             )               (                               )
              τtkh =      γ
                       1−β(1−δ)       E′it [cit+1 ] − Et [Ct+1 ] =      γ
                                                                     1−β(1−δ)       E′it [cit+1 ] − Et [ci,t+1 ] ,


                                                             5
which reveals that τtkh captures the excessive optimism or pessimism of the households about their
future consumption. From the policy rules for individual and aggregate consumption:

                       E′it [cit+1 ] = ΓcK Kt+1 + (Γcz + Γcz + Γca )At + (Γzc + Γcξ )ρξt
                        Et [Ct+1 ] = ΓcK Kt+1 + (Γcz + Γzc + Γca )At + Γcξ ρξt

Combining, we infer that
                                                        Γcz ρ
                                           τtkh =                ξt
                                                    1 − β(1 − δ)
For our parameterization, we have τtkh = 0.3277ξt .
     The total wedges in the model. Combining the above results, we conclude that the total labor
wedge in the calibrated version of our baseline model is given by τtn = τtnh + τtnf = −0.2396ξt ,
whereas the total capital wedge is given by τtk = τtkh + τtkf = 0.1366ξt . That is, the labor wedge
is negatively correlated with the conﬁdence shock, and therefore countercyclical, while the capital
wedge is positively correlated with the conﬁdence shock, and therefore procyclical.
     In the main text we claimed that both of these predictions are driven by the fact that the ξt shock
shifts the perceptions of short-run returns without moving much the perceptions of permanent income.
Let us now explain why this is the case. As noted above, our model predicts that the wedges for ﬁrms
and households move in opposite directions. Furthermore, the procyclicality of τtnh is tied to the
effect of the conﬁdence shock on perceived permanent income, while the countercyclicality of τtn f
is tied to the effect on the perceived marginal return to labor. For the reasons already explained,
the latter effect dominates the former. Consequently, the overall labor wedge, τtn , is predicted to
be countercyclical. The opposite is true for the capital wedge, τtk . To see why, note ﬁrst that the
Euler condition equates expected consumption growth with a quantity that is equal to unity plus the
expected return to capital. Note next that, while the variation in τtkf is of similar magnitude to the
variation in τtnf , it represents a small component in the aforementioned quantity, and is therefore
overwhelmed by the variation in τtkh , which captures the household’s optimism and pessimism about
future consumption. It follows τtk shares the cyclical properties of τtkh , that is, the total capital wedge
is procyclical.
     Estimation of wedges in the data. We now turn attention to the estimation of the wedges US data.
This is done in a similar fashion as in Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007).
     The estimation is based on the baseline RBC model, augmented with ad hoc stochastic processes
for the following four wedges: an efﬁciency wedge, τte , a labor wedge, τtn , a capital wedge, τtk , and
a resource wedge τtg . Accordingly, the system to be estimated is the following:

                              νNt + Ct = Yt − Nt − τtn                                                 (35)
                         Et [Ct+1 ] − Ct = (1 − β(1 − δ))(Et [Yt+1 − Kt+1 ] − τtk )                    (36)
                        Yt + (1 − δ)Kt = Ct + Kt+1 + τtg                                               (37)
                                      Yt = τte + αKt + (1 − α)Nt                                       (38)


                                                       6
We set the structural parameters ν , α, β and δ to the values chosen in our baseline calibration. As
in Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007), we assume that the vector Tt = (τte , τtn , τtk , τtg )′ follows a
VAR(1) process of the form
                                           Tt = ΦTt−1 + Et

where Φ is a matrix, Et = (εet , εnt , εkt , εgt )′ is normally distributed with E(Et ) = 0 and E(Et Et′ ) = ΩΩ′ ,
and Ω is a lower-triangular matrix. We ﬁnally estimate the matrices Φ and Ω using data on GDP,
investment, hours, and the difference between GDP and the sum of investment and consumption,
over the period 1960Q1-2007Q4. The estimation yields
                                                                                                           
         0.6537    0.1184       0.2268 0.0049                             0.6148    0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
                                                                                                           
     −0.2487      1.0716       0.1605          0.0089                 0.2580     0.8828   0.0000   0.0000  
Φ=  −0.2808
                                                         and Ω = 
                                                                       
                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                              
                  0.0883       1.1620 0.0068                          0.6261 −0.3505 0.1793 0.0000
         0.2017 −0.1390 −0.1741 0.9829                                    0.2492    0.2278 0.4964 1.5210

and results to the moments reported in Table 6. We thus see that the labor wedge is countercyclical
and the capital wedge procyclical, just as predicted by our theory.


                                        Table 6: Wedges in the Data
                                                        Efﬁciency     Labor    Capital
                          Standard Deviation                0.86       1.40      1.04
                          Correlation with Output           0.78      -0.57      0.91




O.2      Data
In this Appendix we describe the data we use in this paper to obtain the various business-cycle
moments and to estimate the models considered in Section 5.
    Table 7 summarizes the data, all of which is from FRED, the Economic Database of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Saint-Louis. GDP, Y , is measured by the seasonally adjusted GDP. Consumption, C ,
is measured by the sum of personal consumption expenditures in nondurables goods (CND) and ser-
vices (CS). Investment, I , is measured by the sum of personal consumption expenditures on durables
goods (CD), ﬁxed private investment (FPI) and changes in inventories (DI). Government Spending,
G, is measured by government consumption expenditures (GCE). Hours worked, N , are measured
by hours of all persons in the non-farm business sector. Labor productivity, Y /N , is measured by
real output per hour of all persons in the non-farm business sector. The inﬂation rate, π , is the log-
change in the implicit GDP deﬂator. The nominal interest rate, R, is the effective federal funds rate
measured on a quarterly basis. Given that the effective federal funds rate is available at the monthly
frequency, we use the average over the quarter (denoted FEDFUNDS). Finally, when relevant, Total
Factor Productivity (TFP) is measured as in Fernald (2014), which adjusts for utilization.

                                                        7
    The sample ranges from the ﬁrst quarter of 1960 to the last quarter of 2007. We dropped the post-
2007 data because the models we study are not to designed to deal with the ﬁnancial phenomena
that appear to have play a more crucial role in the recent recession as opposed to earlier times.
All quantities are expressed in real, per capita terms—that is, deﬂated by the implicit GDP deﬂator
(GDPDEF) and by the civilian non-institutional population (CNP16OV). Because the latter is reported
monthly, we used the last month of each quarter as the quarterly observation.


                                    Table 7: Description of the Data
                                              Description of the Data
            Data                    Formula

            GDP                     Y=GDP/(GDPDEF×CNP16OV)
            Consumption             C=(CND+CS)/(GDPDEF×CNP16OV)
            Investment              I=(CD+FPI+DI)/(GDPDEF×CNP16OV)
            Government Spending     G=GCE/(GDPDEF×CNP16OV)
            Hours Worked            H=HOANBS/CNP16OV
            Labor Productivity      GDP/H
            Inﬂation Rate           π=log(GDPDEF)-log(GDPDEF)−1
            Nominal Interest Rate   R=FEDFUNDS/4

            Mnemonic                Source

            GDP                     http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/GDP
            CND                     http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/PCND
            CD                      http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/PCEDG
            CS                      http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/PCESV
            FPI                     http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/FPI
            DI                      http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/CBI
            GCE                     http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/GCE
            HOANBS                  http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/HOANBS
            GDPDEF                  http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/GDPDEF
            FEDFUNDS                http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/FEDFUNDS
            CNP16OV                 http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/CNP16OV




O.3     Additional Material for Section 5
This appendix contains additional material regarding the two estimated models in Section 5. Table 8
reports the priors and the posteriors of the estimated parameters. Figures 8–9 report the IRFs of our
estimated models with respect to all the structural shocks. Tables 9 and 10 report and the estimated
contribution of the shocks to, respectively, the variances and the co-variances of the key variables
at business-cycle frequencies. The conﬁdence shock is omitted here, because its contributions were
reported in the main text.


                                                        8
                                   Table 8: Estimated Parameters

                 Priors                                           Posteriors
                                           Flexible Price Model                Sticky Price Model
      Shape    Mean       Std. Dev.      Median         90%HPDI          Median         90%HPDI
ν     G        0.500       0.200          0.456       [0.226,0.814]       0.282       [0.161,0.429]
α     B        0.300       0.150          0.261       [0.234,0.286]       0.255       [0.229,0.280]
ψ     B        0.500       0.200          0.576       [0.255,0.856]       0.500       [0.315,0.708]
φ     G        2.000       1.000          3.370       [2.026,5.346]       3.312       [1.917,5.394]
b     B        0.500       0.200          0.860       [0.809,0.899]       0.758       [0.649,0.836]
χ     B        0.660       0.100            –               –             0.732       [0.673,0.782]
κR    B        0.600       0.200            –               –             0.198       [0.072,0.371]
κπ    N        1.700       0.300            –               –             2.271       [1.901,2.660]
κy    N        0.125       0.050            –               –             0.121       [0.052,0.199]
ρa    B        0.500       0.200          0.394       [0.126,0.747]       0.412       [0.115,0.846]
ρn    B        0.500       0.200          0.309       [0.113,0.545]       0.224       [0.075,0.428]
ρi    B        0.500       0.200          0.365       [0.136,0.626]       0.374       [0.155,0.604]
ρc    B        0.500       0.200          0.477       [0.175,0.786]       0.888       [0.802,0.964]
ρg    B        0.500       0.200          0.787       [0.588,0.921]       0.786       [0.632,0.902]
ρm    B        0.500       0.200            –               –             0.647       [0.471,0.753]
ρξ    B        0.500       0.200          0.620       [0.369,0.804]       0.833       [0.717,0.911]
 p
σa    IG       1.000       4.000          0.396        [0.270,0.565]      0.406       [0.278,0.569]
σat   IG       1.000       4.000          0.338        [0.239,0.489]      0.347       [0.244,0.498]
σn    IG       1.000       4.000          0.376        [0.266,0.521]      0.378       [0.263,0.520]
  p
σi    IG       1.000       4.000          0.845        [0.358,2.252]      0.610       [0.321,1.306]
σit   IG       1.000       4.000          5.961       [2.046,11.657]      5.805      [2.839,11.029]
σc    IG       1.000       4.000          0.658        [0.327,2.676]      0.357       [0.244,0.564]
σg    IG       1.000       4.000          1.675        [1.387,2.072]      1.705       [1.431,2.076]
σm    IG       1.000       4.000            –                –            0.313       [0.256,0.388]
σξ    IG       1.000       4.000          1.798        [1.208,2.839]      0.613       [0.348,1.194]

Note: B, G, IG, N stand respectively for Beta, Gamma, Inverse Gamma and Normal distribution.




                                                  9
                                                                                TFP: Permanent Shock
                    Output                     Consumption                    Investment       Hours Worked                                  Inflation                   Nom. Int. Rate
         0.6                         0.6                             1                            0.2                           0.01                          0.01

         0.5                                                       0.8                                                                                           0
                                     0.4                                                           0                               0
% dev.




         0.4                                                       0.6                                                                                        -0.01
                                     0.2                                                         -0.2                           -0.01
         0.3                                                       0.4                                                                                        -0.02

         0.2                          0                            0.2                           -0.4                           -0.02                         -0.03
               0      10       20          0        10        20          0      10         20          0        10        20           0      10        20           0        10       20
                    Quarters                      Quarters                     Quarters                        Quarters                      Quarters                        Quarters

                                                                                  TFP: News Shock
                    Output                     Consumption                    Investment      Hours Worked                                   Inflation                   Nom. Int. Rate
          1                          0.6                           1.5                            0.2                           0.04                            0.1

                                     0.4
                                                                     1                             0                            0.02                          0.05
% dev.




         0.5                         0.2
                                                                   0.5                           -0.2                              0                             0
                                      0

          0                         -0.2                             0                           -0.4                           -0.02                         -0.05
               0      10       20          0        10        20          0      10         20          0        10        20           0      10        20           0        10       20
                    Quarters                      Quarters                     Quarters                        Quarters                      Quarters                        Quarters

                                                                                TFP: Transitory Shock
                    Output                      Consumption                   Investment         Hours Worked                                Inflation                   Nom. Int. Rate
          0.1                        0.1                            0.4                           0.5                            0.02                         0.05

                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                    0.2                                                                                          0
% dev.




         0.05                       0.05                                                            0                           -0.02
                                                                     0                                                                                        -0.05
                                                                                                                                -0.04

            0                          0                           -0.2                          -0.5                           -0.06                          -0.1
                0     10       20           0       10        20          0       10        20           0        10       20           0       10       20           0        10       20
                    Quarters                      Quarters                      Quarters                        Quarters                      Quarters                       Quarters

                                                                          Investment: Permanent Shock
                    Output                     Consumption                  Investment      Hours Worked                                     Inflation                   Nom. Int. Rate
          0.2                          0                            0.5                            0.2                           0.01                          0.02

                                    -0.02
           0                                                          0                             0
% dev.




                                    -0.04                                                                                           0                                0
         -0.2                                                      -0.5                           -0.2
                                    -0.06

         -0.4                       -0.08                            -1                           -0.4                           -0.01                         -0.02
                0     10       20           0       10       20           0       10        20           0        10       20            0      10       20              0     10       20
                    Quarters                      Quarters                      Quarters                        Quarters                      Quarters                       Quarters

                                                                          Investment: Transitory Shock
                    Output                     Consumption                  Investment        Hours Worked                                   Inflation                   Nom. Int. Rate
         0.6                         0.2                             3                            0.6                           0.04                            0.1

                                                                     2                            0.4
         0.4                         0.1                                                                                        0.02                          0.05
% dev.




                                                                     1                            0.2
         0.2                          0                                                                                            0                             0
                                                                     0                             0

          0                         -0.1                            -1                           -0.2                           -0.02                         -0.05
               0      10       20          0        10        20          0      10         20          0        10        20           0      10        20           0        10       20
                    Quarters                      Quarters                     Quarters                        Quarters                      Quarters                        Quarters
                                                             Flexible-Price Model,                           Sticky-Price Model.

                                                              Figure 8: Theoretical IRFs, Part I



                                                                                           10
                                                                                            Discount Shock
                        Output                       Consumption                        Investment      Hours Worked                              Inflation                Nom. Int. Rate
           0                               0.1                               0.5                            0.1                       -0.05                           0

                                         0.05
                                                                              0                              0                         -0.1
% dev.




         -0.1                               0                                                                                                                      -0.1
                                                                            -0.5                           -0.1                       -0.15
                                         -0.05

         -0.2                             -0.1                                -1                           -0.2                        -0.2                        -0.2
                0         10        20           0           10        20          0       10         20          0     10       20           0     10        20           0     10       20
                        Quarters                           Quarters                      Quarters                     Quarters                    Quarters                     Quarters

                                                                                              Fiscal Shock
                        Output                       Consumption                        Investment       Hours Worked                             Inflation                Nom. Int. Rate
          0.4                               0                                0.1                            0.6                       0.02                         0.04

                                         -0.02                                 0
          0.2                                                                                               0.4
% dev.




                                         -0.04                              -0.1                                                      0.01                         0.02
           0                                                                                                0.2
                                         -0.06                              -0.2

         -0.2                            -0.08                              -0.3                              0                           0                           0
                0         10        20           0          10        20           0       10         20          0     10       20           0     10        20           0     10       20
                        Quarters                          Quarters                       Quarters                     Quarters                    Quarters                     Quarters

                                                                                            Monetary Shock
                         Output                          Consumption                    Investment      Hours Worked                              Inflation                Nom. Int. Rate
                0                                0                            0.2                           0.1                         0.1                          0.1

         -0.05                            -0.05                                0                              0                           0                        0.05
% dev.




          -0.1                             -0.1                             -0.2                           -0.1                        -0.1                           0

         -0.15                            -0.15                             -0.4                           -0.2                        -0.2                        -0.05
                    0      10        20              0       10        20           0       10        20          0     10       20           0      10       20           0     10       20
                         Quarters                          Quarters                       Quarters                    Quarters                     Quarters                    Quarters
                                                                      Flexibe-Price Model,                        Sticky-Price Model.

                                                                      Figure 9: Theoretical IRFs, Part II




                                                                                                     11
                                       Table 9: Contribution of Shocks to Volatilities (6–32 Quarters)

                       Y         C         I      N       π      R                        Y        C       I       N       π       R

     Permanent TFP Shock                                                News Shock
     Flexible Price   9.05      8.25      3.13   2.91      –      –     Flexible Price 15.92 14.13        5.67    3.89      –       –
     Sticky Price     9.66      12.50     1.99   2.94    0.34   1.02    Sticky Price    13.72 16.51       2.67    1.40    0.64    1.90
     In the absence of belief shock                                     In the absence of belief shock
     Flexible Price 16.45 28.30           4.50   1.30      –      –     Flexible Price 13.37 22.39         5.52    3.06     –       –
     Sticky Price    19.84 23.23          6.05   5.20    0.11   0.16    Sticky Price    47.24 67.06       14.49   12.17   3.16    12.27

     Transitory TFP Shock                                               Discount Shock
     Flexible Price   0.95      2.14      0.40   2.05      –      –     Flexible Price   0.27      0.10   0.89    0.35      –       –
     Sticky Price     0.22      0.52      0.08   2.86    1.69   5.26    Sticky Price     1.52      1.40   3.97    1.71    63.25   37.75
     In the absence of belief shock                                     In the absence of belief shock




12
     Flexible Price 12.98       3.75     24.49   5.10      –      –     Flexible Price   2.53      2.41   12.83    4.21     –       –
     Sticky Price     0.17      0.39     0.07    7.38    0.03   0.79    Sticky Price     8.28      3.45   12.84   20.72   96.38   55.48

     Permanent Investment Shock                                         Fiscal Shock
     Flexible Price   1.81      0.30      4.30   2.15      –      –     Flexible Price   4.34      0.98   0.50    5.17      –       –
     Sticky Price     0.98      0.09      2.34   1.13    0.13   0.38    Sticky Price     4.98      0.48   0.12    5.94    0.40    1.19
     In the absence of belief shock                                     In the absence of belief shock
     Flexible Price 49.70 39.12          26.04   78.87     –      –     Flexible Price   2.26      1.45   12.81   2.97      –       –
     Sticky Price     1.17      0.44     4.05    2.48    0.12   0.12    Sticky Price     3.61      0.59    0.07   8.62    0.03    0.22

     Transitory Investment Shock                                        Monetary Policy Shock
     Flexible Price 12.94       3.90     43.52   15.16     –      –     Flexible Price     –         –      –       –       –       –
     Sticky Price     15.48     2.43     49.34   17.20   2.42   6.93    Sticky Price     2.16      4.10   0.99    2.68    19.50   4.73
     In the absence of belief shock                                     In the absence of belief shock
     Flexible Price   2.71      2.58     13.80   4.50      –      –     Flexible Price     –         –      –       –       –       –
     Sticky Price     18.58     1.38     62.23   40.70   0.16   1.59    Sticky Price     1.10      3.46   0.20    2.73    0.02    29.37
                                     Table 10: Contribution of Shocks to Comovements (6–32 Quarters)

                                           Covariance                                                                 Covariance
                     (Y, N )   (Y, I )   (Y, C ) (N, I )   (N, C )   (I, C )                    (Y, N )   (Y, I )   (Y, C ) (N, I )   (N, C )   (I, C )

     Permanent TFP Shock                                                       News Shock
     Flexible Price   0.21      5.91     10.62    0.74     1.99      8.86      Flexible Price   0.10      10.67     18.07    0.40     3.47      15.08
     Sticky Price     0.86      4.82     13.99    1.24     2.46      10.03     Sticky Price     0.09      6.80      19.28    0.58     0.46      13.40
     In the absence of belief shock                                            In the absence of belief shock
     Flexible Price   4.60      11.52    26.05    3.04     9.24      23.50     Flexible Price   5.44      10.27     20.70    6.11      8.03     18.60
     Sticky Price     5.36      11.87    27.87    5.63     8.14      31.12     Sticky Price    20.27 28.84          68.05    2.85     83.48     65.41

     Transitory TFP Shock                                                      Discount Shock
     Flexible Price -0.39       0.69     1.80     -0.34    -0.56     1.61      Flexible Price   0.37      0.54      -0.14    0.67     -0.17     -0.41
     Sticky Price     -0.42      0.15    0.44     -0.19    -1.02     0.40      Sticky Price     1.90      2.63      0.16     3.02     -0.11     -1.46
     In the absence of belief shock                                            In the absence of belief shock




13
     Flexible Price   8.97      24.10    8.36     16.84    6.45      20.31     Flexible Price   3.68      7.67      -2.82    11.10    -4.68     -11.73
     Sticky Price     -1.14      0.12    0.33     -0.25    -5.15      0.42     Sticky Price    20.08 13.04          6.75     21.11    30.17      21.36

     Permanent Investment Shock                                                Fiscal Shock
     Flexible Price   2.38      2.75     -0.17    2.98     -0.02     -1.18     Flexible Price   5.81      -0.90     -1.34    -1.10    -1.79     1.23
     Sticky Price     1.23      1.57     -0.00    1.60     0.06      -0.39     Sticky Price     6.47      -0.45     -1.34    -0.51    -1.91     0.49
     In the absence of belief shock                                            In the absence of belief shock
     Flexible Price 70.47 43.08          52.57    57.90    88.89     52.91     Flexible Price   2.92      -4.89     -1.82    -6.85    -2.93     9.05
     Sticky Price     2.58      2.76     -0.39     4.10    -2.16     -1.82     Sticky Price     8.60      -0.22     -1.74    -0.36    -7.46     0.47

     Transitory Investment Shock                                               Monetary Policy Shock
     Flexible Price 16.64 26.60          -7.33    30.25    -7.99     -19.91    Flexible Price     –         –         –        –        –         –
     Sticky Price     18.91 31.96        -7.28    34.04    -9.72     -21.39    Sticky Price     2.86      1.68      3.80     1.93     5.52      4.04
     In the absence of belief shock                                            In the absence of belief shock
     Flexible Price   3.92      8.25     -3.04    11.86     -5.02    -12.64    Flexible Price     –         –         –        –        –         –
     Sticky Price     41.57 43.07        -3.41    66.09    -18.16    -19.19    Sticky Price     2.67      0.51      2.54     0.83     11.15     2.22
O.4     Estimating ϱ and σξ
In the main text, we noted that the data considered in Section 5 do not allow us to identify separately
the standard deviation of the conﬁdence shock and the degree of strategic complementary. Never-
theless, this may be achieved if the data set were augmented to include data on expectations. In this
Appendix, we elaborate on these points and describe the “augmented estimation” that motivates the
value of ϱ used in Section 5.
    To illustrate the main identiﬁcation issue, consider again the example studied in Subsections 3.2
and 3.3. From conditions (18) and (19), we see that the volatility of the non-fundamental (conﬁdence-
driven) innovations in output is given by
                                                                      ω2
                              V ar ( Yt − Yt∗ | history) = ψ 2 =           σ2,                        (39)
                                                                   (1 − ω)4 ξ
where Yt∗ is the fundamental (TFP-driven) component, σξ is the standard deviation of the conﬁdence
shock, and ω is the degree of strategic complementarity. Under the assumption, made in the baseline
model, that the CES aggregator across the islands is Cobb-Douglas, ϱ is unity. Relaxing this assumption
gives ω as a monotone function of ϱ. From condition (39) it is then evident that exactly the same non-
fundamental volatility in output can be accounted for by a continuum of values for the pair (ϱ, σξ ).
This is the crux of the identiﬁcation issue faced in Section 5: the models of that section are more
complicated, something that hinders analytical results, but the issue remains the same.
    To illustrate how data on expectations could possibly aid identiﬁcation, aggregate condition (12)
to obtain the following equation:

                                      Nt − Nt∗ = ω · Ēt [Nt − Nt∗ ],

where Nt∗ denote the fundamental component of employment. This condition reveals how expecta-
tions of employment (or some other variable) together with a measure of its “fundamental” component
can be used to identify the degree of strategic complementarity, and therefore ϱ.
    The procedure, thought, is fraught with difﬁculties. Unlike the example discussed above, the
models of Section 5 have expectations mattering through multiple horizons and multiple channels. It
is not clear how to combine these expectations into a single measure, or how to map the theoretical
objects to the available empirical measures. For instance, the University of Michigan Index of Con-
sumer Sentiment, which is known to forecast future employment and output, is constructed on the
basis of answers to qualitative questions that do not have an immediate counterpart in the theory.
    These challenges, in combination with the desire to stay as close as possible to standard practice,
account for our choice to estimate the models of Section 5 on the macroeconomic data alone. Note,
though, that this choice does not matter for the estimated contribution of the conﬁdence shock to the
business cycle. Fixing the value of ϱ or allowing it to be estimated freely makes little difference for the
shock’s estimated contribution to the variances and covariances of the macroeconomic quantities.
    Does the lack of identiﬁcation of σξ and ϱ pose a problem for our assertion that conﬁdence shocks
are a major driver of the business cycle? We think it does not. Not being able to rule out values of

                                                    14
σξ that seem implausibly high relative to the innovations in aggregate TFP and other fundamentals
only implies that a narrow interpretation of the conﬁdence shock as capturing mis-coordination and
higher-order uncertainty may be tenuous. But it allows our shock to proxy for alternative kinds of
waves of optimism and pessimism, for instance, irrational beliefs.
    Notwithstanding our preference for a broad interpretation of the conﬁdent shock, we now describe
an exercise that supports the more narrow interpretation and justiﬁes the value of ϱ used in Section
5. Consider either one of the models of Section 5 and construct an “augmented” model by adding
the following equation, for some k ≥ 0 :

                                             mcsit = λĒt [Nt+k ] + ηt                                            (40)

where Nt+k is aggregate employment k periods ahead, λ is a scalar, and ηt is a random variable, that
is orthogonal to the conﬁdence shock and other structural shocks, and that follows an AR(1) process
ηt = ρη ηt−1 + εηt where ρη ∈ [0, 1) and εηt ⇝ N (0, ση2 ). We take mcsit as the theoretical counterpart of
the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index; ηt as measurement error, or as a crude proxy
for mis-speciﬁcation in the “true” relation between the theory and the aforementioned index;34 and
λ as a scaling parameter.
    Now let θ be the vector that collects all the parameters of the original model, inclusive of σξ and
ϱ. The parameters of the augmented model are given by the union of θ and (λ, ση , ρη ). Trying to
estimate all the parameters jointly creates a new problem that prevents the MCMC from converging
properly. This seems to be due to the fact that the same covariation between the sentiment index and
the macroeconomic variables can be captured with different combinations of the scaling parameter
λ, the volatility of the measurement error, and the degree of strategic complementarity. To cut the
Gordian knot, we chose to impose an ad-hoc identiﬁcation restriction that requires the augmented
model to produce a particular value for the share of the variance in mcsit that is accounted for by the
measurement error ηt . This is equivalent to imposing one’s prior on the noise-to-signal ratio in the
sentiment index.
    More speciﬁcally, for any k ≥ 0, there exists a function vk such that
                                             (           )
                                         Var Ēt [Nt+k ] = vk (θ).

This function is generated by the same system of equations as the one that pins down the equilibrium
outcomes and is not affected by the addition of equation (40). It follows that the relative contribution
of the measurement error in the theoretical counterpart of the sentiment index is given by
                                Var(ηt )                           ση2
                                           = M(λ, θ′ ) ≡
                               Var(mcsit )               (1 − ρη )λ2 vk (θ) + ση2
where θ′ ≡ (θ, ση , ρη ). For any θ′ and any target me ∈ (0, 1) for the contribution of the measurement
error, solving the equation M(λ, θ′ ) = me gives the value of λ that is consistent with that target.
  34
    In the data, the correlation of the Consumer Sentiment Index with hours worked attains a maximal value of about 0.7
when the former leads the latter by 3 quarters. To some extent, this corroborates the speciﬁcation assumed above and
suggests k = 3 as a possible benchmark.


                                                         15
Fixing a value for me is therefore equivalent to adding an identiﬁcation restriction on the parameters
of the augmented model; in that case the MCMC converges properly and θ′ is well identiﬁed for any
given me. Our strategy is therefore to select various values for me and to estimate θ′ on the data used
in Section 5 together with the times series of the aforementioned index.

                                    Table 11: Estimating both σξ and ϱ
                                      Estimated                 Variance Contribution
                                     Parameters                 of Conﬁdence Shock
               k     me         ϱ       σξ    σξ2 /σa2      Y        C       I          N
               Flexible-Price Model
               0    0.25      0.70     0.64    0.99        54.26   54.45   50.29   84.56
                    0.50      0.72     0.57    0.78        54.41   52.35   52.01   85.19
               4    0.25      0.70     0.43    0.40        45.80   24.40   47.79   84.01
                    0.50      0.70     0.45    0.44        46.26   29.53   49.25   84.78
               20 0.25        0.79     0.44    0.41        58.09   46.31   61.04   85.33
                    0.50      0.77     0.45    0.47        55.60   44.49   58.58   84.75
               Sticky-Price Model
               0    0.25     0.60      0.58    0.27        12.37   13.52   10.04   21.69
                    0.50     0.72      0.36    0.32        53.99   50.74   51.06   71.50
               4    0.25     0.69      0.36    0.30        45.15   41.93   39.87   64.26
                    0.50     0.72      0.36    0.30        46.12   43.28   43.05   67.51
               20 0.25       0.65      0.38    0.33        50.80   39.60   46.87   70.36
                    0.50     0.69      0.38    0.33        49.45   41.89   46.34   69.84

    The results from the “augmented” estimation are reported in Table 11. Let us focus on the ﬂexible-
price model and consider two values for me, the share of the measurement error, and three values
for k , the horizon of the expectations that show up in condition (40). For each k and me (ﬁrst two
columns), the table reports the estimated values for ϱ and σξ (next two columns), the ratio of the esti-
mated σξ to the estimated σa (ﬁfth column), and the estimated contributions of the conﬁdence shock
to the business-cycle volatilities of output, consumption, investment and hours (last four columns).
The ﬁndings suggest a value of ϱ in the neighborhood of 0.75, which in turn motivates the value used
in Section 5. Furthermore, the estimated σξ is smaller than the estimated σa , allowing for a narrow
interpretation of the conﬁdence shock. Finally, the estimated contribution of the conﬁdence shock to
the business cycle is of the same magnitude as the one estimated in Section 5. There are, however,
two notable differences: the conﬁdence shock now explains a larger share of the volatility in hours
and a smaller in consumption.
    We ﬁnd the results of this exercise useful even if they do not constitute proof that ϱ and σξ lie in
those ranges.

                                                      16
O.5     Log-Linear Solution
In this appendix we explain how to augment a large class of DSGE models with our proposed type
of higher-order belief dynamics and how to obtain the solution of the augmented model as a simple
transformation of the solution of the original model.

      A Prelude. Before considering the general case it is instructive to review the linearized version of
our baseline model.
      The log-linearized equilibrium conditions of the model are given by (7)-(11) in Section 3 and have
a familiar interpretation. The only novelty is the presence of two distinct expectation operators Eit and
E′it , which denote local expectations in stage 1 and stage 2 of period t respectively. The difference
between these two expectation operators derives from the fact that islands form beliefs about one
another’s signals and thereby about Yt in stage 1 on the basis of their mis-speciﬁed priors, but observe
the true state of nature and the true realized Yt in stage 2. Under the supply ﬁrst timing protocol,
the ﬁrst expectation shows up in the optimality condition for labor, while the second shows up in the
optimality condition for consumption/saving.
      The following points are worth emphasizing. The aggregate-level variables are, of course, ob-
tained from averaging the individual-level variables across all islands. In equilibrium, the realized
values of the aggregate variables coincide with the realized values of the corresponding individual
variables; e.g., yit = Yt for all i, all t, and all realizations of uncertainty. This is because all islands
receive the same signals and the same fundamentals. However, this does not mean that one can just
replace the island-speciﬁc variables in the above conditions with the aggregate ones, or vice versa.
Even though the “objective truth” is that all islands receive the same signals, in stage 1 of each period
each island believes that the signals of other islands can differ from its own signal. Accordingly, each
island reasons that yit can differ form Yt , even when all other islands follow the same strategy as itself
and receive the same TFP shock.
      Keeping track of this delicate difference between the realizations and the beliefs of different vari-
ables is key to obtaining the solution to the model. Our method deals with this delicate matter by
(i) using appropriate notation to distinguish the signal received by each agent/island from either the
average signal in the population or the true underlying shock to fundamentals; and (ii) choosing ap-
propriate state spaces for both the individual policy rules and the aggregate ones.
      In what follows, we ﬁrst set up the general class of log-linear DSGE models that our solution
method handles. We next introduce a class of linear policy rules, which describe the behavior of each
agent as a function of his information set. Assuming that all other islands follow such a policy rules,
we can use the equilibrium conditions of the model to obtain the policy rules that are optimal for the
individual island; that is, we can characterize the best responses of the model. Since the policy rules
are linear, they are parameterized by a collection of coefﬁcients (matrices), and the aforementioned
best responses reduce to a system of equations in these coefﬁcients. The solution to this system gives
the equilibrium of the model.



                                                    17
    A “generic” DSGE model. We henceforth consider an economy whose equilibrium is represented
by the following linear dynamic system:

           Myy yit = Myx xbit + MyX Xtb + MyY Eit Yt + Myf Eit xfit + MyF Eit Xtf + Mys zit
       Mxx0 xbit+1 = Mxx1 xbit + MxX1 Xtb + Mxy1 yit + MxY 1 Yt + Mxf 1 xfit + MxF 1 Xtf + Mxs1 st
    Mf f 0 E′it xfit+1 = Mf F 0 E′it Xt+1
                                      f
                                          + Mf f 1 xfit + Mf F 1 Xtf + Mf x0 xbit+1 + Mf x1 xbit + Mf X1 Xtb
                     + Mf y0 E′it yit+1 + Mf Y 0 E′it Yt+1 + Mf y1 yit + Mf Y 1 Yt + Mf s0 E′it st+1 + Mf s1 st
                 st = Rst−1 + εt
                 ξt = Qξt−1 + νt

    This system is a generalization of the one we obtained in our baseline RBC model. Here, xb , xf , y, s,
and ξ are allowed to be vectors; xb collects backward-looking variables (such as capital in our model);
xf collects forward-looking variables that are chosen in stage 2 of each period (such as consumption
and investment in our model); y collects the variables that are instead chosen in stage 1 (such as
employment in our model); s collects the shocks to payoff (such as technology); and ﬁnally ξ is meant
to capture the shocks to higher-order beliefs. X b , X f and Y correspond to the aggregate versions of,
respectively, xb , xf and y .
     Beliefs. We assume that, as of stage 2, the realizations of st , of all the signals, and of all the
stage-1 choices become commonly known, which implies that yit , xfit , xbit+1 and Yt , Xtf , Xt+1
                                                                                                b    are
also commonly known in equilibrium). Furthermore, the actual realizations of the signals satisfy
zit = st for all t and all i. However, the agents have misspeciﬁed belief in stage 1. In particular, for
all i, all j ̸= i, all t, and all states of nature, agent i’s belief during stage 1 satisfy

                                          Eit [st ] = zit ,
                                       Eit [Ejt st ] = Eit [zjt ] = zit + ∆ξt ,

where zit is the signal received by agent i, ξt is the higher-order belief shocks, and ∆ is a loading
matrix. We next let z̄t denote the average signal in the economy and note that the “truth” is that
zit = z̄t = st . Yet, this truth is publicly revealed only in stage 2 of period t. In stage 1, instead, each
island believes, incorrectly, that
                                               Eit z̄t = zit + ∆ξt .

Note next that the stage-1 variables, yit , can depend on the local signal zit , along with the commonly-
observed belief shock ξt and the backward-looking (predetermined) state variables xbit and Xtb , but
cannot depend on either the aggregate signal z̄t or the underlying fundamental st , because these
variables are not known in stage 1. By contrast, the stage-2 decisions depend on the entire triplet
(zit , z̄t , st ). As already mentioned, the truth is that these three variables coincide. Nevertheless,
the islands believe in stage 1 that the average signal can differ from either their own signal or the
actual fundamental. Accordingly, it is important to write stage-2 strategies as functions of the three
conceptually distinct objects in (zit , z̄t , st ) in order to do specify the appropriate equilibrium beliefs

                                                         18
in stage-1. (Note that this is equivalent to expressing the stage-2 strategies as functions of the realized
values of the stage-1 variables y and Y , which is the approach we took in the characterization of the
recursive equilibrium in Section 3.) In what follows, we show how this belief structure facilitates a
tractable solution of the aforementioned general DSGE model.
    Preview of key result. To preview the key result, let us ﬁrst consider the underlying “belief-free”
model, that is, of the complete-information, representative-agent, counterpart of the model we are
studying. The equilibrium system is given by the following:

                                      Yt = MX Xtb + MEY Yt + MF Xtf + Ms st
                                   b
                                  Xt+1 = NX Xtb + NY Yt + NF Xtf + Ns st
                                   f
                 (Pf 0 − PF 0 )Et Xt+1 = PF 1 Xtf + PY 0 Et Yt+1 + PX Xtb + PY 1 Yt + Ps st
                                      st = Rst−1 + εt
                                      ξt = Qξt−1 + νt

(This system can be obtained from the one we introduced before once we impose the restriction that
all period-t variables are commonly known in period t, which means that E′it [xt ] = Eit [xt ] = xt
for any variable x.) It is well known how to obtain the policy rules of such a representative-agent
model. Our goal in this appendix is to show how the policy rules of the belief-augmented model that
we described above can be obtained as a simple, tractable transformation of the policy rules of the
representative-agent benchmark.
    In particular, we will show that the policy rules for our general DSGE economy are as follows:

                                          Xt = ΘX Xtb + Θs st + Θξ ξt ,

where Xt = (Yt , Xtf , Xt+1
                        b ) collects all the variables, Θ and Θ are the same matrices as those that
                                                         X       s
appear in the solution of the underlying belief-free model, and Θξ is a new matrix, which encapsulates
the effects of higher-order beliefs.
  The model, restated. To ease subsequent algebraic manipulations, we henceforth restate the
model as follows:

    yit = Mx (xbit − Xtb ) + MX Xtb + MEY Eit Yt + Mf Eit (xfit − Xtf ) + MF Eit Xtf + Ms zit                   (41)
    xbit+1 = Nx (xbit − Xtb ) + NX Xtb + Ny (yit − Yt ) + NY Yt + Nf (xfit − Xtf ) + NF Xtf           + Ns st   (42)
    Pf 0 E′it xfit+1 = Pf 1 (xfit − Xtf ) + PF 0 E′it Xt+1
                                                       f
                                                           + PF 1 Xtf + Px (xbit − Xtb ) + PX Xtb +
                     + Py0 (E′it yit+1 − E′it Yt+1 ) + PY 0 E′it Yt+1 + Py1 (yit − Yt ) + PY 1 Yt + Ps st       (43)

where
        −1             −1                      −1
  Mx = Myy Myx , MX = Myy (Myx + MyX ), MEY = Myy MyY ,
        −1             −1                     −1
  Mf = Myy Myf , MF = Myy (Myf + MyF ), Ms = Myy Mys
         −1               −1                        −1               −1
   Nx = Mxx0 Mxx1 , NX = Mxx0 (Mxx1 + MxX1 ), Ny = Mxx0 Mxy1 , NY = Mxx0 (Mxy1 + MxY 1 ),
         −1                −1                          −1
   Nf = Mxx0 Mxf 1 , NF = Mxx0 (Mxf 1 + MxF 1 ), Ns = Mxx0 Mxs1


                                                        19
   Pf 0 = Mf f 0 , Pf 1 = Mf f 1 + Mf x0 Nf , PF 0 = Mf F 0 , PF 1 = Mf F 1 + Mf f 1 + Mf x0 NF
    Px = Mf x1 + Mf x0 Nx , PX = Mf X1 + Mf x1 + Mf x0 NX ,
   Py0 = Mf y0 , PY 0 = Mf Y 0 + Mf y0 , Py1 = Mf y1 + Mf x0 Ny , PY = Mf y1 + Mf Y 1 + Mf x0 NY ,
     Ps = Mf s0 R + Mf s1 + Mf x0 Ns

    Proposed Policy Rules. We propose that the equilibrium policy rules take the following form:

                        yit = Λx (xbit − Xtb ) + ΛX Xtb + Λz zit + Λξ ξt                                  (44)
                        xfit   = Γx (xbit − Xtb ) + ΓX Xtb + Γz zit + Γz̄ z̄t + Γs st + Γξ ξt             (45)

where the Λ’s and Γ’s are coefﬁcients (matrices), whose equilibrium values are to be obtained in the
sequel. Following our earlier discussion, note that the stage-2 policy rules are allowed to depend on
the triplet (zit , z̄t , st ), while the stage-1 policy rules are restricted to depend only on the local signal
zit . It is also useful to note that we would obtain the same solution if we were to represent the stage-2
policy rules as functions of yit and Yt in place of, respectively, zit and z̄t : the latter two variables
enter the equilibrium conditions that determine the stage-2 decisions, namely conditions (42) and
(43), only through the realized values of the stage-1 outcomes yit and Yt .
     Obtaining the solution. We obtain the solution in three steps. In step 1, we start by characterizing
the equilibrium determination of the stage-1 policy rules, taking as given the stage-2 rules. Formally,
we ﬁx an arbitrary rule in (45); we assume that all islands believe that the stage-2 variables are
determined according to this rule; and we then look for the particular rule in (44) that solves the
ﬁxed-point relation between yit and Yt described in (41) under this assumption. This step, which
we can think of as the “static” component of the equilibrium, gives as a mapping from Γ matrices
to the Λ matrices. In step 2, we obtain a converse mapping by characterize the policy rules for the
forward-looking variables that solve conditions (42) and (43) under the assumption that the stage-1
outcomes are determined according to an arbitrary rule in (45). We can think of this step as solving
for the “dynamic” component of the equilibrium. In step 3, we use the ﬁxed-point between these two
mappings to obtain the overall solution to the model.
    Step 1. As noted above, we start by studying the equilibrium determination of the stage-1 policy
rules, taking as given the stage-2 policy rules.
    Thus suppose that all islands follow a policy rule as in (45) and consider the beliefs that a given
island i forms, under this assumption, about the stage-2 variables xfit and Xtf . From (45), we have

                        xfit = Γx (xbit − Xtb ) + ΓX Xtb + Γz zit + Γz̄ z̄t + Γs st + Γξ ξt
                       Xtf = ΓX Xtb + (Γz + Γz̄ )z̄t + Γs st + Γξ ξt

Along with the fact that Eit [st ] = zit and Eit [z̄t ] = zit + ∆ξt , the above gives

                  Eit xfit = Γx (xbit − Xtb ) + ΓX Xtb + (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )zit + (Γξ + Γz̄ ∆)ξt
                  Eit Xtf = ΓX Xtb + (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )zit + (Γξ + (Γz + Γz̄ ) ∆) ξt


                                                          20
which also implies that

                                   xfit − Xtf = Γx (xbit − Xtb ) + Γz (zit − z̄t )
                              Eit (xfit − Xtf ) = Γx (xbit − Xtb ) − Γz ∆ξt

Plugging the above in (41), the equilibrium equation for yit , we get

       yit = Mx (xbit − Xtb ) + MX Xtb + MEY Eit Yt + Mf Eit (xfit − Xtf ) + MF Eit Xtf + Ms zit
                                                         [                          ]
           = Mx (xbit − Xtb ) + MX Xtb + MEY Eit Yt + Mf Γx (xbit − Xtb ) − Γz ∆ξt
                     [                                                     ]
             + MF ΓX Xtb + (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )zit + (Γξ + (Γz + Γz̄ )∆)ξt + Ms zit

Equivalently,

         yit =    (Mx + Mf Γx )(xbit − Xtb ) + (MX + MF ΓX )Xtb + MEY Eit Yt                          (46)
                  + (Ms + MF (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs ))zit + (MF Γξ + MF Γz̄ ∆ + (MF − Mf )Γz ∆) ξt

     Note that the above represents a static ﬁxed-point relation between yit and Yt . This relation
is itself determined by the Γ matrices (i.e., by the presumed policy rule for the stage-2 variables).
Notwithstanding this fact, we now focus on the solution of this static ﬁxed point.
     Thus suppose that this solution takes the form of a policy rule as in (44). If all other island follow
this rule, then at the aggregate we have

                                         Yt = ΛX Xtb + Λz z̄t + Λξ ξt

and therefore the stage-1 forecast of island i about Yt is given by

                                Eit Yt = ΛX Xtb + Λz zit + (Λξ + Λz ∆)ξt

Plugging this into (46), we obtain the following best response for island i:
                                                                (                           )
   yit =(Mx + Mf Γx )(xbit − Xtb ) + (MX + MF ΓX )Xtb + MEY ΛX Xtb + Λz zit + (Λξ + Λz ∆)ξt

         + (Ms + MF (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs ))zit + (MF (Γξ + Γz̄ ∆) + (MF − Mf )Γz ∆) ξt

For this to be consistent with our guess in (44), we must have

                 Λx = Mx + Mf Γx                                                                      (47)
                 ΛX = (I − MEY )−1 (MX + MF ΓX )                                                      (48)
                                   −1
                 Λz = (I − MEY )        [Ms + MF (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )]                                    (49)
                                   −1
                 Λξ = (I − MEY )        {MF (Γξ + Γz̄ ∆) + (MF − Mf )Γz ∆ + MEY Λz ∆}                 (50)

This completes the ﬁrst step of our solution strategy: we have characterized the “static” component
of the equilibrium and have thus obtained the Λ coefﬁcients as functions of primitives and of the Γ
coefﬁcients.

                                                      21
    Step 2. We now proceed with the second step, which is to characterize the equilibrium behavior
in stage 2, taking as given the behavior in stage 1.
    Recall that, once agents enter stage 2, they observe the true current values of the triplet (zit , z̄t , st )
along with the realized values of the past stage-1 outcomes, yit and Yt . Furthermore, in equilibrium
this implies common certainly of current choices, namely of the variables xfit and Xtf , and thereby
also of the variables xbit+1 and Xt+1
                                    b . Nevertheless, agents face uncertainty about the next-period

realizations of the aforementioned triplet and of the corresponding endogenous variables. In what
follows, we thus take special care in characterizing the beliefs that agents form about the relevant
future outcomes.
    Consider ﬁrst an agent’s beliefs about the aggregate next-period stage-1 variables:
                                              b
                                   Yt+1 = ΛX Xt+1 + Λz z̄t+1 + Λξ ξt+1
                             Eit+1 Yt+1 = ΛX Xt+1
                                              b
                                                  + Λz zit+1 + (Λξ + Λz ∆)ξt+1
                                E′it Yt+1 = ΛX Xt+1
                                                b
                                                    + Λz Rst + (Λξ + Λz ∆)Qξt

Consider next his beliefs about his own next-period stage-1 variables:

                            yit+1 = Λx (xbit+1 − Xt+1
                                                  b           b
                                                      ) + ΛX Xt+1 + Λz zit+1 + Λξ ξt+1
                        E′it yit+1 = Λx (xbit+1 − Xt+1
                                                   b           b
                                                       ) + ΛX Xt+1 + Λz Rst + Λξ Qξt

It follows that
                              E′it (yit+1 − Yt+1 ) = Λx (xbit+1 − Xt+1
                                                                   b
                                                                       ) − Λz ∆Qξt
Consider now his beliefs about his own next-period forward variables:

                  xfit+1 = Γx (xbit+1 − Xt+1
                                         b           b
                                             ) + ΓX Xt+1 + Γz zit+1 + Γz̄ z̄t+1 + Γs st+1 + Γξ ξt+1
         Eit+1 xfit+1 = Γx (xbit+1 − Xt+1
                                      b           b
                                          ) + ΓX Xt+1 + (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )zit+1 + (Γξ + Γz̄ ∆)ξt+1
            E′it xfit+1 = Γx (xbit+1 − Xt+1
                                        b           b
                                            ) + ΓX Xt+1 + (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )Rst + (Γξ + Γz̄ ∆)Qξt

For the aggregate next-period forward variables we have
                          f
                   Eit+1 Xt+1       b
                              = ΓX Xt+1 + (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )zit+1 + (Γξ + (Γz + Γz̄ )∆)ξt+1
                     E′it Xt+1
                           f         b
                               = ΓX Xt+1 + (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )Rst + (Γξ + (Γz + Γz̄ )∆)Qξt

and therefore

                              E′it (xfit+1 − Xt+1
                                              f
                                                  ) = Γx (xbit+1 − Xt+1
                                                                    b
                                                                        ) − Γz ∆Qξt

    Next, note that our guesses for the policy rules imply the following properties for the current-period
variables:

                                 yit − Yt = Λx (xbit − Xtb ) + Λz (zit − z̄t )
                               xfit − Xtf = Γx (xbit − Xtb ) + Γz (zit − z̄t )
                                       Yt = ΛX Xtb + Λz z̄t + Λξ ξt
                                     Xtf = ΓX Xtb + (Γz + Γz̄ )z̄t + Γs st + Γξ ξt


                                                         22
Plugging these results in the law of motion of backward variables, we get

 xbit+1 = Nx (xbit − Xtb ) + NX Xtb + Ny (yit − Yt ) + NY Yt + Nf (xfit − Xtf ) + NF Xtf + Ns st
                                         {                                 }      {                      }
        = Nx (xbit − Xtb ) + NX Xtb + Ny Λx (xbit − Xtb ) + Λz (zit − z̄t ) + NY ΛX Xtb + Λz z̄t + Λξ ξt
                {                               }       {                                    }
          +Nf Γx (xbit − Xtb ) + Γz (zit − z̄t ) + NF ΓX Xtb + (Γz + Γz̄ )z̄t + Γs st + Γξ ξt + Ns st

Equivalently,
                       xbit+1 = Ωx (xbit − Xtb ) + ΩX Xtb + Ωz zit + Ωz̄ z̄ + Ωs st + Ωξ ξt
and hence
                                      b
                                     Xt+1 = ΩX Xtb + (Ωz + Ωz̄ )z̄t + Ωs st + Ωξ ξt
                            xbit+1 − Xt+1
                                      b
                                          = Ωx (xbit − Xtb ) + Ωz (zit − z̄t )

where
          Ωx = N x + N y Λ x + N f Γx               Ωz = Ny Λz + Nf Γz
         ΩX       = NX + NY ΛX + NF ΓX              Ωz̄ = (NY − Ny )Λz + (NF − Nf )Γz + NF Γz̄
          Ωs = N s + N F Γs                         Ωξ = NY Λξ + NF Γξ

It follows that

     E′it xfit+1 = Γx (xbit+1 − Xt+1
                                 b            b
                                     ) + ΓX Xt+1  + (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )Rst + (Γξ + Γz̄ ∆)Qξt
                      {                                 }     {                                       }
                 = Γx Ωx (xbit − Xtb ) + Ωz (zit − z̄t ) + ΓX ΩX Xtb + (Ωz + Ωz̄ )z̄t + Ωs st + Ωξ ξt

                    + (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )Rst + (Γξ + Γz̄ ∆)Qξt

or equivalently

                     E′it xfit+1 = Φx (xbit − Xtb ) + ΦX Xtb + Φz zit + Φz̄ z̄t + Φs st + Φξ ξt                 (51)

where
      Φx = Γ x Ωx            Φz = Γx Ωz                                Φs = ΓX Ωs + (Γz + Γz̄ + Γs )R
     ΦX     = Γ X ΩX         Φz̄ = (ΓX − Γx )Ωz + ΓX Ωz̄               Φξ = ΓX Ωξ + (Γξ + Γz̄ ∆)Q

Similarly, the expectation of the corresponding aggregate variable is given by

                        E′it Xt+1
                              f
                                  = ΦX Xtb + Φz zit + Φz z t + Φs st + (Φξ + Γz ∆Q)ξt                           (52)

    With the above steps, we have calculated all the objects that enter the Euler condition (43). We
can thus proceed to characterize the ﬁxed-point relation that pins down the solution for the stage-2
policy rule.
    To ease the exposition, let us repeat the Euler condition (43) below:

        Pf 0 E′it xfit+1 = Pf 1 (xfit − Xtf ) + PF 0 E′it Xt+1
                                                           f
                                                               + PF 1 Xtf + Px (xbit − Xtb ) + PX Xtb +
                         + Py0 (E′it yit+1 − E′it Yt+1 ) + PY 0 E′it Yt+1 + Py1 (yit − Yt ) + PY 1 Yt + Ps st


                                                         23
Use now (51) to write the left-hand-side of the Euler condition as
                       {                                                          }
        ′ f
  Pf 0 Eit xit+1 = Pf 0 Φx (xit − Xt ) + ΦX Xt + Φz zit + Φz̄ z̄t + Φs st + Φξ ξt
                             b     b          b



Next, use our preceding results to replace all the expectations that show up in the right-hand-side of
the Euler condition, as well as the stage-1 outcomes. This gives
                         {                                  }
  Pf 0 E′it xfit+1 = Pf 1 Γx (xbit − Xtb ) + Γz (zit − z̄t ) +
                           {                                                  }
                     + PF 0 ΦX Xtb + (Φz + Φz̄ )z̄t + Φs st + (Φξ + Γz ∆Q)ξt
                           {                                        }       {          }
                     + PF 1 ΓX Xtb + (Γz + Γz̄ )z̄t + Γs st + Γξ ξt    + Px xbit − Xtb
                                      { (                                )            }
                     + PX Xtb + Py0 Λx Ωx (xbit − Xtb ) + Ωz (zit − z̄t ) − Λz ∆Qξt
                           {       (                                     )                           }
                     + PY 0 ΛX ΩX Xtb + (Ωz + Ωz̄ )z̄t + Ωs st + Ωξ ξt + Λz Rst + (Λξ + Λz ∆)Qξt
                           {                                  }      {                      }
                     + Py1 Λx (xbit − Xtb ) + Λz (zit − z̄t ) + PY 1 ΛX Xtb + Λz z̄t + Λξ ξt + Ps st

For our guess to be correct, the above two expressions must coincide in all states of nature, and the
following must therefore be true:

            Pf 0 Φx = Px + Pf 1 Γx + Py0 Λx Ωx + Py1 Λx                                               (53)
 (Pf 0 − PF 0 ) ΦX = PF 1 ΓX + PX + PY 0 ΛX ΩX + PY 1 ΛX                                              (54)
            Pf 0 Φz = Pf 1 Γz + Py0 Λx Ωz + Py1 Λz                                                    (55)
  (Pf 0 − PF 0 ) Φz̄ = PF 0 Φz + (PF 1 − Pf 1 )Γz + PF 1 Γz̄ + PY 0 ΛX (Ωz + Ωz̄ )
                           − Py0 Λx Ωz + (PY 1 − Py1 )Λz                                              (56)
   (Pf 0 − PF 0 )Φs = PF 1 Γs + PY 0 (ΛX Ωs + Λz R) + Ps                                              (57)
  (Pf 0 − PF 0 ) Φξ = PF 0 Γz ∆Q + PF 1 Γξ + PY 0 {ΛX Ωξ + Λξ Q} + (PY 0 − Py0 )Λz ∆Q + PY 1 Λξ (58)

Recall that the Φ and Ω matrices are themselves transformations of the Γ and Λ matrices. Therefore,
the above system is effectively a system of equations in Γ and Λ matrices. This completes Step 2.
    Step 3. Steps 1 and 2 resulted in two systems of equations in the Λ and Γ matrices, namely
system (47)-(50) and system (53)-(58). We now look at the joint solution of these two systems, which
completes our guess-and-verify strategy and gives the sought-after equilibrium policy rules.
    First, let as write the solution of the underlying representative-agent model as

                        Yt = Λ∗X Xtb + Λ∗s st       and      Xtf = Γ∗X Xtb + Γ∗s st

It is straightforward to check that the solution to the beliefs-augmentend model satisﬁes the following:

              ΛX = Λ∗X ,        Λz = Λ∗s ,      ΓX = Γ∗X ,     and       Γz + Γz̄ + Γs = Γ∗s .

That is, the solution for the matrices ΛX , Λz , and ΓX , and for the sum Γ̄s ≡ Γz + Γz̄ + Γs , can readily
be obtained from the solution of the underlying representative-agent model.

                                                     24
   With the sum Γ̄s ≡ Γz + Γz̄ + Γs determined as above, we can next obtain each of its three
components as follows. First, Γs can be obtained from (57):

                         (Pf 0 − PF 0 )Φs = PF 1 Γs + PY 0 (ΛX Ωs + Λz R) + Ps

Plugging the deﬁnition of Φs and Ωs in the above, we have

− {((PF 0 − Pf 0 )ΓX + PY 0 ΛX ) NF + PF 1 } Γs = Ps + PY 0 (Λz R + ΛX Ns ) + (PF 0 − Pf 0 )(Γ̄s R + ΓX Ns )
|                    {z                    }      |                          {z                           }
                    AS                                                        BS

and therefore Γs =   A−1
                      S BS . Next, Γz can be obtained from (55). Plugging the deﬁnition of Φz and
Ωz in this condition, we have

                  ((Pf 0 Γx − Py0 Λx )Nf − Pf 1 ) Γz = Py1 Λz − (Pf 0 Γx − Py0 Λx )Ny Λz
                  |             {z             }       |               {z              }
                                AZ                                   BZ

and therefore Γz =  A−1
                     Z BZ .  Finally, we obtain Γz̄ simply from the fact that Γz̄ = Γ̄s − Γz − Γs .
    Consider now the matrices Λx and Γx . These are readily obtained from (47) and (53) once we
replace the already-obtained results. It is also straightforward to check that these matrices correspond
to the solution of the version of the model that shuts down all kinds of uncertainty but allows for
heterogeneity in the backward-looking state variables (“wealth”).
    To complete our solution, what remains is to determine the matrices Γξ and Λξ . These matrices
solve conditions (50) and (58), which we repeat below:

                 Λξ = (I − MEY )−1 {MF (Γξ + Γz̄ ∆) + (MF − Mf )Γz ∆ + MEY Λz ∆}
    (Pf 0 − PF 0 ) Φξ = PF 0 Γz ∆Q + PF 1 Γξ + PY 0 {ΛX Ωξ + Λξ Q} + (PY 0 − Py0 )Λz ∆Q + PY 1 Λξ

Let us use the ﬁrst condition to substitute away Λξ from the second, and then the facts that

                               Ωξ = NY Λξ + NF Γξ
                               Φξ = ΓX (NY Λξ + NF Γξ ) + (Γξ + Γz̄ ∆)Q

to substitute away also Ωξ and Φξ . We then obtain a single equation in Γξ , namely

                                         BΓξ + AΓξ Q + C = 0

where

A ≡(PF 0 − Pf 0 ) + PY 0 (I − MEY )−1 MF
B ≡((PF 0 − Pf 0 )ΓX NY + PY 0 ΛX NY + PY 1 )(I − MEY )−1 MF + (PF 0 − Pf 0 )ΓX NF + PF 1 + PY 0 ΛX NF
   (                                                                                                      )
C ≡ PF 0 Γz ∆Q + (PY 0 − Py0 )Λz + (PF 0 − Pf 0 )Γz̄ + PY 0 (I − MEY )−1 [MF Γz̄ + (MF − Mf )Γz + MEY Λz ] ∆Q
     + ((PF 0 − Pf 0 )ΓX NY + PY 0 ΛX NY + PY 1 ) (I − MEY )−1 [MF Γz̄ + (MF − Mf )Γz + MEY Λz ] ∆

Note that A, B, and C are determined by primitives, plus some of the coefﬁcients that we have also
characterized. The above equation therefore gives us the unique solution for the matrix Γξ as a
function of the primitives of the model. Λξ is then readily obtained from (50). This completes the
solution.

                                                   25
