                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         INTERNATIONAL CREDIT FLOWS AND PECUNIARY EXTERNALITIES

                                      Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                         Yuliy Sannikov

                                        Working Paper 20803
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20803


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




We thank Mark Aguiar, Ozge Akinci, Gianluca Benigno, Zhiguo He, Sebastian Di Tella, Oleg Itskhoki,
Anil Kashap, Guido Lorenzoni, Debbie Lucas, Ricardo Reis, Roberto Rigobon, Cedric Tille and participants
at SED, NBER Summer Institute, IMF-Central Bank of Turkey conference, Barcelona Summer Forum,
MFM conference, Yale University, World bank, Michigan State, UCL, Bank of England, London
School of Economics, AEA Meetings in Philadelphia, Federal Reserve Board, NYU, the NBER conference
on Lessons from the Financial Crisis in Boston, Boston College and at the Princeton Macro faculty
lunch. We also thank Xiaoyang Sean Dong, Emil Verner, Christian Wolf, Yu Zhang and especially
Zongbo Huang for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20803.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Markus K. Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
International Credit Flows and Pecuniary Externalities
Markus K. Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov
NBER Working Paper No. 20803
December 2014
JEL No. F32,F43,G15,O41

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper develops a dynamic two-country neoclassical stochastic growth model with incomplete
markets. Short-term credit flows can be excessive and reverse suddenly. The equilibrium outcome
is constrained inefficient due to pecuniary externalities. First, an undercapitalized country borrows
too much since each firm does not internalize that an increase in production capacity undermines their
output price, worsening their terms of trade. From an ex-ante perspective each firm undermines the
natural “terms of trade hedge.” Second, sudden stops and fire sales lead to sharp price drops of illiquid
capital. Capital controls or domestic macro-prudential measures that limit short-term borrowing can
improve welfare.


Markus K. Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
markus@princeton.edu

Yuliy Sannikov
Department of Economics
208 Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
sannikov@gmail.com
     For a long time the “Washington Consensus” held the view that free trade and full
capital account liberalization are conducive to higher economic growth and welfare.
A world in which goods and capital can flow freely was considered as the guiding
“north star” and any incremental liberalization towards this ideal was considered
as a step in the right direction. Recently, the IMF took on a more nuanced view,
see Ostry et al. (2010).1 This more balanced view acknowledges that in a second
best world, liberalizing only some markets might be harmful. Especially, the build-
up of persistent capital flow imbalances in form of short-term debt, referred to as
“hot money,” increases the risk of financial instability. To avoid sudden reversals it
might be desirable to “manage” capital flows. Capital controls should be part of the
macroprudential tool kit.
     We set up a quantifiable model that allows one to analyze capital account lib-
eralization and capital controls. We identify circumstances under which short-term
debt capital flows are excessive and can lead to inefficiencies and instabilities. To
this end we develop a dynamic two-country, two-good stochastic growth model in
continuous time with endogenous capital formation. International financial markets
are imperfect but there are no international trade frictions. The two consumption
goods and the single physical capital good can be traded freely. Like in the classic
Ricardian trade model, each country has some (comparative) advantage in producing
one good and hence should ideally specialize in producing that good. Our model
shows that in a world with less than perfect risk sharing, (which can be justified by
information problems and moral hazard considerations) although opening the capital
account can boost overall economic growth, the resulting debt imbalances can lead to
more volatility and therefore threaten financial stability. The key trade-off is between
better allocation of physical capital and better risk sharing.
     With an open international bond market the inflow of short-term hot money allows
the poorer country to boost its production capacity, buying additional physical capital
financed with debt from abroad. While this improves output levels, increased leverage
makes the country vulnerable to additional shocks. Short-term debt acts as a palliative
after a sequence of negative shocks, but the initial calm can be treacherous. With a
bit of luck positive shocks follow and the strains on the global economy may never be
noticed. However, if another bad shock arrives the country experiences a sudden stop
of funding and conditions deteriorate quickly. Fear of future deterioration leads to
fire sales, depressing the price of physical capital if it is technologically illiquid due to
  1 See also the policy recommendations in the report of the Committee on International Economic
Policy and Reform (2012).


                                               1
adjustment costs or irreversibility of investment. The liquidity mismatch between low
market and technological liquidity on the asset side and low funding liquidity due
to short-term funding on the liability side is the driving force for this amplification.
In addition, the country becomes vulnerable to “sunspot runs.” A jump to a disaster
equilibrium leads to a discrete drop in the price of capital, which abruptly erodes
a country’s wealth. If a total disaster can be avoided, countries can grow out of it
relatively quickly, a phenomenon referred to by the literature as the Phoenix miracle.
In short, better capital allocation funded with hot money comes at the cost of lower
stability. Our framework allows a tight characterization of these endogenous volatility
dynamics.
    To answer the question whether free markets achieve the optimal balance in this
trade off, i.e., whether private borrowing is excessive in a second best world, one has
to conduct a welfare analysis. A closed capital account or domestic leverage restric-
tions limits a poor country’s ability to build up its capital stock (e.g., after an adverse
shock) and to produce goods for which it has a comparative advantage. This pro-
ductive inefficiency limits economic growth, but comes with a favorable side effect:
the price of its output good rises, i.e., the terms of trade improve. Symmetrically,
after a positive shock the terms of trade worsen. The magnitude of this “terms of
trade hedge” increases as the elasticity of substitution between the two outputs de-
creases. With an open capital account, debt financing enables each individual firm in
the country to borrow and purchase more physical capital to produce more. How-
ever, by doing so, firms in the country jointly erode the terms of trade of their output
good. Firms do not internalize this pecuniary externality, which leads to an overall
welfare loss in the economy and globally. The competitive outcome is not constrained
efficient. Moreover, increased leverage of each firm exposes all firms in this country
to further risk. An additional adverse shock to indebted firms increases their concern
about a sudden funding stop and they cut back their production scale by fire-selling
their physical capital. While each firm in the country fully takes into account that
it might have to fire-sell physical capital should further adverse shocks occur, they
ignore that their initial debt financing as a group exacerbates this drop in value of
physical capital. Sudden stops that lead to capital price drops due to self-fulfilling
runs triggered by sunspots can also be seen through the lens of pecuniary externali-
ties. In a complete markets setting capital allocation and risk sharing can be treated as
two independent problems and these pecuniary externalities have no welfare effects,
but in an incomplete markets setting they result in a constrained inefficient outcome.
That is, a social planner that is limited to distort firms’ actions within the same con-

                                            2
strained environment can increase overall welfare.
    Like other macroprudential policies, capital controls are only welfare enhancing in
certain circumstances. The terms of trade hedge is most powerful if both (i) consumers
cannot easily substitute the output good with other goods, and (ii) other country is
not skilled in producing this good. Hence, our results are most applicable for very
specific output goods (oil or other natural resources come to mind.) Price movements
mitigate the risk associated with a destruction of an oil facility or with the discovery
of a new oil field. Bananas for Ecuador or computer hard drives for Thailand are a
more specific example. In October 2011 a severe flood in Thailand impaired a quarter
of the world’s hard-drive production. The subsequent price surge helped the industry
rebuild itself, see Fuller (2011).
    Sudden stops due to self-fulfilling runs occur only if physical capital is sufficiently
technologically illiquid and hence subject to large sudden price drops. These runs
lead to sudden large wealth redistributions and destructions. Imposing capital con-
trols that totally shut down international borrowing and lending might be “throwing
the baby out with the bathwater” as one also forgoes significant capital allocation
efficiency gains. Still, our framework shows that, under some circumstances, even a
complete shutdown of short-term debt flows can be welfare-improving. Our frame-
work thus even provides support for one of the most blunt macroprudential tools
imaginable, and so by extension is also an endorsement of more nuanced macropru-
dential policy measures, for example maximum leverage ratios for domestic borrow-
ers. A quantifiable model, like ours, allows policy makers to weigh various forces and
fine-tune the policy measures.
    One such important factor is the size of a country’s (comparative) advantage in
producing a specific good. Noticing that countries can affect this advantage, e.g.,
through R&D spending, points to another inefficiency. Improving productivity for
advantaged products fosters further specialization. In contrast, when a country im-
proves productivity for disadvantaged goods they improve their terms of trade at
the expense of the other country, Samuelson (2004). As both countries try to imitate
each other’s technology, the resources diverted from other productive activities are a
pure welfare loss. Our analysis adds to this discussion by pointing out that such gov-
ernment activity destroys the terms of trade hedge. Overall, a global social planner
would foster R&D spending that leads to more specialization rather than to catching
up policies, since the resulting output price movements provide natural insurance.
    Finally, the paper also shows that at times of severe wealth inequality across coun-
tries an unanticipated redistribution, e.g., by diluting creditors’ debt claims or straight

                                            3
debt relief, can be Pareto improving. Each individual creditor would be reluctant to
sign on to this scheme, even though as a group all creditors are better off. To under-
stand why, note that creditors are also consumers in our setting. Consumers benefit if
goods produced in countries that have the comparative advantage of producing them.

Related Literature. Relative to the existing literature our framework makes several
contributions. The model can be seen as a two-country two-good version of Brunner-
meier and Sannikov (2014, 2011), which build in turn on the seminal contributions
of Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). Inefficien-
cies can arise due to pecuniary externalities, which can be due to exogenous credit
constraints or an incomplete markets.
    Pecuniary fire sale externalities are the subject of extensive study in finance and
international economics. In most models inefficiencies arise because the price move
tightens an exogenously imposed collateral constraint, see e.g. Caballero and Krishna-
murthy (2004) or Korinek (2011). In Aoki, Benigno and Kiyotaki (2009) collateral debt
limits are lower for international lending than for domestic lending arrangements.2
In Bianchi (2011), Bianchi and Mendoza (2012) and Mendoza (2010), this constraint
binds occasionally, potentially leading to sudden stops. Jeanne and Korinek (2011)
proposes a Pigouvian tax to correct for the externality. Benigno et al. (2014) study the
interaction between ex-ante and ex-post policy interventions. In contrast, we do not
impose any exogenous debt constraint. In our setting a sudden decline in debt arises
endogenously due to the incomplete markets setting, as firms are limited in issuing
equity claims.
    Our paper falls in a second strand of literature in which pecuniary externalities
lead to constrained inefficient outcomes in a multi-good setting due to incomplete
markets—that is, no exogenous credit constraint is imposed. It follows the general
equilibrium literature (Stiglitz (1982), Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1986)). New-
bery and Stiglitz (1984)’s incomplete markets setting shares the feature that free trade
destroys the automatic hedge that price movements provide. However, their paper is
about free trade of goods rather than open capital account. Our analysis also high-
lights that partially completing the market can lead to inferior outcomes, a result
that was shown in the GE literature by Hart (1975). More recently, He and Kondor
(2013) consider two inputs, cash and capital and show that pecuniary externalities can
lead to overinvestment booms and too little investment in recessions. Phelan (2013)’s
   2 In
      Maggiori (2013) countries differ in their financial developments rather than in producing differ-
ent goods.


                                                  4
continuous time model considers a two-good economy in which banks owned by
households play a central role.
     Our framework is general enough that it can have quantitative implications after
some calibration. In this sense our model is closer to the canonical international RBC
model with capital formation as in Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994). Similar to us,
Pavlova and Rigobon (2007) develop a two-country, two-good continuous-time model
with international financial and trade linkages. Unlike Backus, Kehoe and Kydland
(1994) or Pavlova and Rigobon (2007), however, we consider an incomplete market
setting. Hence, we cannot use the standard macroeconomic approach of solving the
planner’s problem and then decentralizing the (global) economy. Heathcote and Perri
(2014) follow our incomplete markets setting, but have a different shock structure and
goods home bias. Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2008) resolve the Backus-Smith puzzle,
i.e., the negative correlation between the real exchnage rate and relative consumption,
by employing an incomplete market structure with appropriate productivity shocks.
Coeurdacier, Rey and Winant (2013) also analyze the trade-off between efficient capi-
tal allocation and improved risk sharing. Instead of analyzing pecuniary externalities,
they focus on precautionary savings conducted primarily by emerging markets. Like
Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995)’s New Keynesian framework, we focus on short-term in-
ternational debt. Benigno (2009) evaluates the welfare costs of incomplete markets
and the gains of deviating from a policy of price stability in the New Keynesian set-
ting. These papers are restricted by the log-linearization technique around the steady
state; our analysis includes crisis events far away from the steady-state.
     Costinot, Lorenzoni and Werning (2014) derive the optimal capital flow tax for
a country that tries to manipulate the terms of trade in order to extract monopoly
rents from the other countries, an insight that can be traced back to the debate be-
tween Keynes (1929) and Ohlin (1929). Our analysis is focused on risk and capital
controls that improve the “terms of trade hedge” can benefit both countries. The
terms of trade hedge argument was anticipated in Helpman and Razin (1978) and
later formally introduced in the seminal paper by Cole and Obstfeld (1991). We gain
additional insights by varying the elasticity of substitution across both goods. In
addition, we show that capital irreversibility requires an even greater hedge than pro-
vided by a Cobb-Douglas elasticity of substitution. Like our paper, Heathcote and
Perri (2013) also allows for endogenous capital formation. The focus of their analysis
is to replicate empirical patterns identified in the international business cycles litera-
ture. Since all the debt financing is short-term, our analysis also speaks to hot money
in international capital flow and the fear of losing control of monetary policy by the

                                            5
monetary authority. For a detailed survey on international finance crises including
sudden stops, see Lorenzoni (2014). In Gabaix and Maggiori (2014) the financial mar-
kets are fragmented and the exchange rate is driven by the net worth of the financial
sector.
    Another strand of papers study the benefits of capital controls in the presence of
price and wage rigidities. For example, Farhi and Werning (2012) argue that nominal
rigidities can lead to inefficiencies that justify capital controls. If in addition currencies
are pegged to each other, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2012, 2013) show that free capital
movements can cause a negative externality that contributes to higher unemployment.
Farhi and Werning (2013) highlight the benefits of contingent wealth transfers within
a currency union.
    Empirical evidence about the effect of capital account liberalizations are mixed.
See, e.g. Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) or Magud, Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). There
are several examples where capital account liberalizations spurred growth but also
others where they led to subsequent crises. Prominent examples are the Scandinavian
crisis in the early 1990s and the South East Asia crisis in the late 1990s. The terms
“sudden stop” and “Phoenix miracle” were coined and empirically documented in
Calvo (1998) and Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2006).


I   The Model
In this section we develop a simple baseline model of a global economy that is pop-
ulated by agents who live in two different countries, A and B. Both types of agents
have the same preferences and can own capital. They can also both produce the two
consumption goods a and b. Like in the classical Ricardian trade model agents in
country A have a comparative advantage in producing product a, while agents in
country B are better at producing good b. There are no trade barriers for the two
output goods a and b as well as for the input good, physical capital. We focus on fric-
tions in the international finance markets. In particular we contrast a global economy
in which capital account is closed with a world in which the current account is open
for short-term debt instruments. We also derive the benchmark outcome for the case
when all contingent claims can be traded.




                                              6
A          Model Setup
Technology. Capital can be used to produce goods a or b, which can be combined
to produce the aggregate good. The aggregate good can be consumed, or used for
investment to produce new capital.
   When quantities y a and yb of goods a (“apples”) and b (“bananas”) are combined,
they make a total quantity
                                                                    s
                                    1 a s −1 1 b s −1               s −1
                                 y=   (y ) s + (y ) s                      ,                        (1)
                                    2         2

of the aggregate good. Note that both goods are equally weighted, since we abstract
from any home bias for local goods. For s = ∞ both goods are perfect substitutes, for
s = 0 there is no substitutability á la Leontieff, while for s = 1 the substitutabililty
corresponds to that of a Cobb-Douglas utility function. The index/aggregate good
serves as numeraire and its price is normalized to one.
    Agents in country A are better at producing good a, while agents in country B are
better at producing b. From k t units of capital, an agent in country A can produce
good a at rate āk t and good b at rate of only ak t , where ā > a ≥ 0.3 Symmetrically, an
individual in country B can produce good b at rate āk t and good a at rate only ak t .
    We denote the aggregate amount of world capital at time t ∈ [0, ∞) by Kt . Denote
the fraction of world capital used by agents in country A to produce good a by ψtAa ,
the fraction used by agents in country B to produce good b by ψtBb , etc., so that

                                   ψtAa + ψtAb + ψtBa + ψtBb = 1.

     Then the total world supply of goods a and b is given by

                   Yta = ( āψtAa + aψtBa )Kt    and Ytb = ( āψtBb + aψtAb )Kt ,                   (2)

respectively. The total supply of the aggregate good is, naturally,
                                                                     s
                                     1 a s −1 1 b s −1               s −1
                                Yt =  (Y ) s + (Yt ) s                         ,                    (3)
                                     2 t      2
    3 If
       a = 0, then country A will not use capital to produce good b, because it is a strictly (weakly if
there is no country B) dominant strategy to produce good a.




                                                   7
and the prices of goods a and b in terms of the numeraire/aggregate good are

                                          1/s                                 !1/s
                             1       Yt                              1    Yt
                       Pta =                            and    Ptb =                   .     (4)
                             2       Yta                             2    Ytb

   There is a single type of physical capital. Capital is subject to shocks, which de-
pend on the country I = A, B in which the capital is employed. Also, new capital can
be built through internal investment by using the aggregate good. Overall, capital
employed in country I evolves according to

                                 dk t
                                      = (Φ(ι t ) − δ) dt + σ I dZtI ,                        (5)
                                 kt

where ι t is the investment rate of the aggregate good per unit of capital (i.e., ι t k t is the
total investment rate). Function Φ, which satisfies Φ(0) = 0, Φ0 (0) = 1, Φ0 (·) > 0, and
Φ00 (·) < 0, represents a standard investment technology with adjustment costs. In the
absence of investment, capital depreciates at rate δ. The concavity of Φ(ι) represents
technological illiquidity, i.e., the adjustment cost due to converting output to new capital
and vice versa. The two Brownian motions dZtA , dZtB are exogenous and independent.
They are country specific. Examples of such shocks are the discovery of new resources
or natural catastrophes like earthquakes and tsunamis. If one interprets k t as being
measured in efficiency units instead of physical number of machines, then the shocks
also capture innovations in productivity.

Preferences. All agents in the world have identical risk and intertemporal prefer-
ences represented by the expected utility function

                                                              1− γ
                                           "Z                        #
                                                    ∞       c
                                     E0                 e−rt t     dt ,
                                                0           1−γ

where ct is the individual consumption of the aggregate good.

Markets for Physical Capital and the Risk-Free Bond. All agents can trade physical
capital in a fully liquid international market. We denote the equilibrium market price
of capital per unit by qt (measured in the aggregate good). That is, capital k t is worth




                                                          8
qt k t . For now, we postulate the law of motion qt to be of the form

                              dqt    q       qA        qB
                                  = µt dt + σt dZtA + σt dZtB ,                                     (6)
                              qt

with undertermined (time-dependent) drift and volatility terms. Our conjecture will
be verified later.
    Absent capital controls and macroprudential regulation there is also an interna-
tional market for the risk-free bond, which is in zero net supply. Agents can go long
(lend) or short (borrow) in the risk-free asset. The return on the risk-free asset is
             dr F
denoted by dtt . In equilibrium both qt and drtF are determined endogenously.4

Returns from Holding Physical Capital. The return from capital depends on the
identity of the agent holding it and the good that it is used to produce. The capital
gains from capital are given by d(qt k t )/(qt k t ), where k t and qt evolve as (5) and (6).
The dividend yield from capital - after reinvesting output at a rate ι t - is given by
( āPti − ι t )/qt when it is used productively to produce good i = a, b, and by ( aPti −
ι t )/qt otherwise. Therefore, when an agent of type A uses capital to produce good a,
he earns the return of
                  a
                   āPt − ι t
                                                         
         Aa                      q                  A qA                qA          qB
       drt =                  + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ σt    dt + (σ A + σt ) dZtA + σt dZtB ,
                       qt

where we used Ito’s lemma to compute the capital gains portion of the return, d(qt k t )/(qt k t ).
                  qA
The Ito-term σ A σt reflects the covariance between the exogenous volatility of capi-
tal stock in country A and the endogenous risk price exposure. When agent A uses
capital to produce good b, he earns
                                                           !
               aPtb − ιt    q                      qA                        qA            qB
    drtAb =              + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ A σt            dt + (σ A + σt ) dZtA + σt dZtB .
                   qt

Similar equations hold for agents B. The optimal investment rate, which maximizes
returns, is always given by the first-order condition

                                              Φ0 (ι) = 1/qt .                                       (7)
  4 Note                              drtF
           that we use the notation    dt    for the risk-free rate in order to allow for potential non-
differentiabilities.




                                                     9
Financial Frictions, Incomplete Markets and Equity Home Bias. There are financial
frictions in this economy. We assume that, absent capital controls and macropruden-
tial regulations, agents can borrow through risk-free debt to buy capital, but cannot
internationally share risk of the capital they employ by issuing equity or through other
means. Thus, international markets are incomplete.5 Home bias in investors’ equity
holdings is very well documented, see Lewis (1999). We simply assume that investors
do not hold any foreign capital risk. Our results are robust to a more general setting
with partial risk sharing, as long as some equity home bias remains. Agency problems
and asymmetric information problems are an alternative way to micro-found limited
risk sharing.6
    Each agent chooses his consumption rate, as well as the allocation of wealth to
capital used to produce each good and to the risk-free asset. When agent I = A, B
consumes at rate ctI > 0 and chooses portfolio with weights ( xta , xtb , 1 − xta − xtb ), his
net worth nt evolves according to

                      dntI     a    Ia     b    Ib           a     b      F   ctI
                           = x t dr t  + x t dr t  + ( 1 − x t − x t ) dr t −     dt.                   (8)
                      ntI                                                     ntI

Equation (8) (together with the solvency constraint nt ≥ 0) can be thought of as the
agent’s budget constraint. Portfolio weights xta and xtb must be nonnegative for all
agents.
   Definition. For any initial allocation of wealth, an equilibrium is a map from histories of
shocks { ZsA , ZsB , s ∈ [0, t]} to the allocation of capital (ψtAa , ψtAb , ψtBa , ψtBb ) and the aggregate
consumption good (CtA , CtB ) as well as prices qt and drtF such that

   1. all agents solve their optimal consumption and portfolio choice problems, subject to the
      budget constraints and

   2. all markets clear, i.e.7

                      ψtAa + ψtAb + ψtBa + ψtBb = 1        and    CtA + CtB = Yt − ι t Kt ,             (9)

      where Yt is given by (3).
   5 Domestic  markets are complete but international markets are incomplete, which is consistent with
the observed equity home bias.
   6 See Jensen and Meckling (1976), Bolton and Scharfstein (1990), and DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006).
   7 If the markets for capital and aggregate output clear, then the market for the risk-free asset clears

automatically by the Walras’ Law.


                                                    10
   We denote the net worth of all agents in country A at time t by Nt and the net worth
share (wealth share) of agents of country A, by ηt ≡ Nt /(qt Kt ). Then the portfolio
weights of representative agent A are given by
                                                               !
                               ψtAa ψtAb    ψ Aa + ψtAb
                                   ,     ,1− t                     ,
                                ηt   ηt          ηt

and consumption rate by ζ tA = CtA /Nt . Likewise, for agents B, these are given by
                                                 !
                  ψtBa   ψ Bb  ψ Ba + ψtBb                                    CtB
                       , t ,1− t                      and       ζ tB =               .
                 1 − ηt 1 − ηt   1 − ηt                                   qt Kt − Nt

Asset-pricing equations. Here, we take a technical detour to summarize equations
that price available assets from the agent’s consumption processes. Let us postulate
that consumption CtA of agents A follows

                         dCtA      A        A            A
                           A
                              = µCt dt + σtC A dZtA + σtC B dZtB .                       (10)
                         Ct

The stochastic discount factor θtA = e−rt (CtA /C0A )−γ of agents A depends on their
discounted marginal utility. By Ito’s lemma

                        dθtA      A         A            A
                          A
                             = µθt dt −γ(σtC A dZtA + σtC B dZtB ),
                         θt    | {z }
                                −drtF


    The return of any asset available to agents A has to satisfy the following property:
if wealth et is invested in asset X, so that det /et = drtX , then θtA et must be a martin-
gale if the portfolio allocation to X is positive (and a supermartingale if the portfolio
allocation is zero). In other words, the drift of θtA et must be zero (negative). For the
risk free asset it follows directly that

             drtF       A            A   γ(γ + 1)  C AA 2       A
                                                                    
                  = −µθt = r + γµCt −              (σt ) + (σtC B )2 .                   (11)
              dt                             2
   The pricing condition for capital used to produce output a is

                    E[drtAa ]      A      A          qA        A   qB
                              + µθt = γσtC A (σ A + σt ) + γσtC B σt .                   (12)
                      dt              |              {z             }
                                             −Cov [ drtAa , dθtA /θtA ]


                                            11
The negative of the under-braced Ito terms reflect the risk premium, i.e., the required
expected excess return in equilibrium. Likewise, for capital used to produce good b,

                    E[drtAb ]      A      A          qA        A   qB
                              + µθt ≤ γσtC A (σ A + σt ) + γσtC B σt .                                (13)
                      dt              |              {z             }
                                                 −Cov [ drtAb , dθtA /θtA ]


with equality if agents A devote a positive amount of capital to produce good b, i.e.
ψtAb > 0. Similar equations also hold for agents B.


B    First-best Benchmark
In the economy without frictions and complete markets, full specialization realizes.
Agents A specialize in producing only output good a and agents B only produce
output good b.
    For simplicity, assume a symmetric economy, in which σ A = σ B = σ. Then, given
the efficient allocation of capital to the production of the two goods, ψtAa = ψtBb = 1/2
and ψtAb = ψtBa = 0, the total aggregate output is

                                                 āKt
                                          Yt =        .
                                                   2

A social planner that assigns Pareto weights (λ, 1 − λ) must divide the consumption
stream according to the shares
                                                                               !
                                λ1/γ           (1 − λ)1/γ
                                           ,                                       .                  (14)
                          λ1/γ + (1 − λ)1/γ λ1/γ + (1 − λ)1/γ

   With complete markets agents fully share the risks dZtA and dZtB . That is, any
redistributive shock is offset, but the aggregate shocks to the global capital stock Kt
have to be borne. The price of capital and the risk-free rate are given by the following
proposition.

Proposition 1 With complete markets, the market outcome leads to the first-best allocation
                                                                        drtF
with full specialization, ψtAa = ψtBb = 1/2. The risk-free rate          dt    and the price of capital are
time-invariant and given by

    dr F                     γ ( γ + 1) σ 2                  ā/2 − ι
         = r + γ(Φ(ι) − δ) −                and q = F                           .                     (15)
     dt                            4               dr /dt + γσ2 /2 − (Φ(ι) − δ)

                                              12
The time-invariant wealth shares (η, 1 − η ) are also the consumption shares. The correspond-
ing Pareto weights of the centralized economy can be found from (14).

Proof. See Appendix A.
    The first-best benchmark economy which emerges in a setting with complete mar-
kets is particularly simple. The size of the economy essentially scales up or down
depending on the total shock dZtA + dZtB . All relative quantities, like wealth shares,
stay constant and so do prices. The risk-free rate dr F /dt is determined by the time-
preference rate r, the expected growth rate of capital (and the economy) and aggregate
risk. As overall aggregate risk increases, the risk-free asset becomes relatively more
attractive and hence the risk-free rate falls. The price qt of physical capital is given by
the Gordon growth formula, where the denominator is the required return on capital
minus the growth rate of capital.


II    Open Capital Account for Debt
In this section, we analyze the equilibrium in an economy in which agents in both
countries can borrow through risk-free debt. Markets are not complete since agents
cannot issue equity claims to foreigners (equity home bias.) In the next section we
contrast these findings with an economy in which the capital account is closed.
    Technically, the equilibrium with debt is characterized by the asset pricing equa-
tions (12), (13) and (11) for agents of type A, together with analogous equations for
agents of type B, the market-clearing conditions (9) and equations (2), (3) and (4) that
determine output and prices. We use these equations, together with the law of motion
of ηt given by Proposition 2, to solve for the equilibrium quantities as functions of the
wealth allocation, summarized by ηt .
    First let us define the volatility coefficient. With portfolio weights ψtAa /ηt and
ψtAb /ηt on the two technologies, the law of motion of the net worth of agents in
country A is

          dNt  ψ Aa + ψtAb  A    qA    A     qB   A
                                                                CA
              = t         γ (σ + σt )σtC A + σt σtC B dt + drtF − t dt
           Nt       ηt                                           Nt
                   ψtAa + ψtAb A    qA        ψ Aa + ψtAb qB B
               +              (σ + σt ) dZtA + t         σt dZt
                        ηt                         ηt
                   |         {z        }      |      {z    }
                           σtN A                       σtNB




                                             13
   The process of net worth of agents in country B can be derived in a similar way.
     Proposition 2 characterizes the equilibrium including the evolution of wealth share
η. The two shocks dZtA and dZtB affect both (i) the global capital stock Kt as well as
(ii) the relative wealth shares ηt . In other words, shocks have redistributive conse-
quences. This allows us to provide a different interpretation of the shock structure.
Our framework also captures redistributive shocks, like losing a large law suit (think
of Samsung losing a large law suit against Apple). The initial direct redistributional
impact leads agents to reoptimize, e.g., sell capital after losing a law suit, which can
amplify into further redistributional effects. Our analysis captures the joint effect, the
initial impact plus the endogenous redistributional responses.

Proposition 2 The state space can be divided into three regions. In the middle region, η ∈
[η a , η b ] all agents engage only in their most productive technology (full specialization), i.e.
(ψtAb = ψtBa = 0). In the left region [0, η a ), ψtBa > 0 and the right region (η b , 1], ψtAb > 0.
When ψ Ab = 0 (left and middle region), ηt follows

                       dηt   1 − ηt Aa          qA    A     qB   A
                           =       ψt γ[(σ A + σt )σtC A + σt σtC B ] dt
                       ηt      ηt

                          qA   B                      qB    B           Yt − ι t Kt      CtA
           −(1 − ψtAa )γ[σt σtC A       + (σ   B
                                                   + σt )σtC B ] dt +               dt −     dt
                                                                           qt Kt         Nt
                                                                        |           {z        }
                                                                                  =0 if γ=1
                                  qA     ηA            qB
                    −[ψtAa σ A + σt ]σt
                                dt − [σt + (1 − ψtAa )σ B )]σt dt +
                                                                                    ηB

      Aa                               Aa
       ψt − ηt qA 1 − ηt Aa A            ψt − ηt qB
                                                                   
                                   A
              σt +      ψt σ dZt +              σt − (1 − ψt )σ dZtB ,
                                                               Aa B
                                                                                                       (16)
          ηt        ηt                      ηt
     |           {z           }        |             {z             }
                          ηA                                             ηB
                       σt                                               σt

and in the right region ηt follows a symmetric equation.
   In terms of asset pricing, in all three regions

                                 ā( Pta − Ptb )        qA       qB
                                                 + σ A σt − σ B σt =
                                        qt
                                  A            A              B                          B
                                                                                               
                      A      qA            qB             qA                        qB
               γ (σ       + σt )σtC A   + σt σtC B     − σt σtC A   − (σ     B
                                                                                 + σt )σtC B       .   (17)

In addition,
                                                     Pb
                                          a/ ā ≤       ≤ ā/a.                                        (18)
                                                     Pa

                                                      14
In the left region the first inequality becomes equality, and right, the second.
    If γ = 1, then the price of capital qt satisfies
                                                                       s
                1                   s −1 1                 s −1        s −1
                  ( āψtAa + aψtBa ) s + ( āψtBb + aψtAb ) s                 − ι(q(η )) = rq(η ).   (19)
                2                        2



Proof. See Appendix B.
    Note that all equations hold for any risk aversion coefficient γ, while the market
clearing condition takes the simple form (19) only for log utility, i.e. when γ = 1.
    For the left and middle regions, we can use Equation (16) to evaluate the volatilities
of η and q from ψtAa and the values of qt (ηt ) and q0t (ηt ). Indeed, using Ito’s lemma,

                                                                      ψtAa
                qA    q 0 ( ηt ) ηt η A    (16)           ηA            ηt (1 − ηt )
             σt      = t           σ       ==⇒         σt      =                               σA.   (20)
                       q t ( ηt ) t                                                q0 (η )
                                                                   1 − [ψtAa − η ] qt (ηt )
                                                                                    t t
                                                                   |            {z         }
                                                                          amplification


     The factor in front of σ A highlights the amplification. The numerator captures the
amplification effect due to the leverage effect. Recall that ψtAa /ηt is A’s leverage. The
denominator captures the loss spiral. If the price of capital is more sensitive, i.e., q0 (η )
is larger, additional losses arise which amplify the endogenous risk even further. For
constant qt , i.e. q0t (ηt ) = 0, the loss spiral captured by the denominator is switched
off.
     Likewise,

                                                                    ψtBa +ψtBb
                qB     q0t (ηt )ηt ηB     (16)                        1− ηt (1 − ηt )
                                                                                               σB,
                                                       ηB
             σt      =             σ      ==⇒        σt     =   −                                    (21)
                        q t ( ηt ) t                                              q0 (η )
                                                                  1 − [ψtAa − η ] qt (ηt )
                                                                                   t t


and the shocks dZtB are amplified as well.
    Shocks affect future flows at least in three ways. First, a drop in net worth Nt and ηt
translates automatically into a decline in consumption flow. Agents A save more and
try to rebuild their net worth. The terms of trade hedge works through a price effect
and a volume effect. After a negative shock, the relative prices P A /P B , i.e., the terms
of trade, increase. That is, flow profit margins per unit of output increase. However,
there is also a volume effect. For higher P A /P B total output volume declines. Total

                                                  15
revenue for firms in country A increase as long as the price effect dominates the
volume effect. Note for the first region ηt < η a , the terms of trades P A /P B = ā/a
are fixed. That is any further shock is not mitigated by the terms of trade hedge. By
symmetry this is also true for the last region with ηt > η b .
    For the special case of logarithmic utility, we can also explicitly evaluate the drift
of ηt . Since the consumption of all agents is proportionate to their net worth, we have

                         AA               ψtAa A    qA                   AB              ψtAa qB
                   σtC        = σtN A =       (σ + σt ),           σtC        = σtNB =       σ        (22)
                                           ηt                                             ηt t

         B           B      1 − ψtAa qA                     B             B      1 − ψtAa B    qB
      σtC A   =   σtN A   =         σ ,          and     σtC B     =   σtN B   =         (σ + σt ).   (23)
                             1 − ηt t                                             1 − ηt
Then the drift of ηt divided by ηt is

                      (ψtAa )2 A       qA 2       qB 2     (1 − ψtAa )2 qA 2            qB
                                                                       [(σt ) + (σ B + σt )2 ]
     η
    µ t = (1 − ηt )           [( σ + σt  )  + ( σt  )  ] −
                        ηt2                                   1 − ηt

                                            qA   ηA           qB
                              −[ψtAa σ A + σt ]σt      − [σt + (1 − ψtAa )σ B )]σt
                                                                                         ηB


    We outline the numerical procedure that we employ in Appendix II.


A    Special Cases
Special case of Perfect Substitutes, s = ∞. When both output goods are perfect
substitutes, then each country produces the good it is better at producing. Country A
produces good a and country B good b. Also, both goods are sold at the same price
of P a = Pb = 1/2. The “terms of trade hedge” is switched off altogether. A negative
shock is not dampened by an increase in one country’s output price. In other words,
the market incompleteness has full bite and each country carries the full weight of its
risks. In addition, when σ A = σ B then countries have no need to borrow or lend, and
each country functions independently. Risk within each country is perfectly shared
and hence country-specific first best solutions can be obtained. A slightly modified
version of Proposition 1 holds in this case, but with the variance of shocks twice as
large due to the lack of diversification.

Corollary 1 With s = ∞, each country fully specializes. The terms of trade hedge is inactive,
i.e. P a /Pb = 1.



                                                         16
   In addition, in the symmetric case σ A = σ B = σ there is no international borrowing and
lending. Each country I ∈ { A, B} carries its own risk dZtI and the equilibrium risk-free rate
and price of capital are given by

     dr F                     γ ( γ + 1) σ 2                 ā/2 − ι
          = r + γ(Φ(ι) − δ) −                and q = F                        .                     (24)
      dt                            2               dr /dt + γσ2 − (Φ(ι) − δ)

Proof. This result follows directly from applying first-best analysis to a single country.

    The lack of international diversification forces individuals to hold more risk rel-
ative to the first-best scenario of Proposition 1. This makes the risk-free asset more
attractive, pushing down the equilibrium risk-free rate. This also changes the invest-
ment rate ι. Since firms do not borrow or lend, capital shares and wealth shares
coincide, i.e. ψtAa = ηt and ψtBb = 1 − ηt . Essentially in this symmetric case firms are
endogenously in autarky. As country I faces shock dZtI , the economy is scaled up or
down without affecting prices or the other country. The wealth share of the country
increases when it experiences a relatively more favorable shock. In the long-run the
system converges to one of the extreme outcomes, where the wealth share is either
η = 0 or η = 1. That is, the stationary distribution is degenerate with atoms at the
two extreme points.8 Interestingly, for the case of log utility the price q and the invest-
ment rate ι coincide with the first best price and investment rate, while the risk-free
is lower.9

Special case of No Productive Disadvantage, a = ā. In this case firms in both
countries are equally good at producing both output goods. As a consequence,
P a = Pb = 1/2: otherwise firms in both countries would want to shift to produce
less of the cheaper good. In this case, the production technology leads to the same
outcome as that in the case of perfect substitutability. Like that case, the “terms of
trade hedge” is switched off.

   8 For the asymmetric case σ A < σ B , absent any lending the risk-free rate would be higher in country
A. Hence, with open international debt markets, country A would borrow, expand its production
capacity, and make in expectation higher profit. In the long-run the wealth share η would converge to
1 almost surely.
   9 This can be seen by setting γ = 1 and noting that Equation (24) reduces to q = ā/2−ι . This
                                                                                                r
equation together with Φ0 (ι) = 1/q jointly determine q and ι. Monotonicity of both equations ensures
uniqueness.




                                                   17
Corollary 2 If a = ā, the risk-free rate, the price and allocation of capital between countries
and the dynamics of wealth shares (but not the allocation of capital to goods a and b) coincide
with those in the case of s = ∞, as described in Corollary 1.

     Viewed differently, Corollary 2 states that it is necessary for the main results of our
paper that the two output goods are imperfect substitutes and that the firms in both
countries have different expertise.
     Corollary 2 also points to an interesting comparative static. As a increases to-
wards ā, risk sharing worsens. R&D spending and product imitations with the aim of
improving a goes at the expense of the firms in the other country, see, e.g., Samuel-
son (2004). As firms in both countries engage in such activities, the “terms of trade
hedge” worsens, risk sharing becomes limited and welfare reduced. This suggests
that policies which increase specialization, by fostering R&D spending and boosting
ā, are much better than “catch-up” policies.


B      Numerical Example
Proposition 2 allows us to characterize the full stochastic equilibrium dynamics of
the global economy. For all numerical examples we assume that all agents have log-
arithmic
  √       utility, i.e., γ = 1, and that the investment technology is given by Φ(i ) =
1
κ     1 + 2κi − 1 .10 We fix σ A = σ B = 0.1, ā = 0.14, a = 0.04, δ = 0.05, κ = 2, r = 0.05
and consider different elasticities of substitution s ∈ {0.5, 1, ∞}. Note that due to the
symmetry of our setting, it is sufficient to characterize the equilibrium for the wealth
shares η ∈ [0, 0.5]. The equilibrium dynamics are symmetric about η = 0.5.
    Panel A of Figure 1 plots the capital shares for the three values of s. The solid
black line captures the case of s = 1 (Cobb-Douglas aggregation), the dashed blue
line, s = 0.5, and the dotted magenta line, s = ∞. Recall for a reference that the
first-best solution of complete markets results in full specialization and with constant
capital shares of ψ Aa = 0.5. Under full insurance, the wealth shares also stay constant.
    With incomplete markets, as long as η ≤ 0.5 country A still puts all its capital
into producing output good a. However, as the wealth share η declines, so does the
capital share ψ Aa . The capital share declines slower than the wealth share and hence
the curve ψtAa stays (weakly) above the 45-degree line. This is possible since firms in
country A borrow. The level of borrowing depends on the elasticity of substitution
    10 The
         investment technology in this example has quadratic adjustment costs: An investment of
Φ + κ2 Φ2 generates new capital at rate Φ.


                                              18
                                                                     4                                              1.05




                0.6                                                                                                 1.04
                                                                    3.5


                                                                                                                    1.03
                0.5
                          ψBa
                                                                     3
                                                                                                                    1.02
                0.4                   ψAa
  ψAa and ψBa




                                                            Pa/Pb
                                                                    2.5
                                                                                                                    1.01




                                                                                                                q
                0.3

                                                                                                                      1
                                                                     2

                0.2
                                                                                                                    0.99

                                                                    1.5
                0.1
                                                                                                                    0.98


                                                                     1
                 0                                                                                                  0.97
                      0         0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4                 0   0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5              0   0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5
                                            η                                             η                                                η


Figure 1: Panel A plots the capital shares ψ Aa and ψ Ba , Panel B plots the terms
of trade P a /Pb and Panel C plots the price of physical capital q, as functions of the
wealth share η, for three different levels of elasticity of substitution: s = 0.5 in dashed
blue, s = 1.01 (Cobb-Douglas) in solid black, and s = ∞ in dotted magenta.

s between both output goods. For the special case with perfect substitutes s = ∞
there is no borrowing (Corollary 1) and hence the dotted magenta capital share is the
45-degree line. For the cases of s = .5 and s = 1, the difference between ψtAa and
the 45-degree line reflects the fraction of capital that is debt financed. Debt financing
reaches its maximum for η values around 0.1. A negative shock at that point leads
to a sudden and sharp decline in debt financing. Simply the fear of a sudden stop of
funding leads firms to cut back their operation. As η falls below η a , firms in country B
start producing good a as well, even though they are less productive in doing so. The
(decreasing) solid and dashed lines depict ψ Ba for s = 1 and 0.5. For s = ∞, ψ Ba = 0
for any η.
    Panel B of Figure 1 plots the terms of trade, i.e., the price ratio P a /Pb . The figure
shows clearly the “terms of trade hedge.” As the wealth share of agents A drops after a
negative shock, output good a becomes more scarce. Consequently, the price of good
a rises and agents A receive better terms of trade. As soon as the ratio P a /Pb rises to
ā/a, at point η a , firms in country B start producing good a. The terms of trade price
ratio P a /Pb is then capped at ā/a. Notice that the terms of trade improvement after a
negative shock is sharper when the goods a and b are worse substitutes. In the limit,
as both goods become perfect substitutes, the terms of trade hedge vanishes.


                                                                                      19
    A remark about empirics is in order: The terms of trade hedge argument sug-
gests a negative association between (relative) GDP growth and the terms of trade.
Acemoglu and Ventura (2002) argue that these terms of trade movements introduce
de-facto diminishing returns to scale and are the reason for their empirical finding
that cross-country world distribution is stable. However, for many commodities this
correlation is empirically not strong and can even go in the opposite direction (Backus
and Crucini (2000), Berka, Crucini and Wang (2012)). In the end, the sign of the link
between output and terms of trade is simply a matter whether supply or demand
shocks dominate. In our model, each country’s own shock (the shock to its capital
stock) is a supply shock, and so naturally produces a negative correlation between the
terms of trade and output growth. At the same time, foreign shocks are like a demand
shock – a positive shock abroad, say, pushes up demand for domestically produced
consumption goods and consequently improves the terms of trade. If shocks have the
same volatility and the overall model structure is symmetric, then these countervail-
ing forces work such that the correlation between consumption and the terms of trade
in our model ends up being negative (so the terms of trade hedge is operative).11 This
is consistent with the observation that, as long as a country has the unique expertise in
producing a certain good, the link between its output and terms of trade must be neg-
ative in the extreme (i.e. as η approaches 0 or 1). This, however, does not preclude the
possibility that output and terms of trade move together locally. Panel B shows that, in
our model, the link between output and terms of trade is monotonic in η, but in more
general settings this need not be so. For example, Pavlova and Rigobon (2007) develop
a framework in which demand shocks lead to a locally positive association between
domestic consumption and terms of trade. They achieve this by scaling country-level
utility functions via arbitrary stochastic processes (interpreted as demand shocks),
and by assuming cross-country heterogeneities in preferences (home-good bias). Do-
mestic demand shocks thus disproportionately increase demand for domestic goods,
and so terms of trade and consumption go hand in hand.
    Panel C of Figure 1 shows the price of physical capital q for the three different
values of s. Recall that the reinvestment rate per unit of capital ι is directly related to
the price of capital q through the first order condition Φ0 (ι) = 1/qt . A higher capital
price q translates to a higher investment rate.
    Figure 2 characterizes the stochastic dynamics of the state variable: country A’s
wealth share η. This differs from how macroeconomists typically represent the stochas-
  11 Withincomplete markets, domestic wealth and so consumption are more sensitive to domestic
supply shocks than to foreign shocks. Complete markets, in contrast, involve perfect risk-sharing.


                                               20
                            2.5                                                 0.03                                                0.045



                                                                                                                                     0.04

                                                                               0.025
                             2
                                                                                                                                    0.035



                                                                                0.02                                                 0.03
  Stationary Distribution




                            1.5
                                                                                                                                    0.025




                                                                        µη η




                                                                                                                             ση η
                                                                               0.015

                                                                                                                                     0.02
                             1

                                                                                0.01                                                0.015



                                                                                                                                     0.01
                            0.5
                                                                               0.005

                                                                                                                                    0.005



                             0                                                    0                                                    0
                                  0   0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5                  0   0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5                  0   0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5
                                                  η                                                    η                                                    η


Figure 2: Panel A plots the stationary distribution, Panel B the drift and Panel C
the volatility of wealth shares η for three different levels of elasticity of substitution:
s = 0.5 in dashed blue, s = 1.01 (Cobb-Douglas) in solid black, and s = ∞ in dotted
magenta.

tic dynamics of an economy. It is standard to plot impulse response functions. How-
ever, impulse response functions only plot the expected response of a variable near
a specific reference point (e.g. the steady state). The drift and volatility of the state
variable, depicted in Panels B and C of Figure 2, provide a full characterization of the
dynamical system for any starting point, including the volatility dynamics. The drift
of η (Panel B) reveals that the system has a basin of attraction at η = 0.5. Whenever
the system falls below η = 0.5, the positive drift pushes it back towards η = 0.5.
Similarly, for η > 0.5, the system drifts back to η = 0.5 as the drift is negative in the
range η ∈ (0.5, 1). Panel C depicts the volatility of η.
    Panel A plots the stationary distribution for η ∈ [0, 0.5]. Two features stand
out. First, lower output good substitutability leads to a tighter distribution of wealth
shares. For smaller s the “terms of trade hedge” ensures that countries are better in-
sured against redistributive shocks despite the fact that no risky claims can be traded
in international markets. In the limit as s goes to infinity and both output goods be-
come perfect substitutes, the stationary distribution becomes degenerate with atoms
only at η = 0 and η = 1. Recall that the first-best complete-market solution implies a
degenerate stationary distribution that is concentrated at the initial η. Second, unlike
in Cole and Obstfeld (1991) the Cobb-Douglas case does not lead to full insurance nor


                                                                                                   21
to the first best outcome in our setting. The stationary distribution does not degener-
ate to an atom. What explains this difference? In Cole and Obstfeld (1991) a positive
productivity shock for country A is like a positive endowment shock of good a. Sup-
plying more a goods worsens country As terms of trade. In our setting the terms
of trade hedge is less pronounced, since the shock is in terms of the capital good K.
After a positive shock, agents in country A sell off some of the (composite) capital
goods instead of only selling off output good a. In addition, in our economy capital
is persistent and hence a productivity shock has long-lasting implications, while in
Cole and Obstfeld (1991) capital is short-lived, it depreciates fully in each period. Our
results also show that their resolution of the international diversification puzzle in the
case of Cobb-Douglas preferences is particular to their setting.
    Even though the terms of trade hedge is not perfect in our setting, and conse-
quently the wealth share η is not constant, a distressed economy typically grows
relatively fast out of its malaise. Panel B of Figure 2 reveals that the drift of η is
high for low, but not extremely low, η values. Competition is depressed and profits
(corrected for legacy losses) are high. Calvo (1998) coined this empirical phenomenon
as ‘‘Phoenix miracle’’. Importantly, the Phoenix miracle vanishes for very extreme η
values, when the poor economy is extremely impaired.


C    Sudden Stops and Runs
Sudden stops refer to a sharp decline in credit flows. The total amount of country
A debt in our model is given by (ψtAa − ηt )qt Kt , i.e., total assets minus net worth.
Figure 3 depicts the total debt level for country A for η ∈ [0, 0.5], normalizing Kt
to one. In our model sudden stops occur naturally on the equilibrium path due to
the amplification of exogenous shocks and corresponding decline of wealth in an
individual country. In addition, there is a possibility of sunspots triggering a sudden
decline in capital price and outstanding debt of one of the countries.

Definition 1 A sudden stop occurs when either:
(i) an adverse fundamental shock triggers a percentage decline in outstanding debt that exceeds
the percentage decline in net worth, i.e. the leverage ratio falls. For country A this occurs when
              ∂(ψ Aa −η )   η                         ∂ψ Aa    ψ Aa
the elasticity    ∂η    ψ Aa −η
                                > 1, or equivalently, ∂η > η .
(ii) a sunspot triggers a sudden capital price drop from q to q̂, accompanied by a drop in η to
η̃ and a decline in debt. In this event, the wealth of country A (per unit of capital) jumps to
q̃η̃ = max(ηq + ψ Aa (q̃ − q), 0). The drop in capital is a self-fulfilling if q̃ = q(η̃ ), i.e. the


                                                22
new capital price level is sustainable in equilibrium.



Sudden Stops within Baseline Equilibrium. Formally, the total debt amplification
effect is captured by
                                                                                          
                      
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
                                                                      ψ Aa
                      
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
                                                                      ηt (1 − ηt )
                                                                      t
                         q0t (ηt )ηt    [(ψtAa )0 (ηt ) − 1]ηt
                      
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
               A
      σtDebt       = 1+[             +          Aa − η                           q0t (ηt ) 
                                                                                             σA,         (25)
                              q                                         Aa
                                                               } 1 − [ψt − ηt ] qt 
                    
                    
                               t             ψt         t                                 
                    
                                       |          {z                                      
                                                                                           
                                       leverage ratio sensitivity
                                                                 |       {z             } 
                                                                      η-amplification


where the ‘‘η-amplification factor’’ is directly taken from Equation (20). If the lever-
age ratio declines as η declines, the “leverage ratio sensitivity’’ factor is larger than
1. Likewise for dZ B -shocks, one can derive an analogous amplification factor using
Equation (21). Recall that q0 (η ) in the denominator reflects the amplification due to
the loss spiral.
   Whether and to what extent sudden stops can occur within the baseline equilib-
                                               ψ Aa
rium – that is, the leverage ratio, η , falls as η declines – depends on the market
illiquidity of capital, q0 (η ). Market illiquidity, in turn, is driven by technological illiq-
uidity, captured by the adjustment cost parameter κ. With κ = 0, both technological
and market liquidity of capital are perfect as the price is always q = 1, as shown by
the dashed blue line in the right panel of Figure 3.
     The case with adjustment costs of κ = 2 is depicted by the black curve in the right
panel of Figure 3. As long as output goods are not perfect substitutes, i.e. s < ∞ and
a < a, the price of capital q(η ) declines as η drops. There is aggregate price impact
and hence market liquidity is not perfect. In this case, debt declines sooner, at higher
                                                                                   ∂ψ Aa       ψ Aa
level of η. However, in our example a sudden stop defined by ∂η > η does not
occur. Graphically on the left panel, there are no η-values for which the slope of the
          ∂ψ Aa                                                                         ψ Aa
tangent    ∂η       of the (normalized) debt level is higher than the slope              η     of the secant,
the line that goes through (0, 0) and (η, ψ Aa (η )).
   Irreversibility of investments is an extreme form of technological illiquidity, which
assumes infinite adjustment costs for disinvestment ι < 0. The green dashed-dotted
curves in Figure 3 depict the case in which disinvestment adjustment costs are κι<0 =
100, while investment adjustment costs stay at κι>0 = 2. The right panel shows clearly
that now the price drop for low η values is much more pronounced. More importantly,


                                                      23
                        0.35                                                                                    1.1




                         0.3                                                                                   1.05




                        0.25                                                                                     1
  Total Debt q(ψAa−η)




                         0.2                                                                                   0.95




                                                                                                           q
                        0.15                                                                                    0.9




                         0.1                                                                                   0.85




                        0.05                                                                                    0.8




                          0                                                                                    0.75
                               0    0.05    0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5                   0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5
                                                                η                                                                                    η


Figure 3: Panel A depicts Country A’s (normalized) debt level q(η )[ψ Aa − η ] as a
function of its wealth share η, for three different levels of adjustment costs functions:
κι<0 = κι>0 = 0 in dashed blue, κι<0 = κι>0 = 2 in solid black, κι<0 = 100 and κι>0 = 2
in dashed-dotted green. Panel B depicts the corresponding price functions for q(η ).
As in our benchmark case we set s = 1.01.

the price q(η ) is not always concave due to the kink. Hence for a whole range η-values
∂ψ Aa                              ψ Aa
 ∂η                     >           η      and therefore sudden stops can occur.

Sudden stops in Sunspot Equilibria. With sufficiently low market liquidity, i.e.,
sufficiently high q0 (η ), a non-fundamental sunspot can trigger the second form of
a sudden stop – a jump in price of capital and wealth share. Such a jump occurs
even absent an adverse fundamental shock. That is, the contraction can be entirely
self-fulfilling.
    Intuitively, as each agent A shrinks his balance sheet by fire-selling assets and
repaying his debt, the price of capital q drops and erodes all agents A’s net worth.
Competing agents from the same country, who have no contractual arrangement with
each other, erode the price of the joint capital good and thereby impose negative
spillover effects on another. The externality works through the price qt , which each
agent A takes as given. Note the difference from a classic bank run in which lenders
withdraw funding and cause a crunch in credit supply. Here the decline in total credit
is a credit demand effect. Borrowers cut back since they are worried about downside
risks and about hitting the insolvency boundary condition where net worth is zero.
    More formally, consider a price drop from current point q(η )to say q̃. This price

                                                                                                      24
drop leads to a new net worth N + (q̃ − q)ψ Aa K, which translates to a new wealth
share of 12
                      N + (q̃ − q)ψ Aa K   ηq + (q̃ − q)ψ Aa
                                         =                   .
                              q̃K                  q̃
      The economy is only vulnerable to sudden stops due to sunspots if q(η ) is suffi-
ciently steep in η and the initial debt level q(η )[ψ Aa − η ] is sufficiently large. For large
enough starting points η, q0 (η ) is too small. At the other extreme, for small enough
η the debt level is not high enough to generate a second equilibrium. In short, the
economy is only vulnerable to sudden stop runs only for a range of η ∈ [η, η ]. Within
that range there exist exactly two sun-spot equilibria, as long as q(η ) is concave and
η̃ (q̃) convex. Note that we considered only unanticipated self-fulfilling run equilibria
where the arrival rate of the sunspots is zero. The economy is most vulnerable to
unanticipated sunspots since agents do not prepare for these. Proposition 3 formal-
izes this result.

Proposition 3 For sufficiently low market liquidity, such that q(η ) is sufficiently (concavely)
increasing in η, there exists a vulnerability region [η, η ] in which country A is vulnerable
to unanticipated self-fulfilling jumps in q triggered by a sunspot absent a fundamental shock.
Jumps are discontinuous in price and wealth share. Within the vulnerability region there are
two sunspot equilibria of which one results in the absorbing disaster state η = 0. The outcome
is analogous for country B.

    The proof of the proposition follows directly by construction and continuity around
the region. The concavity of q(η ) and strict convexity of the hyperbola η̃ (q̃) implies
that there are at most two sunspot equilibria and that there are no small jump equilib-
ria. The finding that small jumps are not self-sustaining can be seen as a robustness
property of the baseline equilibrium.
    One might suspect that when agents of the poorer country sell off their physical
capital at fire sale prices foreigners benefit at their expense. Indeed the foreigners’
wealth shares rise, but surprisingly they are ultimately also worse off. In short, sud-
den stops are not only associated with large wealth redistributions, but even more
importantly with wealth destruction in both countries. Section IV’s welfare analysis
shows sudden stops lead to Pareto inferior outcomes independent of whether they
are associated with multiple equilibria or amplification effects.
  12 If
      we were to plot this equation in right panel of Figure 3 it would be an upward sloping convex
hyperbola that goes through the initial starting point q(η ). The hyperbola potentially crosses q(η ) at
the initial starting point and possibly in addition at a lower price level q(η̃ ). If so, then a jump to
absorbing sate η = 0 is also possible.


                                                  25
    From a policy perspective, ex-post crisis management should avoid wealth de-
structive sudden stops and ex-ante credit flow management should reduce excessive
build-up of liquidity mismatch due to short-term debt financed projects with low
technological liquidity. Macroprudential policies instruments that limit leverage and
liquidity mismatch might be the appropriate policy tools.


III     Closed Capital Account: Capital Controls
Let us now consider the case in which the capital account is closed or macroprudential
regulation prevents borrowing. Agents in the economy cannot tap in to the interna-
tional debt market but can still trade goods a and b as well as physical capital. Then
asset-pricing conditions (12) and (13) still hold. Each country has its own risk-free rate
characterized by Equation (11) for country A and an analogous equation for country
B based on the consumption process in country B.
    The following proposition characterizes a procedure to compute the equilibrium
under the assumption of logarithmic utility.

Proposition 4 Suppose that all agents have logarithmic utility (γ = 1). Then the state space
is divided into three regions. In the middle region, η ∈ η a , η b , all agents engage only
                                                                    

in their most productive technology (full specialization), i.e. ψtAa = ηt , ψtBb = 1 − ηt and
ψtBa = ψtAb = 0, and the price of capital qt satisfies
                                                                s
                          1        s −1 1            s −1       s −1
                            ( āη ) s + ( ā(1 − η )) s                − ι(q(η )) = rq(η ).                (26)
                          2             2

    In the region [0, η a ), in which agents of country B use capital to produce good a, the price
of capital and the production of agents B are determined jointly by the equations

                                               āPb = aP a ,                                               (27)
                                                                             s
                1                          s −1 1         s −1               s −1
                  ( āη + a(1 − η − ψ Bb )) s + ( āψ Bb ) s                        − ι(q(η )) = rq(η ).   (28)
                2                               2
At point η a , ψ Bb reaches 1 − ηt and q(η ) reaches the level defined by (26). The law of motion




                                                    26
of ηt over the entire range [0, η b ) is given by

            āPta − ι t
                                                                         
dηt
    =                   − r − (1 − ηt )[ηt (σ A )2 − (1 − ηt )(σ B )2 ]       dt + (1 − ηt )[σ A dZtA − σ B dZtB ].
 ηt             qt
                                                                                       (29)
    The region (η b , 1], where agents A produce good b, is determined symmetrically to the
region [0, η a ).

Proof. See Appendix C.
    As before we illustrate our findings within specific numerical examples. To ease
the comparison with the previous section we apply the same parameter values. In-
stead of focusing on different levels of substitutions, in this section we stress the
difference between outcomes under open and closed capital accounts.
    Panel A of Figure 4 shows the difference between a global economy with and
without capital controls. For equal wealth shares, i.e., for η = 0.5, agents are fully
specialized in both cases. However, as η declines, production in country A falls faster
under closed capital account than it does under the open capital account. The reason
is that firms in country A can issue short-term debt to agents in country B. Panel A
reveals that ψ Aa is significantly higher in the case without capital controls (increasing
black solid curve) than in the case with capital controls (red dashed increasing 45-
degree line). With capital controls agents in country B start producing the output
good a much sooner at higher η values. As a result, the economy with open capital
accounts exhibits a higher degree of specialization than the economy with closed
capital accounts.
    Panel B shows the difference in the terms of trade, the relative price ratio P a /Pb .
Without capital controls each agent in country A borrows in order to hold a larger
fraction of the global physical capital stock, resulting in greater output of good a. This
undermines the terms of trade improvement that occurs under strict capital controls.
With capital controls the terms of trade improvement is sharper. In addition, an open
capital account is subject to a pecuniary externality. Each individual agent ignores the
effect of his production on his fellow countrymen; by borrowing and operating on a
larger scale, he raises output and depresses the price for others.
    Cutting down on debt financing also pushes down the price of physical capital q
as shown in Panel C of Figure 4. This lowers the net worth. In terms of wealth shares,
it hits the country which is levered further. As pointed out above the loss liquidity
spiral amplifies the initial shock even further.


                                                     27
                             0.7                                                                    4                                                  1.05



                                                                                                                                                       1.04
                             0.6
                                                                                                   3.5


                                                                                                                                                       1.03
                             0.5
                                       ψBa                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                       1.02
                             0.4                                         ψ
                                                                         Aa
  ψAa and ψBa




                                                                                           Pa/Pb
                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                       1.01




                                                                                                                                                  q
                             0.3
                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                    2

                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                       0.99

                                                                                                   1.5
                             0.1
                                                                                                                                                       0.98


                                                                                                    1
                               0                                                                                                                       0.97
                                   0         0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4        0.5                        0   0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5                  0   0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5
                                                         η                                                               η                                                    η


Figure 4: Panel A, B and C contrast the capital shares ψ Aa and ψ Ba , the terms of trade
P a /Pb and the price of physical capital q of an economy without and with capital
controls (black solid versus red dashed curves) assuming an elasticity of substitution
of s = 1.01 (close to Cobb-Douglas).
                             4.5                                                             0.025                                                     0.04



                              4                                                                                                                       0.035

                                                                                               0.02
                             3.5
                                                                                                                                                       0.03


                              3
                                                                                                                                                      0.025
   Stationary Distribution




                                                                                             0.015
                             2.5
                                                                                    µη η




                                                                                                                                               ση η




                                                                                                                                                       0.02

                              2
                                                                                               0.01
                                                                                                                                                      0.015
                             1.5


                                                                                                                                                       0.01
                              1
                                                                                             0.005


                             0.5                                                                                                                      0.005



                              0                                                                     0                                                    0
                                   0         0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4        0.5                       0    0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5                  0   0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5
                                                         η                                                               η                                                    η


Figure 5: Panel A plots the stationary distribution, Panel B the drift and Panel
C the volatility of wealth shares η for the global economy without capital controls
(black solid curves) and with capital controls (red dashed curves) for an elasticity of
substitution coefficient of s = 1.01.


                                                                                                                     28
    Figure 5 shows the stability profile of an economy without and with capital con-
trol. Overall, debt financing increases specialization, it leads to better allocation of
resources and boosts economic growth in normal times. However, it comes at the
price of reduced economic stability. Panel A of Figure 5 shows this: the stationary
distribution of the wealth share has more mass at the extremes in a global economy
without capital controls. Panel C shows that the volatility of η is much higher with
an open capital account.


IV         Welfare Analysis
While short-term debt restrictions, like capital controls, can improve risk sharing
through the terms-of-trade hedges, they can also lower average economic growth.
In our incomplete-market setting, capital controls interact with many pecuniary ex-
ternalities. To answer whether capital controls are desirable, it is important to conduct
a formal welfare analysis.

Pecuniary Externalities. In complete markets, negative pecuniary externalities on
competitors balance out against positive externalities on consumers, leading to a
Pareto efficient outcome. In an incomplete-market setting, such as ours, pecuniary
externalities can lead to inefficiencies, see Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1986).
For example, when agents who maximize individual utility affect prices as a group,
they affect the amount risk sharing in the economy, which is limited by market in-
completeness. While η, which characterizes the wealth distribution, remains constant
in a complete-market setting, in our setting price changes shift the wealth distribu-
tion. Firms in one country affect prices in two ways. First, when overcapitalized, they
decide at what point to start competing with the firms in the other country. Second,
when undercapitalized, they set their scale of production choosing the amount of in-
ternational borrowing. While each individual firm’s decisions are too small to affect
prices, as a group they do.
    When a firm decides to start producing the good for which it has less expertise, it
takes output prices as given. Each firm in a country ignores that they as a group cap
the other country’s output price. This ruins the terms of trade hedge for the firms in
the other county as soon as the ratio P a /Pb reaches ā/a or a/ ā. Capital controls have
no impact on this pecuniary externality.13
 13 If   one were to endogenize a, even further inefficiency would arise whose cause is not a pecuniary


                                                   29
    The second pecuniary externality stems from firms’ borrowing decisions to scale
up their operation. This decision affects mainly competing firms in the home country.
As each domestic firm borrows after an adverse shock to keep production high, the
firms as a whole limit the price increases of their output. Each firm does not inter-
nalize that its borrowing undermines the terms of trade hedge. On the other hand,
if borrowing is limited, competition is reduced and profit margins rise. This can lead
to higher profits and help firms recapitalize themselves more quickly through higher
retained earnings. Of course, the dose of the borrowing limits has to be right; limits
that are too draconian are counterproductive. This is the case if higher profit margins
do not offset the losses from the decreased volume, as it is the case when foreign firms
enter to compete with the domestic firms.14
    Pecuniary externalities also work through the price of capital q. When firms decide
how much short-term debt to issue in order to acquire physical capital from abroad,
they do not internalize that effect of their leverage on the sensitivity of the price q to
shocks. As all firms in a country increase their leverage ratio, the price of capital q is
subject to a much sharper drop.
    While in this paper we simply ask whether the crude policy of closing the inter-
national capital flow can increase welfare, better outcomes can be attained with more
general policies. International lending does not have to be shut down fully, and capi-
tal flows across borders can be regulated with taxes that directly target the size of the
pecuniary externalities.
    Pecuniary externalities and market incompleteness are the reasons for the constrained-
inefficient equilibrium outcome. Optimization by the social planner would account
for the effects price changes, and, in our case, the terms of trade hedges. That is, even
though the planner may have no more freedom and face the same incomplete-market
frictions as the agents, he can achieve higher welfare.

Welfare Calculations. Pecuniary externalities help us to identify the source of con-
strained inefficiency of the market outcome. However, to figure out the extent of the
inefficiency and the welfare impact of various policy measures we have to conduct
an explicit welfare analysis. Policy measures that reduce uncertainty can be welfare
enhancing even when they result in a slightly lower growth rate. Hence, we calculate
externality. Each country as a whole has an incentive to promote measures that increase its a. This
improves the country’s terms of trade at the expense of the other country, see Samuelson (2004). As
both countries engage in such activities they undermine each others’ terms of trade hedges.
  14 That is, capital controls can improve risk sharing from terms-of-trade hedges only when specialized

domestic firms do not have viable foreign competitors.


                                                  30
the value functions reflecting the discounted future expected utility stream for both
types of agents.
   In this section we focus on a setting with logarithmic utility, i.e. γ = 1. In this case
value functions take the simple form

                                                           log nt
                                        V ( n t , ηt ) =          + h ( ηt ).                        (30)
                                                             r
To understand this form of value functions, note that if we change the net worth of
an agent by a factor of α, the agent’s optimal consumption also changes by a factor
of α.15 Since log(αct ) = log(α) + log(ct ), the agent’s utility increases by log(α)/r.
This is reflected in the form (30). The wealth-independent term h(ηt ) depends on the
agent’s investment opportunities, summarized by the state variable ηt . The first term
is increasing in agent A’s own wealth, while the h(ηt )-term tends to be decreasing in
ηt , the wealth share of other agents in the same country. As ηt declines competing
firms in the same country decrease their output, the output price rises and with it
expected profits. The exact form of h(η ) depends on the market frictions.
     For country A the value function can be decomposed into

                  log Nt              log(ηt Kt qt )              log ηt log Kt log q(ηt )
V ( Nt , ηt ) =          + h ( ηt ) =                + h ( ηt ) =       +      +           + h ( ηt ) .
                     r                     r                        r      r     | r {z            }
                                                                                          H ( ηt )


   For clarity, we normalize the initial size of the economy to K0 = 1. Hence,
the second term drops out. Let us combine the third and fourth terms to H (η ) =
log(q(η ))/r + h(η ). Proposition 5 shows that, after manipulating the HJB equation,
H (η ) has to solve a second order ordinary differential equation.
Proposition 5 In the competitive equilibrium, H (η ) = log(q(η ))/r + h(η ) satisfies the
following second order differential equation:

                                                                ηA
                                                (σ )2 + (σt )2 Φ(ι) − δ
                                                     η                     ηB
                                            µ
                     rH (η ) = log(rq(η )) + t − t            +
                                             r        2r          r
                                                                                ηA   ηB
     (ψ Aa + ψ Ab )2 (σ A )2 + (ψ Ba + ψ Bb )2 (σ B )2                  (σ )2 + (σt )2 2 00
                                                       + µt η H 0 (η ) + t
                                                          η
 −                                                                                    η H ( η ).
                            2r                                                2
For agents B an analogous ODE applies, and their value function is given by V B ( NtB , ηt ) =
log( NtB )/r + H (1 − ηt ) in the symmetric case σ A = σ B = σ.
  15 In   fact, this is true for any CRRA utility.


                                                           31
                           −70




                           −75




                           −80




                           −85




                           −90




                      VB
                           −95




                           −100




                           −105




                           −110




                           −115




                           −120
                             −120   −115   −110   −105   −100   −95   −90   −85   −80   −75   −70
                                                                VA




Figure 6: Welfare frontier for agents in country A (x-axis) and agents in country B
(y-axis). The first-best solution is depicted by the outer dashed-dotted green frontier.
The market equilibrium frontier without capital controls is given by the black frontier,
while the frontier under strict capital controls is depicted by the red dashed curve.
The circles on the frontiers mark the switching points, η a , η b , when full specialization
starts or ends.

Proof. See Appendix D.
    The exact form of H (η ) depends on the market frictions and whether capital con-
trols are imposed or not. Once we have solved the ODE for H (η ) for both types
of agents, we find out the welfare of agents A and B for any current wealth share
η. As one varies η one walks along the frontier. Any η corresponds to the point
(V A (η ), V B (η )) = (log(η )/r + H (η ), log(1 − η )/r + H (1 − η )) on the frontier.
    Figure 6 plots the frontier of value functions for agents in country A on the x-axis
and for agents in country B on the y-axis. The outer frontier, given by the green
dashed-dotted curve, depicts the first best outcomes that arise as equilibrium out-
comes under complete markets. The values themselves turn out to be negative, which
is not surprising given that the value function is of the log form, like the utility func-
tion. The circles on the various frontiers indicate the points η a and η b . In the middle
region η ∈ [η a , η b ] firms exclusively produce output goods they are good producing
at. In a world with capital controls the middle region seems smaller. This does how-
ever not automatically imply that the economy spends less time in this region, since
in that case the stationary distribution is more concentrated around η = .5
    The first best frontier is the Pareto frontier, and so it is strictly decreasing. As
one moves along the frontier, the value of agents A increases only when the value of

                                                                32
agents B declines. The first best solution is particularly simple as in this case H (η )
is constant. Note that in the case of log utility the Pareto weight λ that the planner
assigns to agents A coincides with agent A’s consumption share and wealth share η.16
For the first best solution, the ODE in Proposition 5 reduces to

                                 (σ N A )2 + (σ NB )2 1 āP a − ι
                                                                                     
                                                                                A NA
rH (η ) − log(q(η )) = log(r ) +                     +            + Φ(ι) − δ − σ σ − r ,
                                           2r          r    q

where σ N A = σ A /2 and σ NB = σ B /2 and q is given in Proposition 1.
    Returning to Figure 6, the incomplete markets outcome with an international debt
market is given by the solid black curve. Notice that the black frontier is inward
bending for very skewed wealth distributions, i.e. for η sufficiently close to 0 or 1.17
In other words, the frontier is not necessarily a Pareto frontier. For low enough values
of η an unanticipated wealth transfer from agents in country B to agents in country
A, e.g. in form of a bailout or debt relief program, can make both types of agents
better off. (By symmetry, for high enough η, the reverse transfer can lead to Pareto
improvement.) The intuition for this feature is that with extreme wealth inequality it
would be better to distribute wealth to the poor country. Firms in the poor country in-
crease their output which lowers their output price.18 Agents from the richer country
benefit from the lower output price, justifying the initial wealth transfer. Since each
individual rich agent takes prices as given he would be unwilling to do such a trans-
fer. Only a government can coordinate such a transfer that internalizes the pecuniary
externalities.
    Looking at Figure 6 one might get the impression that transfers should occasion-
ally occur and capital controls are primarily welfare destroying except for some values
of η close to 1/2. The conclusion one could draw is misleading for two reasons. First,
assuming that η is drawn from the stationary distribution, values of η for which a
transfer from the rich to the poor country is Pareto improving are rare. Most of the
time the economy stays close to 1/2. Second, capital controls are actually mostly wel-
fare improving since the system is rarely outside the region where the dashed red
capital control frontier is inside the solid black welfare frontier.
    It is therefore wise to look at welfare for each type of agent from a different angle,
  16 Recall   from Equation (14) for general risk aversion coefficient γ the consumption share under first
              1     1           1
best is (λ) /[(λ) γ + (1 − λ) γ ] (see Appendix A)
              γ
   17 As one increases the adjustment costs for disinvestment the frontier becomes more inward bending.
   18 Note even though for η < η a (η > η b ) the immediate terms of trade are temporarily fixed at either

ā/a (a/ ā), a price in the (near) future becomes more likely.


                                                     33
                   −170                                                          −170




                   −175                                                          −175




                   −180                                                          −180




                                                              Sum of Utilities
    Sum of Utils




                   −185                                                          −185




                   −190                                                          −190




                   −195                                                          −195




                   −200                                                          −200
                       0   0.1   0.2       0.3   0.4   0.5                           0   0.1   0.2           0.3   0.4   0.5
                                       η                                                             CDF η


Figure 7: Panel A depicts the sum of both countries’ welfares for different levels of
wealth shares, η for the case s = 1. The first-best solution where the planner assigns
equal Pareto weights to both type of agents is represented by the dashed-dotted green
horizontal line. The outer increasing green dashed-dotted curve depicts the complete
market solution for different initial η. The equilibrium outcome with an international
debt market is given by the black solid curve and without an international debt market
by the dashed red curve. Panel B represents the same graph but depicts on the x-axis
the the cumulative density distribution of η instead of η itself. The circles mark the
point η a .

i.e., one that takes the relative frequency of different η-values into account. Note that
any monotone transformation of η would have been mathematically an equally good
state variable to use, albeit more difficult to interpret economically. Taking instead
of η the cumulative (stationary) distribution function of η is a particular attractive
monotone transformation. The CDF of η is uniformly distributed and hence one can
easily integrate the areas between the curves. Figure 7 Panel A depicts the sum of
both countries’ welfare for different values of η for the cases of (i) first best with equal
Pareto weights λ = η = 1/2, (ii) market equilibrium with open debt market and
(iii) market equilibrium in which capital controls shut down the international debt
market. Panel B depicts the sum of the value functions as a function of cumulative
distribution function of η. Note that since the stationary distribution differs across
these three cases, so does the transformation of η. In particular, for the first best case
with constant η = 1/2, the stationary distribution is step function with a step at 1/2.
The horizontal line depicts the first best sum of value functions of both agents for the
case of η = 1/2. Note that for other Pareto weights the first best horizontal line would
be lower.
     The differences between Figure 6 and Panel B of Figure 7 are striking. Figure 6

                                                             34
suggests that capital controls are welfare reducing except for a small range of ηs
around 1/2. Panel A of Figure 7 points already out that for most values of η capital
controls are welfare enhancing.19 Panel A is still difficult to read since the stationary
distribution of η is more concentrated around 1/2 for the case of capital control than
for the case with open capital account. Panel B of Figure 7 takes the relative frequency
of η (based on the stationary distribution) into account. Panel B makes clear that this
range of η-values for which capital controls are welfare improving is actually the
relevant one. The economy is almost always within this range. In other words, Panel
B of Figure 7 shows that initial η values for which capital controls reduce welfare
are rare events, indeed, they are so rare that they are unrecognizable in Panel B of
Figure 7. Second, the values of η for which the value frontier Figures 6 is inward
bending and unanticipated debt relief program should be enacted are even further
down in the extreme tails of the stationary distribution.
     While for our parameter values capital controls are “almost always’’ utility value
improving, this does not need to hold for all parameter values. As the fundamental
exogenous risk σ A = σ B rises the advantage of capital controls declines. Similarly,
an increase in the substitutability of both output goods, i.e. in s, reduces the value
of capital controls. Increasing a towards ā has at least two implications. First, it
lowers the price cap for the output good. Hence, the terms of trade hedge is reduced,
reducing welfare. Second, the efficiency losses from producing the output good for
which the output rate is only ak is smaller. This increases the welfare. As a approaches
ā the production efficiency loss vanishes, but so does also the terms of trade hedge.
The overall welfare implications are not monotone in a.


V      Conclusion
Magud, Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) complain about the lack of a unified theoretical
framework to analyze the macroeconomic consequences of capital controls. This pa-
per provides such a framework that is general enough that it can be calibrated and
quantitative implications can be derived. It clearly identifies pecuniary externalities.
The externality only arises in a multiple good setting and undermines the natural
terms of trade hedge stressed in Cole and Obstfeld (1991). Open current accounts
  19 Capital controls increase the sum of both value functions for a large range of η. Capital controls
are Pareto improving, i.e. V A (η ) and V B (η ) are higher with capital controls, only for a small range of
η around 1/2. Outside this range of η the value function of the poor country increases, while the value
function of the rich country declines.


                                                    35
that primarily lead to short-term debt financing also lead to a constrained inefficient
outcome in terms of welfare and to a highly volatile market in terms of financial sta-
bility. The analysis shows that capital controls that shut down the international debt
market can be welfare improving. Fine-tuned capital controls, e.g., by imposing taxes
on debt capital flows, would extend the parameter space for which capital controls
enhance overall welfare.


References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Jaume Ventura. 2002. “The World Income Distribution.” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 117(2): 659–694.

Aoki, Kosuke, Gianluca Benigno, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2009. “Capital Flows and
 Asset Prices.” In . , ed. Richard Clarida and Francesco Giavazzi, Chapter 4, 175–216.
 Chicago, IL:University of Chicago Press. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c3006.

Backus, David K, and Mario J Crucini. 2000. “Oil prices and the terms of trade.”
  Journal of International Economics, 50(1): 185–213.

Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland. 1994. “Dynamics of the
  Trade Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve?” The American Economic Review,
  84(1): pp. 84–103.

Benigno, Pierpaolo. 2009. “Price Stability with Imperfect Financial Integration.” Jour-
  nal of Money, Credit and Banking, 41: 121–149.

Benigno, Pierpaolo, Chen Huigang, Christopher Otrok, and Alessandro Rebucci.
  2014. “Optimal Capital Controls and Real Exchange Rate Policies: A Pecuniary
  Externality Perspective.” Working paper.

Berka, Martin, Mario J Crucini, and Chih-Wei Wang. 2012. “International risk
  sharing and commodity prices.” Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne
  d’économique, 45(2): 417–447.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. “The Financial Acceler-
  ator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics. ,
  ed. John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford. Elsevier.



                                          36
Bianchi, Javier. 2011. “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cy-
  cle.” American Economic Review, 101(7): 3400–3426.

Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique Mendoza. 2012. “Overborrowing, Financial Crises and
  ‘Macro-prudential’ Policy.” Working Paper.

Bolton, Patrick, and David S. Scharfstein. 1990. “A Theory of Predation Based on
  Agency Problems in Financial Contracting.” American Economic Review, 80(1): 93–
  106.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov. 2011. “The I Theory of Money.”
  Working Paper.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov. 2014. “A Macroeconomic Model with
  a Financial Sector.” American Economic Review. forthcoming.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2004. “Smoothing Sudden Stops.”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 119(1): 104–127. Macroeconomics of Global Capital Mar-
  ket Imperfections.

Calvo, Guillermo A. 1998. “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple
  Economics of Sudden Stops.” Journal of Applied Economics, 0: 35–54.

Calvo, Guillermo A, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi. 2006. “Phoenix Mir-
  acles in Emerging Markets: Recovering Without Credit from Systemic Financial
  Crises.” Inter-American Development Bank Research Department Working Paper
  570.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Helene Rey, and Pablo Winant. 2013. “Financial Integration
 and Growth in a Risky World.” Working Paper.

Cole, Harold L., and Maurice Obstfeld. 1991. “Commodity trade and international
 risk sharing : How much do financial markets matter?” Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 28(1): 3–24.

Committee   on    International   Economic   Policy    and   Reform.     2012.
 “Banks and Cross-Border Capital Flows:             Policy Challenges and
 Regulatory    Responses.”     Report,   Brookings,      Washington,      D.C.
 http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports/2012/09/ciepr-banks-capital-flows.



                                        37
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc. 2008. “International Risk Shar-
 ing and the Transmission of Productivity Shocks.” The Review of Economic Studies,
 75(2): 443–473.

Costinot, Arnaud, Guido Lorenzoni, and Iván Werning. 2014. “A Theory of Capital
 Controls as Dynamic Terms-of-Trade Manipulation.” Journal of Political Economy.

DeMarzo, Peter M., and Yuliy Sannikov. 2006. “Optimal Security Design and Dy-
 namic Capital Structure in a Continuous-Time Agency Model.” Journal of Finance,
 61(6): 2681–2724.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2012. “Dealing with the Trilemma: Optimal
  Capital Controls with Fixed Exchange Rates.” Working Paper.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2013. “Fiscal Unions.” Working Paper.

Fuller, Thomas. 2011. “Thailand Flooding Cripples Hard-Drive Suppliers.” The New
  York Times.

Gabaix, Xavier, and Matteo Maggiori. 2014. “International Liquidity and Exchange
 Rate Dynamics.” Working Paper.

Geanakoplos, John, and Heraklis M. Polemarchakis. 1986. “Existence, Regularity,
 and Constrained Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations when the Asset Market
 is Incomplete.” In Uncertainty, Information and Communication: Essays in Honor of Ken-
 neth J. Arrow. , ed. Walter P. Heller, Ross M. Starr and David A. Starrett. Cambridge
 University Press.

Hart, Oliver D. 1975. “On the optimality of equilibrium when the market structure is
 incomplete.” Journal of Economic Theory, 11(3): 418–443.

Heathcote, Jonathan, and Fabrizio Perri. 2013. “The International Diversification Puz-
 zle is Not as Bad as You Think.” Journal of Political Economy. forthcoming.

Heathcote, Jonathan, and Fabrizio Perri. 2014. “On the Desirability of Capital Con-
 trols.” Working Paper.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Assaf Razin. 1978. “A theory of international trade under
 uncertainty.” University Library of Munich, Germany.

He, Zhiguo, and Peter Kondor. 2013. “Inefficient Investment Waves.” Working Paper.

                                          38
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek. 2011. “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A
  Pigouvian Taxation Approach.” Working Paper.

Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the firm: Manage-
  rial behavior, agency costs and ownership structure.” Journal of Financial Economics,
  3(4): 305 – 360.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1929. “The German Transfer Problem.” The Economic Journal,
 39: pp. 1–7.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 105(2): 211–248.

Korinek, Anton. 2011. “The New Economics of Prudential Capital Controls.” IMF
 Economic Review, 59(3): 523–561.

Lewis, Karen K. 1999. “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption.”
  Journal of Economic Literature, 37(2): pp. 571–608.

Lorenzoni, Guido. 2014. “International Financial Crises.” In Handbook of International
  Economics. Vol. 4, , ed. Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth Rogoff. Else-
  vier.

Maggiori, Matteo. 2013. “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and
 Reserve Currencies.” Working Paper, NYU.

Magud, Nicolas E., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2011. “Capital
 Controls: Myth and Reality - A Portfolio Balance Approach.” National Bureau of
 Economic Research Working Paper 16805.

Mendoza, Enrique G. 2010. “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage.” American
 Economic Review, 100(4): 1941–1966.

Newbery, David M. G., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1984. “Pareto Inferior Trade.” The
 Review of Economic Studies, 51(1): pp. 1–12.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Cri-
 sis, and Growth. Japan-U.S. Center Sanwa Monographs on International Financial Mar-
 kets., Cambridge University Press.



                                          39
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux.”
 Journal of Political Economy, 103(3): 624–660.

Ohlin, Bertil. 1929. “Mr. Keynes’ views on the transfer problem. II. A rejoinder from
 professor Ohlin.” The Economic Journal, 39: 400–4.

Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S.
 Qureshi, and Dennis B.S. Reinhardt. 2010. “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls.”
 International Monetary Fund. IMF Staff Position Note 10/04.

Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon. 2007. “Asset Prices and Exchange Rates.” The
  Review of Financial Studies, 20(4): pp. 1139–1181.

Phelan, Gregory. 2013. “Financial Intermediation, Leverage, and Macroeconomic Sta-
  bility.” Working Paper.

Samuelson, Paul A. 2004. “Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and Confirm Arguments of
  Mainstream Economists Supporting Globalization.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  18(3): 135–146.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe. 2012. “Pegs and Pain.” Working Paper.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe. 2013. “Downward Nominal Wage
  Rigidity, Currency Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment.” Working Paper.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1982. “The Inefficiency of the Stock Market Equilibrium.” Review of
  Economic Studies, 49(2): 241–261.




                                          40
    Appendix

I     Proofs
A     Proof of Proposition 1: First Best Analysis
A.1   Social Planner’s Problem

Under complete market and no frictions, agents would fully share the risks dZtA
and dZtB , and the equilibrium allocation solves a planner’s problem, where welfare
weights λ and 1 − λ depend on relative initial wealth of agents in country A and B:

                                               ∞
                                      Z                     h                                             i        
                                                       −rt
V ( K0 ) =       max             E0                e             λU (CtA ) + (1 − λ)U (CtB )                   dt
             CtA ,CtB ,ψt ,ι t             0

              s.t.        Yta = ( āψtAa + aψtBa )Kt ,
                          Ytb = ( āψtBb + aψtAb )Kt ,
                                                           s
                                   1 a s−s 1 1  b  s−s 1 s−1
                                
                          Yt =       (Y ) +          Y         ,
                                   2 t           2 t
                           Yt = CtA + CtB + ι t Kt ,
                        dKt = [Φ(ι t ) − δ]Kt dt + (ψtAa + ψtAb )σ A Kt dZtA + (ψtBa + ψtBb )σ B Kt dZtB ,
                             Ij
                         ψt ≥ 0,               ψtAa + ψtAb + ψtBa + ψtBb = 1

   The social planner will choose full specialization (ψtAa = ψtBb = 1/2). Since
marginal cost of goods a and b are identical, marginal product of goods a and b in
producing output-index Y must be the same. Write out the marginal products to
see that the social planner must also choose output equalization (Yta = Ytb ). The
aggregate production function will be Yt = āKt /2.
   Denote the consumption intensities as ζ tA ≡ CtA /Kt and ζ tB ≡ CtB /Kt . The social
planner’s problem above reduces to:

                                                                     ∞
                                                         Z                        h                                         i        
                                                                             −rt
               V (K0 ) = max E0                                          e             λU (ζ tA Kt ) + (1 − λ)U (ζ tB Kt )       dt
                                  ζ tA ,ζ tB ≥0                  0

                                                                      σ dZtA + dZtB
                                                               
                                              ā   A     B
                      s.t.        dKt /Kt = Φ( − ζ t − ζ t ) − δ dt + √     √
                                              2                         2     2

    Note that agents fully share the risks, the responses to Brownian shocks dZtA and

                                                                                       41
dZtB are symmetric, we can aggregate them into a single standard Brownian shock
                     √
dZt = (dZtA + dZtB )/ 2. The HJB equation for the planner’s problem is:

                    rV (K ) = max λU (ζ A K ) + (1 − λ)U (ζ B K )
                                   ζ A ,ζ B ≥0
                                                                σ2
                                                    
                                       ā  A   B       1
                              +V K K Φ( − ζ − ζ ) − δ + V KK K2                                              (31)
                                       2               2        2

   Next, we are solving for the equilibrium total consumption intensity ζ ∗ . We first
focus on the general CRRA case and then on the log-utility case.

CRRA Utility case. We conjecture that the solution of the value function takes on the
                             1− γ
following form: V (K ) = α K1−γ + h where α and h are constants. Then V K K = αK1−γ
and V KK K2 = −γαK1−γ . Plug into (31), the HJB under this conjecture is (h = 0):

   K 1− γ            ( ζ A )1− γ            ( ζ B )1− γ                           γασ2
                                                                                    
                                                              ā
rα        = max λ                + (1 − λ )                        A     B
                                                        + α Φ( − ζ t − ζ t )− δ −        K 1− γ
   1−γ      A  B
           ζ ,ζ ≥0     1  −  γ                1  −  γ         2                    4

    The terms in the bracket does not depend on K, which verifies the function form
for V. The first order conditions are:
                                                                    −1
                                      −1
                                               A   ā    A   0  B
                                                                      γ
                               (λ) (ζ ) = αΦ ( − ζ t − ζ t )
                                      γ                                  ,
                                                   2
                                                                    −1
                                  −1               ā                 γ
                           (1 − λ) γ (ζ B ) = αΦ0 ( − ζ tA − ζ tB )      .
                                                   2

   Let total consumption intensity be ζ ∗ = ζ A + ζ B .
                               1                                                             1
                           (λ) γ                   ∗                                (1 − λ ) γ
              A
            ζ =        1                   1
                                                 ·ζ ,       and         B
                                                                       ζ =          1             1
                                                                                                      · ζ∗
                   ( λ ) + (1 − λ )
                       γ                   γ                                   ( λ ) + (1 − λ )
                                                                                    γ             γ



   The FOC becomes:
                                     h         1                  1
                                                                      i−γ        ā
                                                                                        
                       ∗ −γ                                                     0     ∗
                     (ζ )      = ( λ ) + (1 − λ )
                                               γ                  γ           αΦ ( − ζ ) ,
                                                                                  2

which involves α and ζ ∗ . For given constant α, LHS of the above equation is decreasing
in the total consumption intensity ζ ∗ and RHS is increasing in ζ ∗ .
    To determine both α and ζ ∗ we need one more equation. Plug λ(ζ A )−γ = αΦ0 and


                                                            42
(1 − λ)(ζ B )−γ = αΦ0 into the HJB equation:

                           ζ∗                               γσ2 α
                                                        
                     rα         0 ā  ∗        ā  ∗
                        =     αΦ ( − ζ ) + A Φ( − ζ ) − δ −
                    1−γ   1−γ     2            2             4

         The α’s cancel out and the above HJB becomes a single variate equation in ζ ∗ :

                             ζ∗                            γσ2
                                                       
                       r         0 ā  ∗      ā  ∗
                          =     Φ ( − ζ ) + Φ( − ζ ) − δ −
                      1−γ   1−γ    2          2             4

   Importantly, the total consumption intensity ζ ∗ does not depend on Kt . For ap-
propriate functional form and parameters we can solve out ζ ∗ , the optimal total con-
sumption intensity, using above version of HJB.

Log Utility Case. For the case of log utility we conjecture that the value function
takes on the following form V (K ) = α log(K ) + h where α and h are constants. Then
V K K = α and V KK K2 = −α. First order conditions for the HJB equation 31 are:

                                       λ      0 ā
                                         = αΦ  ( − ζ tA − ζ tB ),
                                      ζA        2
                                   1−λ          ā
                                      B
                                         =αΦ0 ( − ζ tA − ζ tB ).
                                    ζ           2

         Under log utility, consumption shares are proportional to the welfare weights
     A
( ζζ B    = 1−λ λ ). Furthermore, since the ζ’s do not depend on K (scale invariance), co-
efficient α equals r −1 and we verify the function form assumed on V.
Let ζ ≡ ζ A + ζ B , the optimal consumption intensity ζ ∗ is then pinned down by:

                                                 1     ā
                                     ( ζ ∗ ) −1 = Φ 0 ( − ζ ∗ )
                                                 r     2
   where the LHS is marginal utility in consumption intensities and the RHS is the
marginal efficiency of capital investment times the marginal value of capital (in rates).
Importantly, ζ ∗ does not depend on Kt . The LHS is decreasing in ζ ∗ from +∞ to 0 and
the RHS is increasing in ζ ∗ from Φ0 ( 2a ) > 0 to Φ0 (−∞). There exists a unique ζ ∗ that
solves the planner’s problem. The individual consumption intensities are ζ A∗ = λζ ∗
and ζ B∗ = (1 − λ)ζ ∗ . The value function V for the social planner’s problem is:

                                                                               σ2
                                                                            
                 1      ∗                                       1   ā  ∗
         V (K ) = [log(ζ K ) + λ log(λ) + (1 − λ) log(1 − λ)] + 2 Φ( − ζ )− δ − 2 .
                 r                                             r    2          4r

                                                43
A.2   Decentralization: Representative Agent Economy

The original planner’s problem is equivalent to a representative agent with utility
function Ũ defined by

                Ũ (C ) = Ũ (ζK ) ≡     max λU (ζ A K ) + (1 − λ)U (ζ B K )
                                       ζ A +ζ B ≤ζ


facing the following problem:

                                                     ∞
                                              Z                              
                        R                                −rt
                      Ṽ (K0 ) = max E0
                                                                         
                                            e   Ũ (ζ t Kt ) dt
                                 ζ ≥0    0
                                             
                                      ā                  σ
                     s.t. dKt = Φ( − ζ t ) − δ Kt dt + √ Kt dZt
                                      2                     2

    To decentralize a planner’s problem we need to solve for the prices consistent with
the planner’s solution. In the planner’s problem consumption is a constant fraction
of total capital, so dCt /Ct follows the same stochastic process as dKt /Kt . Using the
asset-pricing condition ( Equation (11) ) we can compute the risk-free interest rate r F

                      dr F                        γ ( γ + 1) σ 2
                                              
                                     ā  ∗
                           = r + γ Φ( − ζ ) − δ −
                       dt            2                  4

   The inverse of marginal rate of transformation equals capital prices hence
                                                               −1
                                         ā
                                  q = Φ ( − ζ∗)
                                              0
                                                                      ,
                                         2

Observe that q is constant over time. Then we can use the Equation (12) to price the
return on capital and get capital prices.

                    dr F   ζ∗
                                                     
                                  ā  ∗        σ     γσ
                         =    + Φ( − ζ ) − δ + √ · − √ .
                     dt     q     2             2     2
                           |      {z        }
                                 return on capital




                                                  44
B    Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. Recall that the return processes follow

                  āPta − ι t
                                                          
                                 q                  A qA                   qA          qB
     drtAa   =                + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ σt      dt + (σ A + σt )dZtA + σt dZtB
                      qt
                                                           !
                  aPtb − ι t     q                   A qA                  qA          qB
     drtAb =                  + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ σt       dt + (σ A + σt )dZtA + σt dZtB
                       qt
                  a
                  aPt − ι t
                                                           
                                 q                  B qB            qA              qB
     drtBa =                  + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ σt      dt + σt dZtA + (σ B + σt )dZtB
                      qt
                                                           !
                  āPtb − ι t    q                      qB          qA               qB
     drtBb =                  + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ B σt    dt + σt dZtA + (σ B + σt )dZtB
                       qt

    Using equations (10) to (13), the risk-free rate is given by

                       dr F              γ(γ + 1)  C AA 2     A
                                                                    
                            = r + γµCt −           (σt ) + (σtC B )2 ,
                        dt                  2
whereas the excess returns can be expressed as

       āPta − ι t    q                      qA  dr F                   A      qB   A
                   + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ A σt −      = γ(σ A + σqA )σtC A + γσt σtC B
           qt                                     dt
       aPtb − ι t    q                      qA     dr F                   A       qB   A
                  + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ A σt −         ≤ γ(σ A + σqA )σtC A + γσt σtC B
          qt                                        dt
       aPta − ι t     q                      qB    dr F     qA   B              qB    B
                  + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ B σt −         ≤ γσt σtC A + γ(σ B + σt )σtC B
           qt                                       dt
       āPtb − ι t    q                      qB  dr F     qA   B             qB    B
                   + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ B σt −      = γσt σtC A + γ(σ B + σt )σtC B
           qt                                     dt

   From these excess returns we can derive the following equilibrium asset-pricing
conditions

ā( Pta − Ptb )        qA       qB           qA    A      qB   A      qA   B             qB    B
                + σ A σt − σ B σt = γ(σ A + σt )σtC A + γσt σtC B − γσt σtC A − γ(σ B + σt )σtC B
       qt
                               aPta ≤ āPtb   with equality if ψtBa > 0

    With portfolio weights ψtAa /ηt and ψtAb /ηt on the two technologies, the law of




                                                 45
motion of the net worth of agents A is

      dNt   ψtAa + ψtAb     A   qA C AA    qB C AB     dr F      CtA
          =             γ[(σ + σt )σt   + σt σt ] dt +      dt −     dt
       Nt        ηt                                     dt       Nt
               ψtAa + ψtAb A    qA        ψ Aa + ψtAb qB B
           +              (σ + σt ) dZtA + t         σt dZt
                    ηt                         ηt
               |         {z        }      |      {z    }
                           σtN A                              σtNB

                           AA              A            dr F     CA
           = γ[σtN A σtC        + σtNB σtC B ] dt +          dt − t dt + σtN A dZtA + σtNB dZtB
                                                         dt      Nt

   The law of motion of aggregate wealth can be found by computing the return on
the aggregate portfolio of capital, and subtracting the dividend yield, i.e.

     d ( qt Kt )                           qA    A     qB   A
                 = (ψtAa + ψtAb )γ[(σ A + σt )σtC A + σt σtC B ] dt
       qt Kt
                                      qA       BA             qB     B          dr F      Yt − ι t Kt
               + (ψtBa + ψtBb )γ[σt σtC             + (σ B + σt )σtC B ] dt +        dt −             dt
                                                                                 dt          qt Kt
                                                              qB
               + (ψtAa + ψtAb )[(σ A + σqA )dZtA + σt dZtB ]
                                                             qB
               + (ψtBa + ψtBb )[σqA dZtA + (σ B + σt )dZtB ]

It may appear strange that we derived this expression by subtracting dividend yield
from the return on the world portfolio, instead of by multiplying the laws of motion
of q and K. The benefit of this approach is that it allows us to express the law of
                            q
motion of ηt without using µt and dr F /dt. Thus, the law of motion of η that we obtain
in the end can be computed purely from the first derivatives of q, C A and C B (without
second derivatives).




                                                        46
    Using Ito’s lemma,

      dηt   1 − ηt Aa                   qA    A     qB   A
          =       (ψt + ψtAb )γ[(σ A + σt )σtC A + σt σtC B ]dt
      ηt      ηt
                               qA   B               CtA
                                                      qB    BYt − ι t Kt
          − (ψtBa   + ψtBb )γ[σt σtC A
                                + (σ           B
                                                   + σt )σtC B ]dt −
                                                        dt +             dt
                                                     Nt         qt Kt
              1 − ηt Aa
                                                       
                                     qA          Bb qA
          +         (ψt + ψt )(σ + σt ) − (ψt + ψt )σt dZtA
                           Ab   A           Ba
                ηt
            |                     {z                    }
                                          ηA
                                         σt
              1 − ηt Aa
                                                     
                           Ab qB                   qB
          +         (ψt + ψt )σt − (ψt + ψt )(σ + σt ) dZtB
                                     Ba   Bb   B
                ηt
            |                    {z                   }
                                          ηB
                                         σt
                                                            i Aa        Ab
                                                         qA ψt + ψt
           h
          − (ψtAa + ψtAb )(σ A + σqA ) + (ψtBa + ψtBb )σt                  (σ A + σqA ) dt
                                                                   ηt
           h                                               i ψ Aa + ψ Ab
                           qB                          qB
          − (ψtAa + ψtAb )σt + (ψtBa + ψtBb )(σ B + σt )      t       t
                                                                          σqB dt
                                                                  ηt
                                                         qA 2
           h                                                i
          + (ψtAa + ψtAb )(σ A + σqA ) + (ψtBa + ψtBb )σt     dt
                                                       qB 2
           h                                               i
                           qB
          + (ψtAa + ψtAb )σt + (ψtBa + ψtBb )(σ B + σt ) dt,

and (16) follows if we set ψtAb = 0 and simplify.


C    Proof of Proposition 4
Proof. We only need to derive the law of motion of ηt . The net worth of agents A on
[0, η b ) follows
           a
 dNtA       āPt − ι t
                                                  
                          q                  A qA                qA         qB
      =                + µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + σ σt    dt + (σ A + σt )dZtA + σt dZtB −r dt.
  NtA           qt
          |                                    {z                                }
                                                    drtAa


The aggregate net worth of all agents follows

                d ( qt Kt )  
                               q
                                                                              
                            = µt + Φ(ι t ) − δ + ηt σ A σqA + (1 − ηt )σ B σqB dt
                  qt Kt
                                         qA                            qB
                         + (ηt σ A + σt ) dZtA + ((1 − ηt )σ B + σt ) dZtB .


                                                    47
                                                                                 ηA                     ηB
Therefore, using Ito’s lemma, the volatility of η is given by σt                      = (1 − ηt )σ A , σt    =
−(1 − ηt )σ B . Likewise, the drift of ηt is

                         āPta − ι t
                                     − r − (1 − ηt )[σ A ηt σ A − σ B (1 − ηt )σ B ],
                             qt

which leads to (29) after simplifications.


D        Proof of Proposition 5
The value for the first best is simple noting that with log utility agents consume a
fixed fraction of their wealth at any time. To solve the value function in competitive
equilibrium, we adopt the following steps.
    The value function of a representative agent in country A takes the form V ( Nt , ηt ) =
log(ηt )/r + log(Kt )/r + H (ηt ). The HJB equation is
                                                                                               
        log ηt log Kt                              1    d log(ηt )    1    d log(Kt )        dH (ηt )
r             +       + H ( ηt )       = log(Ct ) + E                + E                +E
          r       r                                r        dt        r        dt              dt

Using Ito’s lemma,
                                                                       η         ηA         ηB
                                                               µ   (σ )2 + (σt )2
             log(ηt ) + log(Kt ) + rH (ηt ) = log(rηt qt Kt ) + t − t             +
                                                                r        2r
                                                                  ηA            ηB
                µtK (σtKA )2 + (σtKB )2                 (σ )2 + (σt )2 2 00
                                        + µt ηH 0 (η ) + t
                                           η
                   −                                                  η H (η )
                 r           2r                               2
We can simplify the equation by first eliminating log(ηt ) + log(Kt ) on both sides.
Second, let us substitute

            µtK = Φ(ι t ) − δ,   σtKA = (ψtAa + ψtAb )σ A       and        σtKB = (ψtBa + ψtBb )σ B .

Then we obtain
                                                          ηA
                                                  (σ )2 + (σt )2 Φ(ι t ) − δ
                                                η                   ηB
                                              µt
                  rH (η ) = log(rq(η )) +        − t            +            −
                                               r        2r            r
                                                                                ηA         ηB
  (ψ Aa + ψ Ab )2 (σ A )2 + (ψ Ba + ψ Bb )2 (σ B )2    η    0       (σt )2 + (σt )2 2 00
                                                    + µt η H (η ) +                η H (η )
                         2r                                                2
The welfare of agents in country B satisfies a symmetric equation.



                                                     48
II      Algorithm
A      Equilibrium
This appendix describes the algorithm used to compute the numerical examples in
this paper. The key equilibrium objects are q(η ), ψ Aa (η ), ψ Ab (η ), ψ Ba (η ) and ψ Bb (η ).
Once we have these functions we can solve for the drifts and volatilities, outputs of
goods a and b, aggregate output and the goods prices.
    We compute the dynamics of q(η ), ψ Aa (η ), ψ Ab (η ), ψ Ba (η ) and ψ Bb (η ) only on the
domain η ∈ [0, 0.5]. For η ∈ (0.5, 1] the solution is symmetric. We also determine
the endogenous threshold η a (the threshold η b is determined symmetrically). Within
the domain η ∈ [0, 0.5] agents in the poorer country A do not produce good b, so
we set ψ Ab (η ) = 0. Since ψ Bb (η ) = 1 − ψ Aa (η ) − ψ Ba (η ) by capital market clearing,
we can restrict the algorithm to solving for the two capital shares ψ Aa (η ) and ψ Ba (η ),
along with the capital price q(η ). The algorithm solves a system of implicit differ-
ential equations in three equilibrium conditions: goods market clearing, debt market
clearing, and country B’s portfolio decision. The algorithm is as follows:

     1. Consider first the region [0, η a ), where B produces good a. First, we need to
        compute initial conditions. We calculate the level ψ Aa (0) analytically. Then, we
        use the Matlab function decic to compute initial conditions ψ Aa (0), ψ Ba (0), q(0)
        and (ψ Aa )0 (0), (ψ Ba )0 (0), q0 (0) that are consistent with the system of implicit
        differential equations, holding ψ Aa (0) fixed.

     2. Given the initial conditions, we use Matlab’s implicit ODE solver, ode15i, to
        solve for q(η ), ψ Aa (η ), ψ Ba (η ) using the three equilibrium conditions. We then
        determine the endogenous threshold η a as the η where ψ Ba (η ) reaches zero.

     3. Next consider the middle region [η a , 0.5]. Forcing q(·) to be continuous in η
        and setting ψ Ba (η a ) = 0, use the decic function to determine consistent initial
        conditions at η a .

     4. In the region [η a , 0.5], use these initial conditions and proceed as in 2. to solve the
        appropriate equilibrium conditions to obtain the functions q(η ), ψ Aa (η ), ψ Ba (η ),
        η ∈ [η a , 0.5]. Specifically, in this region B does not hold capital to produce a.

     5. Once we have q(η ), ψ Aa (η ), ψ Ba (η ) and their derivatives, use the appropriate
        equations in the text to solve for the drifts and volatilities of dη, dq, dC I , the
        outputs, Y a , Y b , Y, and the prices P a , Pb for each value of η ∈ [0, 0.5].

                                                49
    6. Finally, we compute the stationary distribution of η from the Kolmogorov for-
       ward equation using the same algorithm as in Brunnermeier and Sannikov
       (2014).


B    Welfare
Here we outline the procedure used to solve for H (η ) from the value function used
to calculate welfare under the closed and open capital account for debt.

    1. Given the computed equilibrium we use the explicit ODE solver ode45 to solve
       the functions H A (η ), H B (η ) on η ∈ [0, 0.5], together with an auxiliary function
       H (η ) which is a solution to the (common) homogeneous part of the ODEs of
       H A (η ) and H B (η ).

    2. For η ∈ (0.5, 1], by symmetry we have H A (η ) = H B (1 − η ) and H B (η ) = H A (1 −
       η ). Moreover we have H A (0.5) = H B (0.5) and ( H A )0 (0.5) = −( H B )0 (0.5) as the
       boundary conditions.

    3. We solve H A (0), H B (0), H (0) analytically, set the initial first order derivatives to
       be ( H A )0 (0) = 0, ( H B )0 (0) = 0, and normalize H 0 (0) = 1.

    4. We plug the initial conditions into ode45 to solve for the complementary function
       H (η ) and two particular integrals H̃ A (η ), H̃ B (η ).

    5. Note that the general solutions to the ODEs are of the form of H̃ I (η ) + c I H (η )
       with constants c I and I ∈ { A, B}. We use the boundary conditions at η = 0.5 to
       pin down c A , c B and obtain two particular solutions.




                                               50
