                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          WHO LOSES UNDER POWER PLANT CAP-AND-TRADE PROGRAMS?

                                            E. Mark Curtis

                                        Working Paper 20808
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20808


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




I thank Spencer Banzhaf, Dallas Burtraw, Olivier Deschenes, Paul Ferraro, Ann Ferris, Barry Hirsch,
Thomas Holmes, Josh Linn, Kyle Mangum, Erin Mansur, Karen Palmer, Ron Shadbegian, Joseph
Shapiro, Ian Schmutte and Reed Walker for helpful comments and conversations. I also thank seminar
participants at the 2012 NBER Summer Institute, IZA Labor Market Effects of Environmental Policies
Workshop, Camp Resources XIX, the 2012 AERE Summer Conference, Georgia State University
and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Computing resources were provided by Cornell’s Social
Science Gateway which is supported through NSF grant #1042181. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by E. Mark Curtis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Who Loses Under Power Plant Cap-and-Trade Programs?
E. Mark Curtis
NBER Working Paper No. 20808
December 2014
JEL No. Q28,Q38,Q5

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper tests how a major cap-and-trade program, known as the NOx Budget Trading Program
(NBP), impacted labor markets in the regions where it was implemented. The cap-and-trade program
dramatically decreased levels of NOx emissions and added substantial costs to energy producers. Using
a triple-differences approach that takes advantage of the geographic and time variation of the program
as well as variation in industry energy-intensity levels, I examine how employment dynamics changed
in manufacturing industries whose production process requires high levels of energy. After accounting
for a variety of flexible state, county and industry trends, I find that employment in the manufacturing
sector dropped by 1.3% as a result of the NBP. Young workers experienced the largest employment
declines and earnings of newly hired workers fell after the regulation began. Employment declines
are shown to have occurred primarily through decreased hiring rates rather than increased separation
rates, thus mitigating the impact on incumbent workers.


E. Mark Curtis
Wake Forest University
Department of Economics
Winston-Salem, NC 27109
curtisem@wfu.edu
1      Introduction
The Environmental Protection Agency’s regulation of the energy sector is a highly con-
tentious topic in the public sphere. Proponents of the federal regulations emphasize the
health benefits that accrue to society when fewer pollutants are emitted, while critics
claim that the current regulations harm the economy by imposing significant costs on
industry and workers. Job loss in particular is cited as a primary means by which reg-
ulation inflicts damage on the economy and has gained special attention in recent years
as the EPA has proposed new energy sector regulations at a time when labor markets
are still recovering from the Great Recession and middle class jobs are disappearing.1
    The federal law that lies at the heart of this controversy is the Clean Air Act Amend-
ments (CAAA), which vests authority in the EPA to regulate the emissions of polluting
industries. Broadly speaking, there are two types of regulations that the CAAA im-
poses on pollution-emitting establishments. The first, known as the National Ambient
Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), began in the 1970’s as a result of the 1970 CAAA and
required polluting plants in counties with poor air quality to adopt “lowest available
emission rate” technology. The labor market impact of the NAAQS and its subsequent
expansions has been studied extensively by economists over the past decade (Greenstone
2002; Kahn & Mansur 2013; Walker 2011; 2013). These studies examine changes in man-
ufacturing employment in counties that fail to meet NAAQS attainment standards and
are thus subject to tighter regulations.
    Since the passage of the 1990 CAAA, however, a second and wider reaching policy
has taken form with the intent of regulating interstate air pollution. As counties began
to realize that their own air quality was affected not only by local polluters but also by
polluters located in upwind states, there was a push for the regulation of all establish-
ments whose air pollutants crossed state boundaries. In 1990, the Acid Rain Program
established a national cap-and-trade program for Sulfur Dioxide (SO2 ) and in 2003 and
2004 the Nitrogen Oxide (NOx ) Budget Trading Program (NBP) was established in nine-
teen states east of the Mississippi. Despite the size and far-reaching impact of these
two cap-and-trade programs, there has been no empirical research that has sought to
evaluate their labor market implications. Understanding their impacts is particularly
important in light of the recently proposed Clean Power Program, whose CO2 emissions
reductions may take place through regional trading programs similar to the NBP.
    1 See
        Wall Street Journal July 26, 2011 op-ed “The Latest Job Killer from the EPA”, “Getting Ready for a
Wave of Coal-Plant Shutdown” Washington Post “Wonkblog” Aug 19, 2011, “Obama Outlines Ambitious
Plan to Cut Greenhouse Gases” New York Times June 25, 2013 and Autor & Dorn (2013).


                                                    1
    From an efficiency standpoint, cap-and-trade programs are preferable to the com-
mand and control style regulations that began in the 1970’s. However, the market-based
solution they provide may still have potentially severe redistributional implications as
firms which previously paid nothing to pollute now face a new input cost. In response,
firms are likely to see an increase in their marginal costs and will re-optimize their input
bundles, including labor, so as to minimize total costs.
    While the Acid Rain Program was the first such large scale cap-and-trade program
in the United States, given that it applied to all large power plants in the country, em-
pirically estimating its impact on labor markets has been difficult due to the lack of a
valid counterfactual.2 However, for a variety of reasons, the attributes of the recently
implemented NBP make for a policy whose impacts are both important and possible to
identify. First, the NBP had a major impact on energy production. The regulation of
nearly 900 gas, oil and coal-fired electric generating units plus 270 large manufacturing
plants forced NOx emitting firms to make difficult and costly decisions on how to com-
ply with the cap-and-trade scheme. Overall, complying with the NBP was expected to
add $2.15 billion dollars of annual costs to electric utilities (Palmer et al. 2001) and it rep-
resented a sizable implicit pollution tax on regulated manufacturing industries (Shapiro
& Walker 2014). Second, this policy was implemented in nineteen eastern states over
a period of two years. Many states were not exposed to the NBP and, under certain
assumptions discussed below, may be considered a valid counterfactual after controlling
for preexisting differences. Finally, industries in the NBP region that require high levels
of energy in their production process would be expected to be most affected by the reg-
ulation. These sources of geographic, time and industry heterogeneity form the basis for
the identification strategy used to determine the impact of the NBP on labor markets. To
the best of my knowledge, this is the first such credible study of the labor market effects
of any major EPA cap-and-trade program.
    One reason why empirical methods may prove particularly useful is that economic
theory gives no clear intuition regarding the effect of energy sector regulation on man-
ufacturing employment outcomes (Berman & Bui 2001). Environmental regulation that
causes an exogenous shock in the price of energy is likely to lead to two competing
employment effects on an establishment’s intensive margin. First, given that capital and
energy are complements and capital and labor are substitutes, a positive shock in the
price of energy may lead plant managers to employ more labor and less capital. How-
   2 Forthis reason, researchers have generally used structural models to estimate the costs and benefits
of the Acid Rain Program (see Burtraw et al. (1998)).



                                                   2
ever, an increase in the price of energy production will also increase marginal costs and
decrease the demand for labor due to a decline in production. Manufacturing plants
that require onsite energy production and are subject to regulation will take the costs
of regulations into account as they decide whether to expand or contract. Furthermore,
firm owners may adjust the extensive margin as they take production costs into account
when determining plant location. Plants in areas with increased energy prices are more
likely to be shut down and newly constructed plants are more likely to be built in re-
gions that did not experience a positive shock to energy prices and are not subject to the
direct regulation of the program.3
    While qualitative predictions from theory may be somewhat ambiguous, recent em-
pirical research studying the impact of environmental regulation on employment has
shown either no change (Berman & Bui 2001; Martin et al. 2014) or a decrease in the em-
ployment levels of regions where regulation has been implemented (Greenstone 2002;
Kahn & Mansur 2013; Walker 2011). Furthermore, the broader literature on the impact
of environmental regulation has consistently found a negative impact of regulation on
other manufacturing outcomes such as productivity, new plant openings and investment
(Becker & Henderson 2000; Dean et al. 2000; List et al. 2003; Henderson 1996; Hanna
2010; Greenstone et al. 2012).4
    This paper takes advantage of the heterogeneity in industry energy intensity levels to
perform a triple differences (DDD) analysis that estimates the NBP’s impact on manu-
facturing employment levels and other labor market outcomes. The econometric model
borrows features from both Deschenes et al. (2012) which looks at the impact of the NBP
on pollution and health outcomes and Kahn & Mansur (2013) which examines the ge-
ographic determinants of manufacturing employment. Using County Business Patterns
(CBP) and Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI) data as well as NBER’s Productivity
Database, I am able to account for important state, county, industry and year controls as
   3 Carlton  (1983) and Kahn & Mansur (2013) find strong empirical evidence that electricity prices are a
major determinant of manufacturing establishment location and employment decisions. Of the 270 regu-
lated manufacturing plants 93% are in the top tercile of energy intensive industries (Author’s calculation
based on records from EPA’s website). The aggregate nature of the employment data used in the paper
prevent estimating a separate effect for the manufacturing plants whose energy production was directly
regulated. The need for a separate estimate is mitigated as energy production is regulated whether or
not it occurs within the boundary of the firm. Energy-intensive plants that choose to purchase electric-
ity, rather than produce energy on-site, will also be impacted as the cost of production of a major input
increases.
    4 Of course there is also a large literature on the benefits of regulation and air quality improvements.

See Chay & Greenstone (2003); Jerrett et al. (2009); Deschenes et al. (2012); Zivin & Neidell (2012) for a
few representative examples.




                                                     3
well as state, county and industry trends. These controls will prove important, as indus-
tries tend toward regional agglomeration and as the manufacturing sector as a whole
has experienced general geographic shifts in recent years. Performing the DDD analysis
with a broad set of controls, I first find that employment in industries with an additional
percentage point of energy intensity decreased 1.23% in the region that was impacted
by the NBP. This represents a loss of roughly 1.3% of manufacturing employment or
110,000 jobs in the NBP region during this period. To place this figure in context, this
is equivalent to about 3.1% of the total job loss in the manufacturing sector in the NBP
region between 1998 and 2009.
    This employment impact is an important outcome, particularly to policy makers look-
ing to protect jobs in particular industries. However, the employment effect will not cap-
ture the full impact of regulation on labor markets. To provide a richer understanding
of the impact of regulation on labor markets this paper explores worker flow and earn-
ings variables found in the QWI, a data source which includes additional labor market
outcomes and further disaggregates the data by worker age. Analysis of QWI variables
finds that firms reduced their employment levels primarily through a reduction in hiring
rather than an increase in separations. Young workers, who have high turnover rates,
experienced the largest employment declines. Furthermore, wage offers, as measured
by new hire earnings, declined by as much as 4.2% for industries in the top quartile of
energy intensity as compared to the bottom quartile. The ability to observe new hire
earnings is important as firms may be unable to immediately adjust earnings of incum-
bent workers when they are hit by a regulatory shock. The results suggest that unions
and firing costs may play a key role in how firms react to environmental regulation.
    This paper adds to the literature in two important ways. It is the first paper to empir-
ically estimate the impact of any major EPA cap-and-trade program on labor markets.
Given the size of the cap-and-trade programs, as well as the current policy debate over
additional energy sector regulations, a better understanding of their impact is greatly
needed. Second, it provides evidence of which workers were affected; uses worker flows
to examine how the employment adjustments occurred; and examines the impact on
worker earnings by focusing on the earnings of new hires, the margin on which earn-
ings changes will most quickly adjust. Finally, while recent work by Walker (2013) has
found long term earnings losses for existing workers in newly regulated plants, this
paper suggests that the method of employment adjustment may have dampened the
impact on incumbent workers at the expense of workers hired after the regulation.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief history


                                             4
of the Clean Air Act Amendments and how the NBP came to be implemented. Sec-
tion 3 details important aspects of the data used in the analysis. Section 4 provides the
econometric model, results and specification checks. Section 5 discusses the results and
Section 6 concludes.


2    Background
Originally passed in 1963, the Clean Air Act (CAA) is the main federal law that seeks to
control air pollution throughout the United States. The CAA has been amended multiple
times including 1966, 1970, 1977 and 1990. Perhaps the most researched of the regula-
tions brought upon by CAA and its amendments is the NAAQS. The NAAQS were
established following the 1970 CAAAs and required polluting establishments located in
counties that failed to achieve certain air quality levels to meet stricter emissions stan-
dards than establishments located in counties whose air quality was deemed acceptable.
    The 1977 amendments, in addition to strengthening the NAAQS, included Section
126, a provision that allowed the EPA to regulate interstate air pollution and limit the
environmental harm that downwind states could impose on upwind states. The EPA
did not immediately enforce Section 126, however, choosing instead to focus regulation
efforts on establishments whose pollutants impacted the air quality of their local com-
munity rather than those impacting regions outside their immediate geographic region.
In fact, between 1977 and 1998, the EPA never granted a petition filed under the interstate
air pollution clause found in Section 126 of the CAA.
    The passage of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments strengthened the language of
Section 126 and established the first cap-and-trade programs. It was passed in response
to the continued failure of many northeastern regions to meet air quality requirements
despite having already restricted emissions in their local region. Title IV of the 1990
CAAA established a cap-and-trade program for SO2 . This would become known as the
Acid Rain Program and in 1995 the EPA began Phase I for the dirtiest 110 power plants.
    In 1998 the EPA granted its first petition under Section 126, paving the way for a
cap-and-trade program for NOx , an important precursor of ground-level ozone. The
granting of this petition came as the result of two factors. First, the 1990 amendments
had strengthened the interstate pollution protection law, calling for “reasonably available
control technology” throughout an ozone transport region. Second, numerous lawsuits
filed against the EPA by northeastern states requested that the EPA regulate NOx emis-
sions from states whose emissions directly contributed to their own levels of smog and


                                            5
ozone. These upwind states argued that NOx pollution from downwind sources not only
had negative health impacts on their citizens but also prevented them from meeting the
NAAQS ozone nonattainment standards. In these lawsuits, a large body of scientific
evidence was presented showing that NOx gases can in fact be transported significant
distances by wind currents and that NOx emissions should therefore be subject to Sec-
tion 126 of the CAAA. By granting the petition of the northeastern states, the EPA agreed
to regulate and reduce the amount of NOx emitted by electric generating units (EGU’s)
and large industrial plants in southern and central states.5
    The NBP cap-and-trade program formally began for eight states and the District
of Columbia in 2003 (see Figure 1). States and utilities in the Midwest and Southeast
continued to fight legal battles against the EPA with varying outcomes, but in 2004 eleven
additional states began compliance with the NBP, for a total of nineteen states.6 The
program would regulate nearly 900 EGU’s and 270 large industrial units that produced
energy and heat for their own consumption.
    As can be seen in Figure 2, EGU’s dramatically decreased their output of NOx on
May 31, 2004, the first day in which all nineteen states began participating. Regulated
establishments could choose to reduce their NOx emissions in a variety of ways. One
option was fuel switching, whereby establishments would shift away from coal and
towards alternative energy sources such as natural gas that release far less NOx into
the atmosphere. Despite the additional production costs brought on by the NBP, most
coal remained a cheaper source of energy than the alternatives (Fowlie 2010). Because
electricity production from coal fired plants remained inframarginal, utilities largely
continued to burn coal and found alternative ways to comply with the NBP. These com-
pliance costs could be fixed and upfront or they could be variable and spread out over
time. Plants opting for the high upfront cost option installed selective catalytic reduc-
tion (SCR) technology. This technology cuts NOx emissions by up to 90% but costs the
average plant $40 million dollars (Linn 2008). On the other end of the spectrum, about
30% of NBP regulated establishments chose to make no capital adjustments and simply
purchased permits for every unit of NOx they emitted (EPA 2009).7 Regardless of which
   5 The smaller and less restrictive program known as the Ozone Transport Commission NOx Budget
Program (not to be confused with the NBP) began for 11 northeastern states in 1999.
   6 Through negotiations and court battles, Missouri delayed compliance until 2007. Georgia, originally

slated to also begin in 2007, was eventually ruled exempt from the program altogether. Additionally, deals
were struck in Missouri, Alabama and Michigan which limited compliance to only certain counties.
   7 SCR is both the most expensive and most effective technology in reducing NO emissions (Fowlie
                                                                                       x
2010). There are a variety of less expensive and less effective technologies that utilizes chose to install.
Selective non-catalytic technologies cost the average plant $10 million but only reduces NOx by 35 per-



                                                     6
reduction technique they choose, the production costs of electric utilities will increase as
a result of the NBP. Three estimates have been made that calculate the cost of the NBP to
utilities. Palmer et al. (2001) estimated the program’s total costs to utilities at about $2.1
billion per year. Deschenes et al. (2012) use the market price of permits to estimate the
cost at $400-700 million per year and Linn (2010) examines utility stock prices to estimate
a total (rather than annual) drop in expected utility profits of up to $25 billion dollars.
Palmer et al. (2001) argue that the costs of the NBP will be passed on to the consumer
in the form of higher electricity prices. Indeed, the EPA (1999) estimated that electricity
prices would rise by 1.6% as a result of the NBP and a later report by Platts Research &
Consulting (2003) predicted a $1-$3/MWh increase in the price of wholesale electricity.8
    Carlton (1983) and Kahn & Mansur (2013) document that electricity prices are a ma-
jor determinant of where manufacturing firms choose to locate their workers. Given
the NBP’s substantial impact on electricity and energy production costs more generally,
firms that require high levels of energy in their production process may be expected to
re-optimize their input mixture in response to a change in the expected costs of a crucial
input. Additionally, Shapiro & Walker (2014) find that the NBP’s direct regulation of
manufactures represented a sizable tax in and of itself. Using a DDD approach, I test
whether firms with high energy requirements did in fact respond to the NBP by decreas-
ing employment levels after the implementation of the NBP, relative to low-energy firms
and relative to non-NBP control areas.
    Since it began in 2003 and 2004, the NBP has changed names but the market for NOx
allowances continues to exist. In 2008 the NBP became part of the Clean Air Interstate
Rule (CAIR) and in 2011 the EPA announced it would replace and expand the regulations
of CAIR with the new Cross-State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR).9
cent. Additional pre-combustion and combustion technologies can decrease emissions between 15 and 50
percent depending on the specifications of the plant. Fowlie shows that regulated utilities are more likely
to pursue capital intensive solutions than deregulated utilities.
    8 Using average wholesale prices in the Northeast ISO and the PJM in 2003 this is equal to an electricity

price increase of between 2.47% and 7.41%. The Platts analysis was performed in light of an unexpected
rise in the price of natural gas that took place just prior to the NBP. This rise made shifting to natural gas
more expensive than had previously been expected.
    9 In 2005 the EPA announced that the Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR) would replace the NBP’s regu-

lation of NOx emissions in 2009 and SO2 in 2010. CAIR was intended to expand the number of covered
states to twenty-five and further tighten emissions standards. Given that there was significant legal uncer-
tainty surrounding CAIR when it was announced, it is unlikely that manufacturing industries would have
immediately reacted. Because CAIR is a continuation of the NBP cap-and-trade program it is difficult and
perhaps even unnecessary to disentangle the impact of the CAIR announcement from the implementation
of NBP. In short, the interpretation of the evidence is influenced only slightly by CAIR, with all results
still attributable to the overall cap-and-trade policy.




                                                      7
    The regional cap-and-trade program continues to be greatly debated. On August
21, 2012 the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals vacated CSAPR leaving the future of both
the SO2 and NOx cap-and-trade programs in doubt, but on April 29, 2014 the Supreme
Court reversed the ruling by the Court of Appeals. This decision clears the way for
the EPA to move forward with the program’s expansion. Furthermore, it has sparked
renewed interest among supporters of GHG regulations, who see the NBP as a template
of a successful environmental regulation that can be implemented under the existing
Clean Air Act (Burtraw et al. 2014).


3     Data

3.1   County Business Patterns
The two employment data sets used to analyze the impact of the NBP on manufacturing
employment are the Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns (CBP) and the Quarterly
Workforce Indicators (QWI). The CBP is a yearly data product released by the Census
Bureau that provides sub-national economic data by industry. Data can be obtained
at the national, state, county and metropolitan levels and include the total number of
workers by industry in a geographic area. The source of the CBP is the Business Register,
Census’ Company Organization Survey and other economic censuses and surveys such
as the Census of Manufactures and the Annual Survey of Manufactures. Using CBP data
from 1998-2009, I create panel data sets at both the state-industry and county-industry
level.
    In 1998 the Census Bureau switched its industry classifier variable to account for the
changing face of the American economy. The Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)
system was abandoned in favor of the newer North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS). The change from SIC codes to NAICS codes in 1998 creates some
difficulties in consistently estimating industry employment across time periods. Given
that the NBP was implemented in 2003, it is logical to use 1998 as a starting year for
the data and avoid any inconsistencies that may arise from merging previous years with
different industry definitions. All data between 1998 and 2009 use NAICS codes which
are consistent across time periods. Following previous literature, this paper uses three-
digit NAICS codes as the industry level of observation (Greenstone 2002; Kahn & Mansur
2013).
    While the CBP has the distinct advantage of being publicly available, it also has the


                                            8
disadvantage of having to undergo a thorough review process to prevent the release of
any data that would disclose the information of any single establishment. Therefore,
if very few establishments are located in a particular county-industry or state-industry
cell, then employment data will be suppressed for that observation. The primary results
of this paper use state-industry data which has limited cell suppression for employ-
ment. In the state-industry data set 76% of state-industry cells are observed directly.
These cells represents 93% of all manufacturing employment in the United States. For
those cells that are suppressed, I perform an imputation method similar to that used
by Kahn & Mansur (2013) and Mian & Sufi (2012), which takes advantage of the CBP’s
establishment-size cell count variables and imputes employment for the suppressed cells
by multiplying the number of establishments in each establishment-size cell by the mid-
point establishment size of that category.10 The same imputation method is used for the
county-industry level data.11


3.2    Quarterly Workforce Indicators
Like the CBP, the QWI is a publicly available data set that contains sub-national em-
ployment data by industry. The underlying microdata for the QWI is the Longitudinal
Employer Household Dynamics (LEHD) program at the U.S. Census Bureau, which uses
state unemployment insurance data as its primary input (see Abowd et al. (2006) for a
complete description of the QWI and the LEHD). In recent years economists have be-
gun to use this data to evaluate the labor market impacts of the housing crash, changes
to minimum wage laws and workplace mandates (Abowd & Vilhuber 2012; Gittings &
Schmutte 2012; Dube et al. 2011; Curtis et al. 2013). The QWI has both strengths and
weaknesses compared to the CBP but there are two primary advantages that the QWI
provides. First, it contains detailed cuts of the data by worker characteristic. That is,
the QWI provides not only total employment within a state-industry, but also breaks
down this employment by age group and gender. These data can then be used to under-
stand the heterogeneity of the treatment effect along a number of dimensions that are
not available in the CBP. The second advantage is that the QWI provides data not only
on employment levels but also on worker flows (hires and separations). On the earnings
  10 All state and county-industry observations contain the number of establishments in narrowly defined

employee size categories (1-4, 5-9, 10-19, . . . , 5,000+). For the 5,000+ category employment is top coded at
6,000. See (Kahn & Mansur 2013) for a full explanation of the imputation method.
  11 As discussed later in the paper, regressions weight state-industry observations by their pre-NBP em-

ployment level. This is common in the literature and mitigates concerns about imputation related bias as
imputed cells are smaller and thus given less weight in the regressions.


                                                      9
side, the QWI records monthly average earnings for new hired workers as well as for all
workers in the state-industry. Earnings of newly hired workers is a particularly nice fea-
ture as firms responding to negative shocks may have more flexibility to adjust earnings
of new hires than incumbent workers. A final benefit of the QWI is the quarterly nature
of the data which provides more frequent snapshots of employment variables and thus
gives a better feel for the dynamics at play and the impact of the program over time.
    The disadvantages of the QWI lie in its coverage. Most states have now agreed to
share UI data with the LEHD system but the historical data they provide differs by state.
As a result, I use data from the 40 states whose data goes back until at least 2000 so that
there is a reasonable pre-treatment period for each state. The states used in the analysis
are listed in the Data Appendix. The QWI also takes a different approach to disclosure
concerns. For cells with few observations noise is infused to ensure confidentiality.
This allows for the QWI to report data for a higher percentage of cells than the CBP.
Employment is reported for 97.5% of cells in the QWI and number of hires is reported for
96.2%. Despite the differences in the CBP and QWI samples the employment regression
results are similar using both data sets. This lends credence to the use of the QWI as
valid source for exploring other outcome variables not observed in the CBP. See the data
appendix for additional details on both the QWI and the CBP.


3.3    NBER Productivity Database
After obtaining annual (or quarterly) state-industry labor data, I merge in three-digit-
industry energy intensity data from the 1998 NBER Productivity Database. This database
contains total energy expenditure by industry in the given year and is based on the Cen-
sus of Manufactures and the Annual Survey of Manufactures. To construct an energy
intensity index for the 21 different 3 digit manufacturing industries, I divide total indus-
try energy expenditure by total value of shipments for the industry.12 As seen in Table 1,
energy intensity in the manufacturing sector varies from a low of 0.6% in the computer
and electronic product industry to a high of 4.8% in the primary metal manufacturing
industry.
  12 Because  the NBP regulated NOx emissions from heat, steam and electricity production I use energy
intensity rather than electricity intensity.




                                                 10
4     Econometric Model and Results
In order to motivate the econometric analysis, provide summary statistics and preview
the results, it is informative to begin by viewing the raw employment data between 1998
and 2009. Based on the energy-intensity index in Table 1, I split the 21 industries into
three separate groups. The seven industries with the highest energy intensity measures
are defined as “high intensity industries”, the seven industries with the lowest energy
intensity measures are defined as “low intensity industries” and the middle seven are
defined as “medium intensity industries”.
    Figure 3 plots out the NBP - Non-NBP employment difference for each industry
energy intensity grouping from 1998-2009. Specifically, the figure plots the percentage
change in employment in the NBP region minus the percentage change in employment
in the non-NBP region for each industry grouping, using 1998 as the baseline year. This
plot suggests a potential effect of the NBP on employment, but it also reveals that pre-
existing trends may be present that, if unaccounted for, could bias DDD estimates. The
plot shows that following 2003 the NBP - Non-NBP employment difference falls most
prominently for the high intensity industries while there is little change in the NBP -
Non-NBP difference for the low-energy industries. Employment in medium intensity
industries tracks closely with high intensity for the first four years, but starting in 2003,
the NBP - Non-NBP employment difference begins to fall for high energy industries
relative to medium energy industries. This gap widens substantially between 2004 and
2008. Vertical lines are drawn in 2001, the year after the courts determined the NBP’s
legality, and in 2003, the start date of the program. Overall, the raw data suggest that the
NBP - Non-NBP employment difference fell more in high energy industries following
the implementation of the program. A regression model which exploits the industry,
geographic and timing variation of the policy and controls for other factors potentially
driving remaining differences is presented below.


4.1   Baseline Regression Specification
The identification strategy of this paper takes advantage of the geographic, time and
industry heterogeneity found in the data. As a first step towards exploiting this hetero-
geneity, I consider the following DDD model:

           y gkt = β T ( Post gt × NBPg × EnIntk ) + θx gkt + δ gk + αkt + γ gt + e gkt   (1)



                                               11
    In this model, y gkt is the employment outcome of interest (logged employment, hiring
rate, separation rate, etc.) in state (or county) g, in industry k in period t. Post gt is an
indicator variable equal to one if the date is after the start of the NBP.13 The variable
NBPg is set equal to one for all states whose electric utility provider is impacted by the
NBP. 15 Figure 4 provides a map of the treated region and provides additional details.16
Finally, the variable EnIntk is a time-invariant measure of the industry’s energy intensity
as defined by total energy expenditure divided by total value of shipments for the entire
industry in 1998. The primary employment specifications will be at the state level such
that gkt is state-industry-year data. Other specifications will use county level data where
a unit of observation is at the county-industry-year level and g refers to county rather
than state.
    The main coefficient of interest is β T , which captures the triple interaction of an
observation being in the NBP region, after the treatment has been applied and allowing
for differences by industry based on their energy-intensity level. The variables δ gk , αkt
and γ gt represent full sets of state-industry, industry-year and state-year fixed effects in
order to control for time-invariant differences across state-industries and non-parametric
trends for each state and industry.17 A vector of variables, represented by x gkt is included
to control for other factors that might differentially impact labor market outcomes for
high energy industries in the NBP region.
    Possible factors that may drive differential changes in labor market outcomes by both
  13 Results using QWI assign the start time likewise as the quarter following the NBP. Linn (2010) per-
forms a similar analysis in which he estimates the impact of the NBP on electric utility profits. His
empirical work, which examines the impact on utility stock prices, uses 2000, the year the D.C. Court of
Appeals ruled in favor of the EPA in Michigan et al. vs. EPA et al. The program began in May of 2003 in
eight states and in May of 2004 for eleven states. For the eight states beginning in mid 2003, Post gt equals
one for years 2004 and later. For all other states Post gt equals one for years 2005 and later.14 As can be
seen in Figure 2, electricity production itself was not altered until the NBP was implemented. For the
purposes of this analysis I assume that manufacturers did not react to the policy until electricity produc-
tion was actually altered and the price of permits had been established. More flexible event-study models
presented in Section 4.5 fail to detect any anticipatory action by firms prior to 2003.
   15 The baseline specification uses a broad definition of the variable NBP. The treated region extends

to include regions which purchase electricity from utilities that are regulated by the NBP. For example,
the treated region extends to the Midwest because manufactures in these states participate in a common
day-ahead electricity market run by the Midwest Independent System Operator, many of whose electric
utilities were regulated by the NBP. Conversely, in the southeast, electricity markets do not cross state
borders. The results are shown to be insensitive to alternate specifications that restrict the treated region
to only those states and counties that were directly regulated.
   16 Note that the concern over defining the treated region also precludes the use of border discontinuity

methods to identify the impact of the NBP as there is no clearly defined geographic cutoff.
   17 Note that the variables Post × NBP , NBP × EnInt and Post × EnInt as well as state, industry
                                  gt       g       g         k          gt        k
and year indicator variables are absorbed by higher order two-way fixed effects.



                                                     12
region and industry include fuel prices and other environmental regulations. If a change
in, for example, the price of oil, raises energy prices uniformly across the country, then
this will be picked up by the industry-year fixed effects. However, some regions rely
more heavily on certain fuels for energy and electricity than others. To account for the
possibility that regional electricity prices may be differentially impacted by changing
relative fuel prices, I obtain average oil, natural gas and coal prices for the years 1998-
2009 as well as the percent of electricity that is derived from that source in each North
American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) region in the country. Interacting the
fuel price with the percent of electricity derived from that fuel in the state’s NERC region
and the industry indicator variables allows for the fact that certain industries in certain
regions may be particularly sensitive to a change in fuel prices.18
    A second potential driver of labor market outcomes is other environmental regu-
lations that disproportionately impact high energy industries in the NBP region. One
important regulatory change was a tightening of the NAAQS ozone nonattainment stan-
dards which resulted in 408 counties across the country entering nonattainment status
in 2004. These counties were disproportionately located in the NBP treated region, and
nonattainment designation is likely to differentially impact industries based on their en-
ergy intensity. To control for this, I examine county-industry data and allow for high
energy industries in new NAAQS nonattainment industries to experience a separate
employment effect. Results are shown to be robust to including these controls in the
regressions.
    Before discussing the identification assumptions and results, a few important details
bear mention. First, as is common in the literature, observations are weighted by their
pre-treatment (1998) employment levels to ensure that state-industries with little or no
employment do not drive the results (Greenstone 2002; Walker 2011). Second, while
using aggregate state-industry data reduces the computational burden and accounts for
some of the inference concerns raised by (Bertrand et al. 2004), given that the identifying
variation occurs at a higher geographic level than the state, it is crucial to account for
serial and spatial correlation of the error term to avoid understating the size of the
standard errors. The standard errors are clustered at the NBP region - Industry level to
  18 Annual  oil, natural gas and coal prices are the Brent Price, the Henry Hub Natural Gas spot price and
the EIA total average coal price and were downloaded from http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/
annual/showtext.cfm?t=ptb0709. NERC region resource mix data comes from EPA’s eGRID summary
tables. Georgraphic boundaries of NERC regions do not always correspond to state boundary lines. For
those states which belong to more than one NERC, I assign them a fuel-intensity level equal to a weighted
sum of the fuel-intensity level of the NERCs to which they belong where the weight is the percent of
manufacturing employment in the state that lies in that NERC region.


                                                    13
address these concerns.19 The error term is represented by e gkt and must be uncorrelated
with the triple interaction term conditional on the set of control variables and fixed
effects. Specifically, the assumption is that

                   E[e gkt × ( Post gt × NBPg × EnIntk )| x gkt , δ gk , αkt , γ gt ] = 0.

A final feature to note is that the model assumes a linear effect in energy intensity. When
logged employment is the outcome variable, the triple difference coefficient should be
interpreted as the percentage change in employment that occurs for every additional per-
centage point in energy intensity. While there are strong theoretical reasons to believe
that the most energy intensive industries will experience the greatest impact from the
NBP, deciding exactly how to model this differential impact is not immediately straight-
forward. Imposing a linear assumption allows for results to be obtained in a single DDD
coefficient which is easily interpretable for the manufacturing sector as whole. How-
ever, I provide additional results which calculate the impact of the NBP separately on
each of the 21 industries. This is done by replacing the triple interaction variable with
21 separate industry-specific triple interaction terms. Results from this non-parametric
approach, presented later, reveal that the linearity assumption is not unreasonable.


4.1.1     Identification

While the model’s fixed effects control for industry and state-specific shocks that occur
in a particular year, for β T to identify the causal effect of the policy, industries in the
NBP region must have similar trends to their counterparts in the Non-NBP region prior
to the regulation. Two strategies are employed to examine potential pre-existing trends.
The first directly controls for this possibility by allowing each industry to have it’s own
region specific linear trend. Equation 2 represents the set of estimated models with these
  19 In separate results not presented here, standard errors were clustered at a variety of other levels
including state-industry, state and NBP region. Clustering at the NBP region-Industry level accounts
for spatial and serial correlation within an industry over time and proved the most conservative of all
clustering methods.




                                                     14
region specific industry trend controls.

                  y gkt = β T ( Post gt × NBPg × EnIntk ) + θx gkt + δ gk + αkt + γ gt +
     K                                              K
+   ∑      βke [trendt × NBPg × 1( Indi = k )] +   ∑ βkw [trendt × NonNBPg × 1( Indi = k)] + egkt
    k =1                                           k =1
                                                                                               (2)

Apart from the summation terms, the model is identical to equation (1). For each in-
dustry k = 1 through K, that industry’s indicator variable is interacted with the region
dummy (NBPg ), and a linear trend variable (trendt ). These summation terms account
for pre-existing trends by directly including them in the model.
    A separate way to examine the presence of trends is to use an event-study framework
which allows for the impact of the regulation to evolve over time. This model, discussed
more formally in Section 4.5 makes no assumptions about the start date of the program,
rather it estimates the differential time-path of the outcome variable for the affected
observations relative to the unaffected observations in every period of the data using the
start date of the program as the reference period. Using data prior to the start of the
program allows for the detection of any trend in the outcome variable that was present
before the program’s implementation. Results from the event-study models suggest the
presence of only a small pre-existing trend.
    Identification of causal estimates for this class of differences-in-differences models
also rests on the stable unit treatment value assumption. While impossible to fully
test for, the multiple sources of variation in the data do allow for a test to determine
the extent to which particular spillovers may be driving the results. One concern is
the presence of geographic spillovers whereby firms in high energy industries relocate
production to the unregulated region. If the policy were to result in firms shifting labor
from plants in regulated to unregulated states then a more parsimonious differences-in-
differences model can be used which exclusively exploits changes in employment across
industries within affected states. If, on the other hand, local labor market spillovers
are a concern, whereby workers in affected industries leave to work in the unaffected
industries, then models can be run which only exploit the across state variation in labor
market outcomes for high energy industries. Results from these models are found in
Table A4.




                                                     15
4.2   Employment Results Using County Business Patterns
The main employment results of the paper are found in Table 2 and use employment
data from the CBP, which contains data at the state-industry-year level between 1998 and
2009. The top row of the table reports results for β T , the primary coefficient of interest.
The columns progressively add sets of controls leading to the preferred specification
in Column 6. This is the model provided in equation 2 and includes state-industry,
state-year and industry-year fixed effects as well as separate industry by region trends.
Tables 3 and 4 report a variety of different specifications using a similar table layout
but alternate samples and control variables. In each table the coefficient on the primary
triple difference regressor Post gt xNBPg xEnIntk is reported as well as the coefficient on
the Post gt xNBPg variable for those specifications in which it is not absorbed by higher
order fixed effects. The coefficient on the triple difference variable signifies the percent-
age change in employment that occurred for industries with an additional percentage
point of energy intensity after the policy was enacted, in the states to which it applied.
The coefficient on the variable Post gt xNBPg represents any change that occurred to all
manufacturing employment in the NBP region relative to the non-NBP region condi-
tional on the differential impact by energy intensity and other controls. This coefficient,
when it is not absorbed by state-year fixed effects, is close to zero in all of the specifi-
cations, thus supporting the case that the primary mechanism through which the policy
impacted employment was through a heterogeneous treatment effect that varied by the
industry’s energy intensity.
    Column 1 of Table 2 reports a very basic model where only state-industry and year
fixed effects are included. The results suggest a large but statistically insignificant impact
of the NBP on manufacturing employment in higher energy industries. The imprecise
nature of these estimates is unsurprising given that much of the employment change
within a state industry is likely to be driven by exogenous state and industry-specific
trends which are not controlled for in this base model.
    Column 2 of Table 2 accounts for these trends by including linear state trends and
industry-year fixed effects. Column 3 relaxes the assumption of linear state trends by
using more flexible state-year fixed effects. The inclusion of industry-year indicator vari-
ables accounts for any industry-specific shock that is common to all states in a given
year while the inclusion of state-year indicator variables accounts for any shock that is
common to all manufacturing employment in a state in a given year. While the non-
parametric specification provides the model with a high degree of flexibility, the large
set of indicator variables, particularly the set of state-year dummies, are quite demand-


                                             16
ing of the data and reduce the degrees of freedom in the regression.20 Results using
the fully non-parametric approach with sets of state-year and industry-year indicator
variables are given in Column 3 of Table 2. The triple difference coefficient is negative
and statistically significant, implying that employment in high energy industries fell rel-
ative to low energy industries and relative to other high energy industries in non-treated
states.
    Columns 4-6 repeat the specifications used in Columns 1-3 but now include separate
region-by-industry trends to account for the possibility that, for example, high energy
industries in the NBP region may have been trending differently than their counterparts
in the Non-NBP region before the start of the program. If high energy industries in
the NBP region are trending down faster than high energy industries in the geographic
control group then failing to account for these trends will overstate the impact of the
policy. While including these trends is essential to accurately estimating the impact of
the policy, it is also important to note that if the NBP lead high energy industries to
experience a change in employment levels as well as a change in trends, then including
these trend variables may pick up some of the impact of the program thus masking its
full effect.
    The size of the estimates in Columns 4-6 are lower than their counterparts in Columns
1-3 and suggest that accounting for these separate region by industry trends is important.
The new coefficients, now ranging from -1.38 to -1.23 imply a smaller but still sizable
impact of the NBP. The coefficient in Column 6, which includes the full set of 588 state-
year indicator variables is statistically significant at the 10% level. If we are willing to
replace these state-year fixed effects with a more parsimonious set of forty-nine state-
specific trend variables then the coefficient becomes statistically significant at the 5%
level with little impact on its magnitude. This result is reported in Column 5. The
coefficient for the primary specification (found in Column 6 of Table 2) is -1.23. This
implies that for each additional point of energy intensity, an industry’s employment
level declined by 1.23 percent.
    Interpreting the results requires consideration of the assumptions at hand and the
identifying variation used in the analysis. Most environmental regulation papers as-
sume that some group of industries are unaffected by the regulation and thus the overall
impact can be calculated by comparing the employment change in "clean" industries
  20 Thedata set used in the main specification contains 12,348 observations. Including state-year indicator
variables adds 588 additional variables to the regression. Using linear instead of non-parametric state
trends reduces the number of state-trend variables from 588 to 49.




                                                    17
to the employment change in "dirty" industries. This paper, by using energy intensity
rather than a binary clean / dirty industry measure does not provide an immediate con-
trol group against which to compare the loss. One simple way to calculate the overall
impact that is consistent with other work is to use the coefficient to compare employ-
ment changes in the most energy intensive industries relative to changes in the least
energy intensive industries. Ninety-three percent of manufacturing plants that were di-
rectly regulated by the NBP were in industries in the top quartile of the energy intensity
index. The average energy intensity of industries in the top quartile is .0389 while the
average energy intensity of industries in the bottom quartile is .0067. Multiplying this
difference times the triple difference coefficient would imply a 3.9% employment loss in
high energy industries relative to low energy industries. This is the equivalent of a loss
of 46,804 jobs. This is a quite conservative interpretation of the overall loss as it assumes
no impact on industries in the middle two quartiles of the energy intensity index. A
more realistic approach would calculate an employment loss for every industry relative
to a theoretical baseline industry that was not impacted by the regulation. If we assume
that there was no overall shift in manufacturing employment (a reasonable assumption
based on small Post gt xNBPg coefficient) and that all losses are relative to the least energy
intensive industry then an employment loss figure could be calculated by multiplying
the pre-regulatory employment level in each industry in the NBP region times the dif-
ference between the energy intensity of that industry and the baseline industry and then
times the triple difference coefficient. This would imply an employment loss of 110,024
                                 K
jobs. Specifically, Emp Loss = ∑ (empk x (EnIntk −.0059) x 1.226) = 110,024 where empk
                                k =1
is the employment level in the NBP region in 2002, .0059 is the energy intensity of the
baseline industry and 1.226 is the triple difference coefficient in Column 6 of Table 2.


4.3   Alternative Employment Specifications
To examine the robustness of the result in the preferred specification, I consider models
which: (1) vary the specific controls in the regression model; (2) more narrowly define
the treated region; (3) examine county-level rather than state-level data and (4) relax the
assumption of a linear employment effect in energy intensity. Results from a separate
set of event study models are presented in Section 4.5.
    Panel A of Table 3 reports results from identical models as Table 2 but controls for
exogenous changes in fuel prices that may impact the energy costs of certain regions
more than others. Any shock in energy prices that is common to the entire country will


                                             18
be picked up in the industry-year fixed effects but if, for example, there is a shock to
the price of oil and certain regions heavily rely on oil for electricity, then it is possible
that these regions will see an increase in the cost of energy that is unrelated to the NBP.
To ensure that shocks to oil, natural gas and coal prices are not driving the results I
gather data on annual fuel prices for each of these fuels and interact these prices with
the percent of electricity that is derived from that fuel in the NERC region to which
that state belongs. This variable is then interacted with the energy intensity variable to
control for the fact that high energy industries in certain regions may be particularly
sensitive to certain fuel price shocks. The results are shown to be insensitive to these
controls.
    Panel B of Table 3 uses an alternate definition for the treated region. Rather than
use the broad definition described in Figure 4, this specification defines the NBP region
as only those states that were directly impacted by the program. Using this narrower
definition, North Dakota, Minnesota, Iowa, Wisconsin, Maine, New Hampshire and Ver-
mont are dropped from the sample. Results using this new definition of the treated
region find the coefficient on the triple difference variable to be -1.24 and statistically
significant at the 5% level.
    Table 4 provides new estimates of the NBP’s employment impact using county rather
than state level data. The use of county level data comes with both benefits and costs.
The primary reason why county data may be useful is that it allows the specifications to
control for county level changes to the NAAQS nonattainment standards that occurred
to 408 counties in 2004, the first year that the NBP was fully implemented. These coun-
ties were located across the United States but a disproportionate number were located
east of the Mississippi. Using county data also allows for additional robustness checks
that allow the NBP treatment group to be defined along county rather than state lines.
While the NBP was a state level program, certain counties in both Alabama and Michi-
gan were ruled exempt of the regulation and can be excluded from the treated region
when using county level data.21 The major downside of the county level data is the
increased prevalence of data suppression. Due to disclosure concerns, employment for
49% of all observations is suppressed.22 When suppressed, employment is imputed by
assigning the midpoint of the employment range provided in the data as done in (Kahn
  21 As discussed earlier these counties were likely still impacted by the policy as their utility providers
produced electricity in NBP regions.
  22 Cells for which data are reported contain 72% of all manufacturing employment. Suppression of the

state data occurs in only 7% of cells, with those 7% being imputed using the same method described in
the text.



                                                    19
& Mansur 2013). This imputation process reduces the true employment variation in the
data and raises other concerns regarding when cells may fall into and out of suppres-
sion status. Panel A of Table 4 reports results using a nearly identical set of regression
specifications in Table 2 but at the county rather than state level. County-industry fixed
effects control for any time invariant differences in employment levels and industry, state
and industry by region trends are controlled for in an analogous manner. Reassuringly,
Panel A reveals the county level results to be of similar magnitude to their state level
counterparts. Results are no longer statistically significant for Columns 2 and 3 but are
statistically significant at the 5% level in Column 6, the preferred specification which
includes separate region by industry trends.
    Panel B of Table 4 restricts the treated region to only the counties that were directly
impacted by the NBP. The results for the preferred specification suggest a slightly smaller
impact than suggested by the state level counterpart, but the coefficient falls well within
the confidence interval of the state level results. The final important use of the county
level data is to control for changes in county level NAAQS nonattainment standards. To
isolate the impact of the NBP from any impact of the NAAQS, I include a term in the
econometric model which interacts 2004 county NAAQS nonattainment status with the
Post and EnInt variables.23
    As a final specification, I return to the state-level data and consider the effect that the
NBP had separately on each specific manufacturing industry. To do this, the main triple
difference interaction variable is replaced with 21 different industry-specific interaction
variables.24 The coefficients on the industry specific interaction variables represent the
estimated effect of the NBP on each industry. Figure 5 plots each of the resulting coef-
ficients on the y-axis and the industry’s energy intensity on the x-axis. As expected, the
higher the energy intensity of the industry, the greater it was impacted by the NBP. The
apparent linearity of the relationship between an industry’s energy intensity and their
NBP related employment change supports the identification strategy used in the triple
difference models.
  23 Specifically, a NAAQS nonattainment indicator variable is set equal to one for all counties that enter

nonattainment for any criterion pollutant in 2004. This variable is then interacted with the PostxNBP
variable and included in the model. Panel C shows that the results in the preferred specification are
robust to including these controls.
  24 That is, I drop the Post × NBP × EnInt variable and replace it with Post × NBP × Ind1 ,
                              st        s       k                                 st     s        k
Postst × NBPs × Ind2k , . . . , Postst × NBPs × Ind21k where Postst × NBPs has been separately interacted
with each of the twenty-one industry indicator variables (Ind1k ,. . . ,Ind21k ).




                                                    20
4.4       Worker Flows and Earnings by Age Group: Results from the Quar-
          terly Workforce Indicators Data
While the finding of an employment decline is an important and policy relevant out-
come, estimating the NBP’s impact on industry employment levels does not fully capture
the impact of the regulation on worker welfare or labor markets. The cost of employment
declines will vary based on which workers lose their jobs and how these employment
adjustments occur. The remainder of this paper attempts to gain insights into these ques-
tions by using the QWI, a relatively new data set which observes all hires, separations,
the earnings of the newly hired workers and the demographic characteristics of the labor
force.
     Learning the effects of the policy on these important outcomes provides policy mak-
ers and economists with a far richer understanding of the impact of environmental reg-
ulation on labor markets. A primary reason these outcomes are important is that they
shed light on the extent of the transitional costs that workers face when their industry
is hit by regulation. If firms respond to regulations by laying off long-time employees
there will be a significant negative impact on incumbent workers. On the other hand,
if firms respond by reducing hiring rates and allowing employment reductions to occur
through retirements and quits then incumbent worker will largely be protected while
new and potential new workers will be impacted.25
     Past research has shown transitional costs can be large for workers that experience
involuntary separations (Jacobson et al. 1993) and these costs should be given particular
attention when considering the effects of regulation (Walker 2013).26 One final yet very
important margin on which firms may adjust to regulation is through worker earnings.
A change in earnings will clearly have implications for worker welfare. Using data from
the QWI on the earnings of newly hired workers allows for these changes to be captured
in a way that previous research has been unable to observe. Summary statistics for these
variables are found in Table 5.
  25 Ina general equilibrium framework equilibrium framework there are a variety of mechanisms through
which incumbent workers will be harmed even if all employment reduction occurs through a decrease in
new hiring. For example, if the shock is “large” a reduction in hiring will slow job-to-job transitions, thus
cutting off an important path through which workers “climb the ladder” (Moscarini & Postel-Vinay 2013).
  26 Workers that involuntarily separate from a firm are shown to experience extended periods of unem-

ployment, long run earnings losses and even increased mortality rates (Jacobson et al. 1993; Sullivan &
von Wachter 2009; Davis & von Wachter 2011; Farber 2012).




                                                     21
4.4.1   Worker Flows and Labor Adjustment

Before reporting results on worker flows it is important as a validity check to begin
by replicating the primary employment regression described in equation (2) using em-
ployment data from the QWI. Column 1 of the first row of Table 6 shows the DDD
estimate using QWI data is smaller (-0.871 as compared to -1.23) but it remains nega-
tive and statistically significant at the 5% level. That these two estimates differ is not
altogether surprising for two reasons. First, employment is measured differently in the
QWI than the CBP. The QWI calculates “stable” employment, which is defined as the
number of workers who have been present at the firm for at least three months, rather
than the point-in-time employment measure used by the CBP. Second, the QWI data
contain only the forty states for which there is employment data back to 2000. These
QWI employment results suggest that industries in the top quartile of the energy inten-
sity distribution lost 2.8% of employment relative to industries in the bottom quartile of
the energy intensity index.
    The first row of Columns 2 and 3 of Table 6 estimates the impact of the regulation on
worker flows, using the same specification as that described in equation (2). For Column
2 the dependent variable, y gkt in equation (2) is now defined as the hiring rate rather
than the natural log of employment. Specifically, the hiring rate is the number of new
quarterly hires divided by the total employment. The coefficient reported in Column 2
of the first row in Table 6 is -0.225. This implies that for every additional percentage
point in energy intensity, an industry decreased their hiring rate by .225 percentage
points. As seen in Table A2 the average quarterly hiring rate for all manufactures over
this time period was 7.6 per 100 employees. This coefficient would imply that there
were 1.24 fewer quarterly hires per 100 workers in the most energy intensive industry.
The program’s impact on separation rates points negative as well but is not precisely
estimated.
    The hiring and separation results suggest firms may have lowered employment through
reductions in hiring rather than increases in layoffs. If true then we would expect to see
no concomitant rise in the periods of non-employment for workers separating from a
high energy industry following the NBP. Column 4 of Table 6 report these results. The
estimates reported in row 1 of Column 4 show there to be no clear evidence that the
NBP increased the average period of non-employment for workers who separated from
high energy industries following the NBP.27
  27 Over the recession, average quarters of non-employment for separating workers jumped from 1.6 to
2.1 (author’s calculation). If workers who separated from regulated industries see no increase in periods of


                                                    22
    Table 6, in addition to reporting the impact on periods of non-employment for sep-
arating workers, reports the major findings for employment and each of the key flow
variables in the QWI by age group. The ability to match worker characteristics to the
firm at this level of detail is a feature that is unique to the QWI and allows us to explore
the heterogeneity of the impact by worker age. Each cell reports the coefficient from a
separate regression using a different outcome-age group combination. All regressions
use the main specification listed in equation (2). The first row of Table 6 uses the entire
population of workers. Breaking these results down by worker age grouping reveals
interesting patterns. The heterogeneous impact of the NBP on employment and periods
of non-employment following a separation are especially important. If firms decrease
their hiring rates then employment declines will first occur for worker groups with high
levels of turnover. For example, young workers are both hired and separate from firms
at a faster clip than other workers. When firms stop or reduce their hiring, the flow of
new workers into the firm declines. However, the flow of workers out of the firm (sepa-
rations) continues to be higher for the young than the old.28 Therefore, the employment
drop will be greatest for young workers. This story is consistent with the change in
employment flows that are observed during macroeconomic downturns (Davis & Halti-
wanger 2014).
    Column 1 reports the employment change by age-group. The coefficient for the age
22-24 category is -2.12 while the coefficient for age 55-64 category is only -0.30. This
shows a far greater drop in employment for younger workers than for older workers.
The dynamics of the age-group specific employment drop are explored more in Sec-
tion 4.5. Following the NBP, hiring rates fall in high energy industries for nearly all age
groups but employment declines are largest for the youngest groups. Consistent with
the story that firms adjusted through natural separations rather than layoffs is the lack of
any observed increase in separations for middle aged workers. Furthermore, there is no
observed increase in periods of non-employment for those middle-aged workers that do
separate. This is important because middle-aged workers are a group with significant
industry and firm specific capital and past research has shown that the costs of non-
voluntary separations for this group are particularly large (Jacobson et al. 1993; Walker
non-employment, this suggests they may have shifted quickly to other jobs. An increase in this variable,
particularly for middle aged workers, suggest regulation may have forced people into unemployment.
This finding is explored more in the following section. See the Data Appendix for more details on this
variable.
  28 Figure A2 displays worker separation rates by age. Rates are significantly higher for younger workers

than older workers.




                                                   23
2013). That middle aged workers experience no clear increase in separations or peri-
ods of non-employment provides further evidence that firms’ method of employment
adjustment had minimal costs to incumbent workers.


4.4.2    Worker Earnings: Incumbents vs. New Hires

The QWI is also able to shed light on the NBP’s impact on workers’ earnings in a way that
no other publicly available data set can. Evaluating the earnings impact of regulations
is crucially important to an understanding of how the NBP impacted labor markets.
However, due to existing contracts, firms are often unable or unwilling to immediately
adjust the hours and wages of incumbent workers. As a result, changes in average
worker earnings occur slowly because they are dominated by incumbent workers. New
hire earnings provide a margin over which firms are most likely to be able to adjust
(Curtis et al. 2013). The QWI provides data not only on average earnings of all workers,
but also on the average earnings of all new hires. Using the econometric model from the
main specification described in equation (2), I estimate the impact of the NBP on worker
earnings by defining y gkt as the natural log of worker earnings. While the NBP appears to
have no distinguishable effect on earnings of all workers, there is a statistically significant
decline in the earnings of new hires. The DDD coefficient is -1.277 for the all age category
and the decline is relatively consistent across age groups. This implies a decline in new
hire earnings of 4.2% for industries in the top quartile of the energy intensity index
compared with those in the bottom quartile. No decline is observed when examining
average earnings of all workers which consists primarily of incumbent workers whose
contracts were negotiated before the regulation. The ability to change the earnings of
the newly hired is an important adjustment margin for firms. This adjustment has not
previously been captured due to a lack of data.29 While not modeled explicitly in this
paper, the drop in new hire earnings could be driving the observed decline in turnover
rates as workers will be less likely to leave their existing jobs if their outside options are
made less attractive.


4.5      Event-Study Models
To understand how the effects of the policy evolved over time it is useful to perform an
event-time study. In the context of the above models, an event-time study tracks how the
  29 Importantly,   the new hires earnings decline may represent a decline in either wages or a decline in
hours.



                                                     24
coefficient on the variable NBPg × EnIntk changes throughout the study period. I use
the second quarter of 2003 as the start date and normalize the coefficient for this period
to be zero. Specifically I estimate the following model:

                M
     y gkt =   ∑      βtT [1( Qtrq = t) × NBPg × EnIntk )] + θx gkt + δ gk + αkt + γ gt + e gkt   (3)
               t=−m

     This model mirrors that of equation (2) but removes the industry specific NBP - Non-
NBP trends and replaces the triple interaction variable with forty-four event-time coeffi-
cients. This model allows us to view trends both before and after the implementation of
the NBP.
     Figure 6 plots the event-time coefficients on the logged employment model. The co-
efficients before the policy are slightly positive but none are statistically different from
zero. The coefficients become negative after the NBP’s implementation with zero falling
outside of their confidence intervals. The slight downward slope prior to the NBP sug-
gests that employment in high energy industries in the NBP region may have been trend-
ing downward prior to its implementation. Regression results from the main specifica-
tion of the paper in Table 2 include separate region by industry trends to control for the
differing trends but it is also useful to simply visualize the extent to which they impact
the results. Furthermore, this allows for a visual inspection as to whether firms antici-
pated the regulation and began responding before its implementation. The relatively flat
line in the quarters leading up to the law’s implementation suggest that firms did not
react to the law until it began in full.
     Figure 7 shows the event-study results for five different age groups of workers.
Rather than use the logged value of total employment, each regression examines the
impact on employment levels of a particular age group. For clarity, the plot removes
confidence intervals and examines only the main working age categories. From the plot,
it is clear that employment of young workers experienced the largest fall while employ-
ment of older workers was largely unaffected.
     As a comparison, Figure 8 reports the same coefficients where the left hand side
variable is periods of non-employment for separating workers. The pattern here is quite
distinct from that seen in Figure 6. Here, the coefficients consistently hover around zero
and are not statistically significant before or after the NBP. The NBP appears to have
had no noticeable impact on periods of non-employment for separating workers. This
analysis is a particularly important compliment to the the DDD results for this outcome
variable. DDD models take the average of the pre-period and compares it to the average


                                                  25
outcome in the post period. This model may not uncover an impact of the policy if
the impact is short lived. By contrast event-time studies capture quarter-specific policy
effects. The plot in Figure 8 shows that there was no clear positive spike in quarters on
non-employment for separating workers in any of the quarters following the NBP.


5      Discussion
Taken as a whole, the results paint a picture of how labor markets in energy intensive in-
dustries responded to the NBP. The findings show that employment in industries in the
top quartile declined 3.9% compared to manufacturing employment in the bottom quar-
tile and that under certain assumptions discussed at the end of Section 4.2, employment
declined by 110,024 jobs.
    In light of this finding it is useful to revisit the causal mechanisms that connect the
NBP to manufacturing employment. First, NOx emissions from large manufacturing
plants that produced their own energy were directly regulated by the program. This
direct regulation may have led existing firms to decrease employment and discouraged
new firms from locating in the regulated region. Second, firms may have adjusted their
production location decisions and / or their input bundles in response to an increase in
the price of electricity or uncertainty regarding the future price of electricity.
    These causal mechanisms suggest two strands of literature that may be helpful in
interpreting the magnitude and plausibility of the findings. Given that part of the effect
came through the direct regulation of plants, it is useful to simply compare the labor
market impacts with findings from previous work on the impact of other major envi-
ronmental regulations. Greenstone (2002) finds that the NAAQS resulted in a loss of
590,000 manufacturing jobs while Walker (2011) finds that the portion of the 1990 CAAA
that changed attainment standards resulted in a 15% loss in employment in regulated
sectors.
    The second way to interpret the magnitude of the findings is to make the (likely
extreme) assumption that the entire effect occurred through an increase in electricity
prices and then determine the electricity price change that would be required to cause
the observed decline in employment.30 A few recent papers have examined the em-
ployment energy price elasticity (Davis & Haltiwanger 2001; Deschenes 2010; Kahn &
Mansur 2013). The most relevant to this paper is Kahn & Mansur (2013) which estimates
    30 Employment may also respond to increased uncertainty over future electricity prices but this subject
has yet to be explicitly studied by economists.


                                                    26
employment-electricity price elasticities for manufacturing industries at the three-digit
NAICS level. Kahn & Mansur (2013) find an employment electricity price elasticity rang-
ing between -0.15 for the computer products industry to -1.17 for the energy intensive
primary metals industry. Based on the Kahn & Mansur (2013) elasticity, a 5.9% increase
in electricity prices would be needed to account for the observed employment decline.
This figure is likely to substantially overstate the actual “required” electricity price in-
crease because it assumes that employment changes occurred entirely through electricity
price increases and that there was no impact of the direct regulation.
    To the best of my knowledge, only two ex-ante simulations of the NBP estimated
the impact it would have on electricity prices and there have been no ex-post studies.
The first, performed by the EPA (1999) predicted an increase in electricity prices of 1.6%.
The second, performed by Platts Research and Consulting titled “The NOx Challenge”,
predicted an increase of $1-$3/MWh in the price of wholesale electricity or an increase
of between 2.47% and 7.42%. Fowlie (2010) notes that in every state where electricity
is regulated, firms successfully petitioned for rate base adjustments in order to cover
the compliance costs of the NBP. A thorough ex-post evaluation of the pass-through
emissions costs to electricity prices is beyond the scope of this paper but Appendix A5
reports results from straight-forward differences-in-differences model that use state-year
electricity price data to test for whether electricity prices rose in NBP states following
the regulation. In short, the main DD coefficients are positive and of similar magnitude
to ex-ante estimates but they are not precisely estimated.
    Past research on the employment effect of environmental regulation and electricity
price increases add credence to the main employment findings. But of perhaps more im-
portance are the changes to other labor market outcomes. Hiring rates in energy inten-
sive industries are shown to have fallen while periods of non-employment for separating
workers did not increase. This finding suggests that firms may have reduced employ-
ment through voluntary separations, such as retirements and job-to-job transitions rather
than involuntary transitions (layoffs). Given the presence of unions and labor adjustment
costs, such as severance packages and increased unemployment insurance taxes, it is not
surprising that firms will choose to adjust to small demand shocks primarily through
natural separations. Figure A1 shows the difference in the employment path between a
firm that adjusts through natural separations and a firm that adjusts through layoffs.31
Although not explicitly modeled here, it is clear to see that employment adjustment
  31 Thereis a large literature on firm adjustment costs and their implications. See Hamermesh (1989),
Caballero & Engel (1993), Bloom et al. (2007) and Cooper & Willis (2009) for a few examples.



                                                 27
decision of a firm will depend on the cost of layoffs and the size of the shock. Distin-
guishing between layoffs and voluntary separations is important as a variety of studies
have found that workers who experience mass displacement events experience extended
periods of unemployment, large earnings losses and increased mortality rates (Sullivan
& von Wachter 2009; Davis & von Wachter 2011; Farber 2011). Regulation’s impact on
hiring also provides a potential explanation for the aging of the manufacturing work-
force in the United States. Young workers have high levels of turnover and separate from
firms at a much faster rate than old workers (see Figure A2). Therefore, when a firm
stops hiring, their employment of young workers will shrink faster than their employ-
ment of old workers. Unions, to the extent that they require shrinking firms to dismiss
workers based on seniority will also exacerbate this aging effect of regulation.
    On the earnings side, we observe a drop in the earnings of new hires but no such
drop in the overall average earnings. This drop in new hire earnings is important for
two reasons. First, it could explain the decrease in worker turnover in energy intensive
industries. If wage offers decline then workers will be less likely to leave their existing
job for a new one. This will decrease worker turnover rates for impacted industries.
Second, recent research has found a one-to-one correspondence between new hire wages
and productivity (Haefke et al. 2013), suggesting that the observed decline in new hire
earnings may be indicative of regulation induced productivity declines such as those
found by (Greenstone et al. 2012).
    The earnings results, together with the worker flow findings, paint a more nuanced
picture of the impact of environmental regulation on labor markets. Incumbent workers
do not bear the brunt of regulation’s impact. The effects are felt by future workers who
receive lower earnings, and potential future workers, who are no longer hired due to the
regulation. These effects are important to labor markets and the economy but are quite
distinct from the traditional job loss story that portrays long-time incumbent workers as
the only losers from environmental regulation.32


6      Conclusion
This paper has examined the impact of the NOx Budget Trading program on a variety
of labor market outcomes in order to better understand the costs associated with envi-
    32 The
         results may also be interpreted in light of the endowment effect which would suggest it is more
painful for an incumbent worker to lose their job than it is for a potential worker to not receive a job. In
such case, incumbent workers should be given extra consideration when considering the costs of environ-
mental regulation.


                                                    28
ronmental regulation of energy producers. As a result of the program, manufacturing
industries in the top quartile of the energy intensity index are seen to have reduced their
employment levels by 3.9% relative to industries in the bottom quartile. Under certain
assumptions discussed above this represents an employment loss of roughly 110,000
jobs. This employment decline however, occurred largely as a result of firms decreasing
hiring rates rather than increasing separation rates. As a result, the impact of the NBP
on incumbent workers was mitigated as there is no evidence of increased separations or
increased periods of non-employment for separating workers. While there was a decline
in earnings, this decline was isolated to workers hired after the regulation began. Over-
all, these findings suggest that firms primarily reduced employment through voluntary
separations, thus mitigating the impact on incumbent workers. The labor market im-
pacts of the NBP were felt primarily by future workers who earn less and the potential
future workers who would have been hired in the absence of the regulation.
    Looking forward, future research should perform ex-post evaluations of environmen-
tal regulations to better understand their impacts on different demographic groups. A
more detailed understanding of the relationship between regulation, energy prices and
employment would help guide policy makers and allow them to target workers that are
particular vulnerable. Furthermore, data distinguishing between voluntary and invol-
untary separations would allow for a better understanding of the types of worker flows
that occur following regulation.




                                            29
References
Abowd, John, Stephens, Bryce, & Vilhuber, Lars. 2006 (Jan.). The LEHD Infrastructure Files
 and the Creation of the Quarterly Workforce Indicators. Longitudinal Employer-Household
 Dynamics Technical Papers 2006-01. Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.

Abowd, John M., & Vilhuber, Lars. 2012. Did the Housing Price Bubble Clobber Local
 Labor Market Job and Worker Flows When It Burst? American Economic Review: Papers
 and Proceedings, 102(3), 589–93.

Autor, David H., & Dorn, David. 2013. The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the
 Polarization of the US Labor Market. American Economic Review, 103(5), 1553–97.

Becker, Randy, & Henderson, Vernon. 2000. Effects of Air Quality Regulations on Pol-
  luting Industries. Journal of Political Economy, 108(2), 379–421.

Berman, Eli, & Bui, Linda T. M. 2001. Environmental regulation and labor demand:
  evidence from the South Coast Air Basin. Journal of Public Economics, 79(2), 265–295.

Bertrand, Marianne, Duflo, Esther, & Mullainathan, Sendhil. 2004. How Much Should
  We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  119(1), 249–275.

Bloom, Nick, Bond, Stephen, & Reenen, John Van. 2007. Uncertainty and Investment
  Dynamics. Review of Economic Studies, 74(2), 391–415.

Burtraw, Dallas, Krupnick, Alan, Mansur, Erin, Austin, David, & Farrell, Deirdre. 1998.
  Costs And Benefits Of Reducing Air Pollutants Related To Acid Rain. Contemporary
  Economic Policy, 16(4), 379–400.

Burtraw, Dallas, Linn, Josh, Palmer, Karen, & Paul, Anthony. 2014. The Costs and Con-
  sequences of Clean Air Act Regulation of CO2 from Power Plants. American Economic
  Review, 104(5), 557–62.

Caballero, Ricardo J, & Engel, Eduardo M R A. 1993. Microeconomic Adjustment Haz-
  ards and Aggregate Dynamics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(2), 359–83.

Carlton, Dennis W. 1983. The Location and Employment Choices of New Firms: An
  Econometric Model with Discrete and Continuous Endogenous Variables. The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 65(3), 440–49.

Chay, Kenneth Y., & Greenstone, Michael. 2003. The Impact Of Air Pollution On Infant
 Mortality: Evidence From Geographic Variation In Pollution Shocks Induced By A
 Recession. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1121–1167.

Cooper, Russell, & Willis, Jonathan. 2009. The Cost of Labor Adjustment: Inferences
 from the Gap. Review of Economic Dynamics, 12(4), 632–647.


                                           30
Curtis, E. Mark, Hirsch, Barry, & Schroeder, Mary. 2013. Evaluating Workplace Mandates
 with Flows versus Stocks: An Application to California Paid Family Leave. Tech. rept. Geor-
 gia State University.

Davis, Steven J., & Haltiwanger, John. 2001. Sectoral job creation and destruction re-
 sponses to oil price changes. Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(3), 465–512.

Davis, Steven J., & Haltiwanger, John. 2014 (September). Labor Market Fluidity and Eco-
 nomic Performance. Working Paper 20479. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Davis, Steven J., & von Wachter, Till. 2011. Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss. Brookings
 Papers on Economic Activity, 43(2 (Fall)), 1–72.

Dean, Thomas J., Brown, Robert L., & Stango, Victor. 2000. Environmental Regulation
 as a Barrier to the Formation of Small Manufacturing Establishments: A Longitudinal
 Examination. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 40(1), 56–75.

Deschenes, Olivier. 2010 (June). Climate Policy and Labor Markets. NBER Working Papers
 16111. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Deschenes, Olivier, Greenstone, Michael, & Shapiro, Joseph S. 2012 (August). Defensive
 Investments and the Demand for Air Quality: Evidence from the NOx Budget Program and
 Ozone Reductions. Working Paper 18267. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dube, Arindrajit, Lester, T. William, & Reich, Michael. 2011 (June). Do Frictions Matter
 in the Labor Market? Accessions, Separations and Minimum Wage Effects. IZA Discussion
 Papers 5811. Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

EPA. 1999. Regulatory Impact Analysis For the Final Section 126 Petition Rule. Tech. rept.
  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

EPA. 2009. NOx Budget Trading Program: 2008 Highlights. Tech. rept. U.S. Environmental
  Protection Agency.

Farber, Henry. 2011 (May). Job Loss in the Great Recession: Historical Perspective from the
  Displaced Workers Survey, 1984-2010. IZA Discussion Papers 5696. Institute for the
  Study of Labor (IZA).

Farber, Henry S. 2012. Unemployment in the Great Recession: Did the Housing Market
  Crisis Prevent the Unemployed from Moving to Take Jobs? American Economic Review,
  102(3), 520–25.

Fowlie, Meredith. 2010. Emissions Trading, Electricity Restructuring, and Investment in
  Pollution Abatement. American Economic Review, 100(3), 837–69.

Gittings, Kaj, & Schmutte, Ian. 2012. Getting Handcuffs on an Octopus: Minimum Wages,
  Employment and Turnover. Tech. rept. University of Georgia.


                                            31
Greenstone, Michael. 2002. The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial
  Activity: Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census
  of Manufactures. Journal of Political Economy, 110(6), 1175–1219.

Greenstone, Michael, List, John A., & Syverson, Chad. 2012 (September). The Effects of
  Environmental Regulation on the Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing. Working Paper
  18392. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Haefke, Christian, Sonntag, Marcus, & van Rens, Thijs. 2013. Wage rigidity and job
 creation. Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(8), 887 – 899.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1989. Labor Demand and the Structure of Adjustment Costs.
 American Economic Review, 79(4), 674–89.

Hanna, Rema. 2010. US Environmental Regulation and FDI: Evidence from a Panel
 of US-Based Multinational Firms. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3),
 158–89.

Henderson, J Vernon. 1996. Effects of Air Quality Regulation. American Economic Review,
 86(4), 789–813.

Jacobson, Louis S, LaLonde, Robert J, & Sullivan, Daniel G. 1993. Earnings Losses of
  Displaced Workers. American Economic Review, 83(4), 685–709.

Jerrett, Michael, Burnett, Richard T., Pope, C. Arden, Ito, Kazuhiko, Thurston, George,
  Krewski, Daniel, Shi, Yuanli, Calle, Eugenia, & Thun, Michael. 2009. Long-Term Ozone
  Exposure and Mortality. New England Journal of Medicine, 360(11), 1085–1095.

Kahn, Matthew E., & Mansur, Erin T. 2013. Do local energy prices and regulation affect
  the geographic concentration of employment? Journal of Public Economics, 101(C), 105–
  114.

Linn, Joshua. 2008. Technological Modifications in the Nitrogen Oxides Tradable Permit
  Program. The Energy Journal, 0(Number 3), 153–176.

Linn, Joshua. 2010. The effect of cap-and-trade programs on firms’ profits: Evidence
  from the Nitrogen Oxides Budget Trading Program. Journal of Environmental Economics
  and Management, 59(1), 1–14.

List, John A., Millimet, Daniel L., Fredriksson, Per G., & McHone, W. Warren. 2003.
  Effects of Environmental Regulations on Manufacturing Plant Births: Evidence from
  a Propensity Score Matching Estimator. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4),
  944–952.

Martin, Ralf, de Preux, Laure B., & Wagner, Ulrich J. 2014. The impact of a carbon tax on
 manufacturing: Evidence from microdata. Journal of Public Economics, 117(0), 1 – 14.



                                           32
Mian, Atif R., & Sufi, Amir. 2012 (February). What Explains High Unemployment? The Ag-
 gregate Demand Channel. Working Paper 17830. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Moscarini, Giuseppe, & Postel-Vinay, Fabien. 2013. Did the Job Ladder Fail After the Great
 Recession? Yale Mimeograph.

Palmer, Karen, Burtraw, Dallas, Bharvirkar, Ranjit, & Paul, Anthony. 2001 (Jan.). Restruc-
  turing and Cost of Reducing NOx Emissions in Electricity Generation. Discussion Papers
  dp-01-10-rev. Resources For the Future.

Research, Platts, & Consulting. 2003. The NOx Challenge. Tech. rept. Platts Research and
  Consulting.

Shapiro, Joseph S., & Walker, Reed. 2014. Why is Pollution from U.S. Manufacturing De-
  clining? The Roles of Trade, Regulation, Productivity and Preferences. Yale Mimeograph.

Sullivan, Daniel, & von Wachter, Till. 2009. Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis
  Using Administrative Data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1265–1306.

Walker, W. Reed. 2011. Environmental Regulation and Labor Reallocation: Evidence
 from the Clean Air Act. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 101(3),
 442–47.

Walker, W. Reed. 2013. The Transitional Costs of Sectoral Reallocation: Evidence From
 the Clean Air Act and the Workforce. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1787–
 1835.

Zivin, Joshua Graff, & Neidell, Matthew. 2012. The Impact of Pollution on Worker
  Productivity. American Economic Review, 102(7), 3652–73.




                                           33
Figures and Tables

                         Figure 1: NBP Compliance Region




          NBP Compliance Dates
           NBP Start Date: May, 2003
           NBP Start Date: May, 2004
           NBP Start Date: May, 2007
           Not Subject to the NBP




                                       34
                                    Figure 2: NOx Emissions From all NBP Affected States


                         10000




                         8000
  NOx Emissions (Tons)




                         6000




                         4000




                         2000
                                 Jan 1   Feb 1 Mar 1   Apr 1 May 1 Jun 1   Jul 1   Aug 1 Sep 1 Oct 1
                                                                 Day

                                              2002 NOx Emissions             2004 NOx Emissions




   While some northeastern states began in 2003, the program started in full on May 30,
2004. This graph plots daily NOx emissions in 2002, when no states were participating,
and 2004 for the nineteen participating states. There is a visible reduction in the amount
of NOx emissions in NBP states beginning on the start date that is not present in 2002.




                                                             35
     Figure 3: East-West Difference in Employment by Energy-Intensity Grouping
      0
      -.05
      -.1
      -.15




             1998     2000          2002            2004         2006         2008
                                                 Year

                      High Energy Industries                Medium Energy Industries
                      Low Energy Industries




                                           emp
                                           g,t,east   emp g,t,west
    Note: Each point is calculated by empg,98,east  − empg,98,west . This shows the percent em-
ployment change in the east minus the percent employment change in the west. Here t
is the year (1998-2009), g is energy intensity group (low, medium, high) and emp g,t,east
is the total employment for industry grouping g in east (treated) region in year t. All
east-west differences assume the 1998 difference to be the baseline difference, set to zero,
against which future differences can be compared. The vertical lines are drawn at 2001,
after the policy was approved and 2003, the year the NBP went into effect.




                                                 36
                                 Figure 4: NBP Treated Region




        NBP "Treatment" Region
        Untreated Region




    Note: An area is defined as treated if its electricity provider is part of an ISO with
coal-burning power plants that were subject to the NBP. For example, Iowa, Minnesota,
Wisconsin and North Dakota, while not part of the geographic area of the NBP are part of
the Midwest Independent System Operator whose geographic region includes Indiana,
Illinois and Michigan. Boundaries of ISO’s are notoriously fuzzy as they are defined
according to utilities rather than a set geographic region. Furthermore the impact of the
NBP will be dissipated for regions whose manufacturing establishments are not directly
regulated. Because there is no clean geographic discontinuity to the policy, this makes
border discontinuity methods an unattractive methodology for identifying the impact of
the NBP.




                                             37
  .1               Figure 5: Industry Coefficients Vs. Energy Intensity



                 Transportation Equipment
                          Wood Product
             Miscellaneous
  .05




                        Apparel
                           Food
                 Computer & Electronic Product           Petroleum & Coal Products
                  Beverage & Tobacco Product
  0




                                                      Chemical     Paper
                   Machinery
                               Fabricated Metal Product
                         Printing & Related Support Activities                      Primary Metal
                           Textile Product Mills
  −.05




                      Electrical Equipment, Appliance, & Components
                      Furniture
                                       Plastics & Rubber Products
                                                               Nonmetallic Mineral Product
  −.1




                                                          Textile Mills
  −.15




         0          .01            .02             .03              .04            .05              .06

                          Industry Coefficients                     Fitted values




   Note: This chart plots the each industry specific triple difference coefficient against
that industry’s energy intensity measure. The coefficients are obtained by replacing the
PostxEastxEnInt variable with 21 industry specific triple interaction variables (PostxEastxInd1,
PostxEastxInd2, . . . , PostxEastxInd21) and then running the specification described in
equation (2). Other model specifications yield similar plots.




                                                 38
  2
  1
  0
  −1
  −2               Figure 6: Impact of NBP on Employment by Quarter




       −5     −4     −3     −2    −1      0     1        2        3      4       5
                              Years Before and After the NBP




   Note: This chart plots the coefficient estimates from a version of equation 3 where the
outcome variable is logged employment. Specifically, it plots the coefficients on the event
time indicator variables which demonstrate how the impact of the policy on employment
evolved over time. The dashed lines represent the 95% confidence intervals. Before the
policy the coefficients are slightly above zero but statistically insignificant. After the
policy the coefficients fall below zero and their confidence intervals do not include zero.




                                            39
  3
  2
  1
  0
  −1
  −2
  −3
  −4        Figure 7: Impact of NBP on Employment by Quarter by Age Group




       −5      −4    −3     −2    −1      0     1        2        3      4       5
                              Years Before and After the NBP

                                  Age 22−24                Age 25−34
                                  Age 35−44                Age 45−54
                                  Age 55−64




   Note: This chart plots event-time coefficient estimates from five different regressions.
The specific model is shown in equation 3. The five different lines plot the differential
dynamic impact of the policy on employment in five different age categories.




                                            40
 Figure 8: Impact on Periods of Non-employment for Separating Workers by Quarter
  .2
  .1
  0
  −.1
  −.2




        −20    −15      −10      −5        0        5        10        15       20
                              Quarters Before and After the NBP




    Note: This chart plots the coefficient estimates from a version of equation 3 where the
outcome variable is periods of non-employment for separating workers. Specifically, it
plots the coefficients on the event time indicator variables which demonstrate the impact
of the policy on periods of non-employment for separating workers evolved over time.
The dashed lines represent the 95% confidence intervals. The coefficients are always
close to zero and are never statistically distinguishable from zero.




                                            41
         Table 1: Energy Intensity of 3-Digit NAICS Manufacturing Industries

        NAICS 3-Digit Code                          Industry Description                  Energy Intensity
               336                       Transportation Equipment Manufacturing                0.59%
               334                    Computer & Electronic Product Manufacturing              0.59%
               312                      Beverage & Tobacco Product Manufacturing               0.65%
               333                                Machinery Manufacturing                      0.73%
               339                              Miscellaneous Manufacturing                    0.79%
               316                        Leather & Allied Product Manufacturing               0.87%
               337                      Furniture & Related Product Manufacturing              0.94%
               335           Electrical Equipment, Appliance, & Component Manufacturing        0.96%
               315                                 Apparel Manufacturing                       1.01%
               323                          Printing & Related Support Activities              1.16%
               314                                  Textile Product Mills                      1.27%
               311                                  Food Manufacturing                         1.30%
               332                        Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing               1.48%
               321                              Wood Product Manufacturing                     1.68%
               326                       Plastics & Rubber Products Manufacturing              2.03%
               325                                 Chemical Manufacturing                      2.93%
               324                      Petroleum & Coal Products Manufacturing                3.17%
               313                                      Textile Mills                          3.25%
               322                                  Paper Manufacturing                        3.83%
               327                     Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing               4.42%
               331                              Primary Metal Manufacturing                    4.80%




   Note: The energy intensity measure is created by dividing the industry’s total energy
expenditure by their total value of shipments. These variables are obtained from the
NBER Productivity Database and use 1998 values.




                                                      42
             Table 2: Employment Results: County Business Patterns
                         (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)                     (6)
                      ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp)                       ln(Emp)
   PostxNBPxEnInt      -3.908  -2.209** -2.235**   -1.383   -1.329**                 -1.226*
                       (3.085)  (0.891)  (0.983)   (0.829)   (0.597)                 (0.662)
   PostxNBP           -0.00183 0.0134             0.00959 0.00294
                      (0.0828) (0.0166)           (0.0173) (0.0155)

   State-Ind FE                 Yes         Yes           Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes
   Year FE                      Yes                                Yes
   State Linear Trend                       Yes                             Yes
   Ind-Year FE                              Yes           Yes               Yes       Yes
   State-Year FE                                          Yes                         Yes
   Ind-Region Trends                                               Yes      Yes       Yes

   Observations               12,348       12,348        12,348   12,348   12,348   12,348
   R-Squared                   0.982        0.993         0.993    0.992    0.993    0.993
   Standard errors in parentheses
   ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



    Note: This table reports the main employment results using versions of equations (1)
and (2). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the NBP
Region-industry level. Inference is not sensitive to clustering at other levels including,
but not limited to, state, industry and state-industry. Column 1 gives the results using
equation (1). Column 2 includes industry-year and state-year fixed effects and Column 3
includes state linear trends and industry-year fixed effects. Columns 4 through 6 repeat
the specificatios in Columns 1 through 3 but now each industry is allowed to trend
differently based on it’s location. For example, steel industries in the NBP region have
a separate trend than steel industries in the non-NBP region. The coefficient on the
PostxNBP variable drops whenever State-Year fixed effects are included.




                                                    43
                  Table 3: Employment Results: State Robustness Checks
                 Panel A: Fuel Price / Composition Controls
                      (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)                       (6)
                   ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp)                            ln(Emp)
  PostxNBPxEnInt    -3.783   -2.322** -2.391**    -1.055    -1.346**                  -1.303**
                    (3.150)   (0.908)    (1.104)  (0.852)    (0.569)                   (0.639)
  PostxNBP         -0.00315   0.0139             0.00391 0.00215
                   (0.0829) (0.0166)             (0.0173) (0.0154)

  Observations               12,348    12,348     12,348   12,348          12,348     12,348
                                Panel B: Restricted NBP Region
  PostxNBPxEnInt             -3.974   -2.172*** -2.150** -1.610*          -1.499***   -1.238**
                             (3.418)   (0.800)    (0.865)  (0.883)          (0.520)    (0.602)
  PostxNBP                  -0.0151    0.0115              0.0104          0.00250
                            (0.0931) (0.0135)             (0.0194)         (0.0131)

  Observations               10,080       10,080        10,080   10,080    10,080     10,080
  State-Ind FE                Yes          Yes           Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes
  Year FE                     Yes                                 Yes
  State Linear Trend                       Yes                              Yes
  Ind-Year FE                              Yes           Yes                Yes         Yes
  State-Year FE                                          Yes                            Yes
  Ind-Region Trends                                               Yes       Yes         Yes
  Standard errors in parentheses
  ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



    Note: These results use the same specifications as those reported in table 2. Panel
A controls for changes in fuel prices that may disproportionately affect certain regions.
Panel B limits the NBP region to only states which are directly regulate. States which
were part of the NBP region but are not directly regulated are dropped from the speci-
fication. See the text for additional details.




                                                   44
               Table 4: Employment Results: County Robustness Checks
                                 Panel A: Base Regressions
                             (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)                     (5)        (6)
                          ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp)                      ln(Emp)    ln(Emp)
PostxNBPxEnInt             -3.223     -1.456    -1.510   -1.546∗               -1.250∗∗     -1.465
                           (2.847)   (0.932)   (0.898)   (0.896)                (0.597)    (0.889)
PostxNBP                   0.0156    -0.0003             0.0108                 -0.0033
                          (0.0803) (0.0159)             (0.0161)               (0.0153)

Observations              374,356 374,356 374,356 374,356                      374,356    374,356
                              Panel B: Restricted NBP Region
PostxNBPxEnInt             -3.270     -1.318    -1.416   -1.689∗                -1.211∗    -1.550
                           (2.997)   (0.913)    (0.897)  (0.955)                (0.655)   (0.943)
PostxNBP                  -0.0293    -0.0084            0.00980                -0.0102
                          (0.0852) (0.0156)             (0.0168)               (0.0161)

Observations              320,323 320,323 320,323 320,323                      320,323    320,323
                                Panel C: NAAQS Controls
PostxNBPxEnInt             -3.326    -1.523 -1.573∗   -1.540∗                  -1.345∗∗   -1.651∗
                           (2.825)  (0.935)  (0.914)  (0.915)                   (0.593)   (0.912)
PostxNBP                  -0.0161    0.0083           0.0096                    -0.0025
                          (0.0806) (0.0162)          (0.0157)                  (0.0152)

Observations              374,356       374,356        374,356    374,356      374,356    374,356
County-Ind FE               Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Year FE                     Yes                                     Yes
State Linear Trend                        Yes                                    Yes
Ind-Year FE                               Yes           Yes                      Yes        Yes
State-Year FE                                           Yes                                 Yes
Ind-Region Trends                                                   Yes          Yes        Yes
Standard errors in parentheses
∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01 Note: See text for additional details.




                                                  45
                          Table 5: QWI Descriptive Statistics



                                   NBP Region                    Non-NBP Region

  Variable                 Low        Mid          High       Low       Mid      High

  Emp                      22819      15315         15463     22229     11751     9076
                          (27310)    (20744)       (18277)   (46884)   (22706)   (15403)
  Hire Rate                0.061      0.073         0.058     0.082     0.093     0.078
                          (0.038)    (0.047)       (0.036)   (0.052)   (0.049)   (0.054)
  Sep Rate                 0.066      0.086         0.066     0.084     0.099     0.081
                          (0.056)    (0.136)       (0.055)   (0.101)   (0.075)   (0.068)
  Avg Monthly Earn         4050       3136          3912      3750      2919      3583
                          (1172)     (1283)        (1177)    (1367)    (1138)    (1132)
  New Hires Avg            3012       2238          2960      2715      2094      2545
  Monthly Earnings        (1053)      (834)        (1073)    (1027)     (928)     (923)
  Avg Qtrs of Non-Emp      1.815      1.799         1.844     1.734     1.766     1.780
  for Seperators          (0.363)    (0.366)       (0.382)   (0.324)   (0.373)   (0.398)

   Note: Observations in the QWI data are at the State – 3-digit NAICS level. Sample
means report averages of the observations in low, medium and high energy intensity
groupings in both the NBP and non-NBP regions. Standard deviations are reported in
parentheses below the means. Hiring and separation rates are quarterly and the average
monthly earnings variables are in nominal dollars. Sample period is from 1998Q1 to
2009Q4. See Section 3.2 and the data appendix for more information on the QWI.




                                              46
                    Table 6: Employment, Flows and Earnings by Age Group
                     (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)             (5)         (6)
                ln(Emp) Hires Rate Seps Rate Seps: Qtrs of ln(New Hire           ln(Avg
                                                    Non-Emp       Earnings)     Earnings)
 All             -0.871  ∗∗   -0.225  ∗∗   -0.187     -0.516       -1.277   ∗∗∗    0.435
                  (0.411)     (0.0999)    (0.128)     (0.636)        (0.470)     (0.299)
 Age 19-21       -1.939  ∗∗    -0.0559   -0.477  ∗∗    0.719         -0.689   ∗   -0.387
                  (0.722)      (0.254)    (0.179)     (0.585)        (0.352)     (0.274)
 Age 22-24      -2.121∗∗∗      -0.288∗   -0.358∗∗      0.688         -0.737∗      -0.417
                  (0.647)      (0.171)    (0.163)     (0.738)        (0.400)     (0.287)
 Age 25-34         -0.860       -0.144     -0.154     0.0354        -0.982   ∗∗    0.141
                  (0.588)      (0.122)    (0.126)     (0.699)        (0.436)     (0.217)
 Age 35-44       -0.861∗∗     -0.222∗∗     -0.149     -0.170        -1.214∗∗       0.370
                  (0.398)     (0.0868)    (0.142)     (0.723)        (0.482)     (0.332)
 Age 45-54         -0.718       -0.156    -0.0986     -0.724          -0.887      0.434
                  (0.521)      (0.117)    (0.136)     (1.216)        (0.550)     (0.327)
 Age 55-64         -0.304       -0.113     -0.214     -0.984        -1.877   ∗∗    0.303
                  (0.387)      (0.105)    (0.138)     (1.370)        (0.723)     (0.328)
 Age 65-99        -0.748∗      -0.0391    -0.0635     -1.829          -1.664      0.361
                  (0.400)     (0.0927)   (0.0888)     (1.111)        (1.267)     (0.484)
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



   Note: Each cell reports the regression coefficient on the triple interaction variable us-
ing a different outcome variable - age group combination from the model in equation (2).
The columns are the outcome variables and the rows are the age group. The hiring /
separation employment identity need not hold for the age specific results as employment
declines in these groupings also occur as workers age out of the group.




                                            47
A     Data Appendix
County Business Patterns does not report observations for which there is no employ-
ment in a given year. If firms shutdown and employment in a state-industry goes from
1,000 one year to zero the following year then this drop will not be observed because
there will be no record for the zero employment (the same issue could occur in reverse.
whereby employment growth that is attributable to new establishments locating in a
state-industry with zero previous employment will not be captured because the zero
employment wasa not observed in the prior years. To address this concern, I create a
balanced panel of every state-industry between 1998 and 2008 by adding zeros when
there is no record listed in the CBP. Data that is suppressed for disclosure purposes is
imputed by the method used by Kahn & Mansur (2013) as described in the text. Other
methods of imputation were explored, but results were not sensitive to the use of other
methods.
     Data suppression at the county-industry level is far more common due to disclosure
concerns. Employment is directly observed for 51% of county-industry pairings. These
observed cells contain 72% of all employment in the U.S. A large percent of the overall
employment remains because employment is only suppressed for observations with few
establishments. Also, some noise is infused in observations for which there are few
establishments, but these noise infusions are always less than 5%, sum to zero at the
state level and are made in fewer than 5% of the observations.
     The QWI is the seond source of data in this paper. It is built from state Unemploy-
ment Insurance records and contains 98% of all private-sector, non-agriculture employ-
ment at high levels of demographic, geographic and industry detail. Importantly, it
contains data on job and worker flows. A job is a relationship between a worker and an
establishment where the worker receives positive earnings from that establishment in a
quarter. Unlike the CBP, there is no way to impute suppressed data.
     Quarterly Workforce Indicator data is also suppressed at times though this is likely
to bias against finding a result. If small drops in employment lead to an observation be-
coming suppressed, then it is possible that employment declines resulting from the NBP
will not be observed if the observation becomes suppressed. This would bias against
finding a result. The ten states not included in the QWI results are Alabama, Arkansas,
Arizona, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire
and Wyoming.
     Hires and Separations variables refer to stable jobs. A job is considered stable if the
worker receives positive earnings from the establishment for three consecutive quarters.
Periods of non-employment for separating workers is obtained by tracking each worker
that separates from their firm for the following four quarters. If they are not observed
working at any other employer then they are assigned four quarters of non-employment.
If, in the quarter following their separation they are observed working at another firm,
then they are assigned zero quarters of non-employment. Currently, the QWI is only
able to track workers if they find employment in the same state in which they separated.
Using state-industry fixed effects accounts for, among other things, time-invariant dif-



                                            48
ferences that may arise in this measure due to a state’s size. Plotting this variable over
time reveals differences by state that are consistent over time.
    EPA’s website provides a list of regulated plants in the NBP. Based on the author’s
calculation, 93% of regulated manufacturing facilities are in the high intensity industry
grouping as defined in section 4.




                                           49
               Table A1: Employment Results: Dropping 2009 Data
                        (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)                       (6)
                     ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp)                        ln(Emp)
   PostxNBPxEnInt     -3.861  -2.301∗∗ -2.293∗∗ -1.458∗ -1.385∗∗                      -1.164
                      (2.991)  (0.966)  (0.869)   (0.798)   (0.631)                  (0.729)
   PostxNBP           0.0024   0.0155             0.0113    0.0043
                     (0.0799) (0.0166)           (0.0151) (0.0164)

   State-Ind FE                 Yes         Yes           Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes
   Year FE                      Yes                                Yes
   State Linear Trend                       Yes                             Yes
   Ind-Year FE                              Yes           Yes               Yes       Yes
   State-Year FE                                          Yes                         Yes
   Ind-Region Trends                                               Yes      Yes       Yes

   Observations               11,319       11,319        11,319   11,319   11,319   11,319
   R-Squared                   0.985        0.994         0.994    0.993    0.994    0.994
   Standard errors in parentheses
   ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



   Note: This table reports results for the same set of regression models found in table
2 but having dropped the year 2009 from the data. As with table 2, the results are from
versions of equations (1) and (2). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses
and are clustered at the NBP Region-industry level.




                                                    50
                       Table A2: QWI Age Group Summary Statistics



Age          Emp      Hire Rate   Sep Rate   Avg Monthly   New Hire Avg    Qtrs Non-Emp
                                                 Earn      Monthly Earn    for Seperators
All          15503      0.076       0.083        3413          2479             1.789
            (26094)    (0.048)     (0.096)      (1287)        (1014)           (0.370)
Age 19-21     456       0.233       0.183         1672         1569             1.620
             (734)     (0.094)     (0.130)        (431)        (458)           (0.509)
Age 22-24    675        0.156       0.140         2191         1964             1.609
            (1071)     (0.072)     (0.103)        (592)        (637)           (0.527)
Age 25-34    3234       0.095       0.099         2933         2415             1.632
            (5678)     (0.053)     (0.096)        (898)        (873)           (0.449)
Age 35-44    4450       0.066       0.074          3561        2851             1.668
            (7901)     (0.047)     (0.098)        (1260)      (1295)           (0.469)
Age 45-54    4113       0.052       0.063          3846        3031             1.801
            (7014)     (0.048)     (0.120)        (1580)      (1560)           (0.515)
Age 55-64    2040       0.043       0.070          3867        2988             2.348
            (3400)     (0.048)     (0.110)        (4417)      (2326)           (0.608)
Age 65-99     396       0.058       0.110          3081        1929             2.903
             (681)     (0.058)     (0.100)        (2346)      (3868)           (0.647)

  Note: Observations in the QWI data are at the State – 3-digit NAICS level. Sample
  means report averages for the different age-groupings provided by the QWI. Standard
  deviations are reported in parentheses below the means. Hiring and separation rates are
  quarterly and the average monthly earnings variables are in nominal dollars. Sample
  period is from 1998Q1 to 2009Q4. See Section 3.2 and the data appendix for more
  information on the QWI.




                                             51
               Table A3: Employment Results: Dropping California
                         (1)     (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)                      (6)
                     ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp)                        ln(Emp)
   PostxNBPxEnInt      -3.396 -2.202** -2.230*    -1.722* -1.687**                   -1.627*
                      (2.997)  (1.037)  (1.161)   (0.863)   (0.697)                  (0.830)
   PostxNBP           -0.0169 0.00940            0.00858 0.00282
                     (0.0822) (0.0208)           (0.0172) (0.0182)


   State-Ind FE                 Yes         Yes           Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes
   Year FE                      Yes                                Yes
   State Linear Trend                       Yes                             Yes
   Ind-Year FE                              Yes           Yes               Yes       Yes
   State-Year FE                                          Yes                         Yes
   Ind-Region Trends                                               Yes      Yes       Yes

   Observations               12,096       12,096        12,096   12,096   12,096   12,096
   R-squared                   0.979        0.992         0.993    0.991    0.993    0.993
   Standard errors in parentheses
   ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



   Note: This table reports results for the same set of regression models found in table 2
but excludes California from the data from the data. As with table 2, the results are from
versions of equations (1) and (2). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses and
are clustered at the NBP Region-industry level.




                                                    52
                                  Table A4: Diff-in-Diff Results
                                    (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)
                                 ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp) ln(Emp)           ln(Emp)
         PostxEnInt               -0.703    -1.036**
                                  (0.452)    (0.410)
         PostxNBP                                      -0.0215 -0.0220*
                                                       (0.0140) (0.0129)
         PostxNBPxEnInt                                                    -1.226*
                                                                           (0.662)

         Observations              6,552         6,552   3,528   3,528     12,348
         R-squared                 0.991         0.992   0.989   0.992      0.993

         State-Ind FE               Yes          Yes     Yes      Yes        Yes
         Year FE                    Yes                  Yes      Yes
         Ind Linear Trend           Yes          Yes     Yes      Yes
         Ind-Year FE                                              Yes        Yes
         State-Year FE                           Yes                         Yes
         Standard errors in parentheses
         ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



    Note: The first two columns of this table report differences-in-differences coefficients
using a simpified regression model which drops all non-NBP region data and identifies
the impact of the program based off of only the industry variation. Columns 3 and 4 use
data from both the NBP and non-NBP region but keep only industries in the top quartile
of the energy intensity index. Columns 3 and 4 are therefore identified off of only the
geographic variation of the program. Column 5, listed simply for comparison purposes,
presents the triple-diff result from the fully specified model. Note that the interpretation
of the coefficients in columns 3 and 4 is different than the interpretation of columns 1, 2
and 5.




                                                   53
                        Table A5: Electricity Price Regressions
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)
                                  ln(Elec Price) ln(Elec Price)      ln(Elec Price)
        PostxNBP                      0.0456          0.0587∗            0.0350
                                     (0.0321)         (0.0322)          (0.0319)
        PerCoalxCoalPrice           0.0228  ∗∗∗        0.0121            0.0122
                                     (0.0054)         (0.0122)          (0.0121)
        PerOilxOilPrice             0.0091∗∗∗        0.0088∗∗∗         0.0089∗∗∗
                                     (0.0008)         (0.0010)          (0.0009)
        PerNatGasxNatGasPrice       0.0663  ∗∗∗      0.0811∗∗∗         0.0819∗∗∗
                                     (0.0126)         (0.0231)          (0.0229)

        State FE                                Yes       Yes             Yes
        Year FE                                           Yes             Yes
        E / W Trends                                                      Yes

        Observations                             539      539             539
        R-Squared                               0.918    0.924           0.925
        Standard errors in parentheses
        ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



    Note: See text for details on fuel prices. Standard errors are robust and clustered at
the state level. The dependent variable is log of average industrial electricity prices in a
state-year. controlling for the price of fuels used in electricity production is important if
certain regions in the country have a relatively high reliance on certain fuels to produce
electricity. Using the same technique as in the robustness check, I interact the average
annual fuel price with the percent of electricity that is derived from that fuel in the NERC
region and include these terms in the regression. This allows for the electricity price in
regions with high reliance on certain fuels to vary with the price of those fuels. Column
2 contains the results with a full set of state and year fixed effects. The coefficient on
the PostxNBP variable indicates that the NBP increased industrial electricity prices by
approximately 5.8% in states impacted by the NBP. Column 3 includes separate NBP and
Non-NBP region trends and while the coefficient is less precisely estimated it remains
positive and of an economically significant magnitude.




                                                   54
        Figure A1: Employment Adjustment Paths: Natural Separations vs. Layoffs



                  p
              Em
             k
          oc
        Sh
    e−
   Pr




                                                                              Slope = Natural Sep Rate
                  p
              Em
             et
         rg
        Ta




                      −5   −4   −3    −2    −1                 1   2   3      4     5     6     7   8    9
                                                          k
                                                       oc
                                                   Sh
                                                  e
                                                  iv
                                               at
                                           eg
                                           N




                                     Path using Natural Separations        Path using Layoffs




    Note: This chart plots two employment adjustment paths a firm may take to arrive
at a new employment level following a permanent negative shock. The dashed line
represents the path taken when the firm adjusts through natural separations (quits and
retirements) and the solid line represents the path when the firm adjusts immediately
through layoffs.




                                                              55
                                    Figure A2: Separation Rate by Age Group
               .25
      QWI: Separation Rate
  .05   .1     .15     .2




                             1998                2003                         2008   2011
                                                         Year

                                                   Age Group
                                                   14-18            19-21
                                                   22-24            25-34
                                                   35-44            45-54
                                                   55-64            65-99




   Note: The above figure plots out the separation rate for workers in each age group
found in the QWI. Younger workers are shown to have separation rates far above older
workers.




                                                        56
