NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY SHOCKS IN MODELS WITH INATTENTIVE PRODUCERS
Fernando Alvarez
Francesco Lippi
Luigi Paciello
Working Paper 20817
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20817

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

We thank Carlos Carvalho, Xavier Gabaix, Christian Hellwig, Pat Kehoe, Herve Le Bihan, Bartosz
Mackowiak, Ricardo Reis, Victor Rios-Rull as well as seminar participants at UCL, EIEF, the Bank
of England, ECB, International Network on Expectations and Coordination at NYU, NBER Summer
Institute 2012, “Rational Inattention and Related Theories” Prague 2012 and Oxford 2014, Tor Vergata
University, and T2M Conference at Lausanne University for their comments. Part of the research for
this paper was sponsored by the ERC advanced grant 324008. Philip Barrett provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Fernando Alvarez, Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Shocks in Models with Inattentive Producers
Fernando Alvarez, Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello
NBER Working Paper No. 20817
December 2014
JEL No. E12,E5
ABSTRACT
We study models where prices respond slowly to shocks because firms are rationally inattentive. Producers
must pay a cost to observe the determinants of the current profit maximizing price, and hence observe
them infrequently. To generate large real effects of monetary shocks in such a model the time between
observations must be long and/or highly volatile. Previous work on rational inattentiveness has allowed
for observation intervals which are either constant-but-long (e.g. Caballero (1989) or Reis (2006))
or volatile-but-short (e.g. Reis’s (2006) example where observation costs are negligible), but not both.
In these models, the real effects of monetary policy are small for realistic values of the average time
between observations. We show that non- negligible observation costs produce both these effects:
intervals between observations are both infrequent and volatile. This generates large real effects of
monetary policy for realistic values of the average time between observations.

Fernando Alvarez
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
f-alvarez1@uchicago.edu
Francesco Lippi
EIEF
Via Sallustiana 62
Rome, Italy
flippi@uniss.it

Luigi Paciello
EIEF
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance
via sallustiana 62, Rome
luigi.paciello@eief.it

1

Introduction

The sluggish propagation of new information from individual into aggregate prices is one of
the key mechanisms behind the transmission of monetary shocks and the analysis of their
real effects. We study micro founded models where prices respond slowly to shocks because
firms must pay a fixed cost to observe the determinants of the profit maximizing price, as
in the “rational inattentiveness” literature. The firm’s frequency of observation determines
the velocity with which new information is embedded into prices, so that large real effects of
monetary shocks require infrequent observations. For a given frequency of observation, more
volatile times between observations increase the real effects, a result established by Carvalho
and Schwartzman (2012) for the case of i.i.d. observation times. The models in Caballero
(1989), and the baseline model of Reis (2006), yield optimally chosen constant observation
times that produce infrequent adjustments but have no volatility. For a given frequency of
observation these models yield real effects similar to Taylor’s exogenously staggered adjustment model, about half the size of what is produced by the Calvo model, or the exponentially
distributed observations as used in Mankiw and Reis (2002) with the same frequency. For a
special case with negligibly small observation costs Reis (2006) provides a micro foundation
for random observation times.1 Although the times between observations are volatile in this
case, the frequency of observations is very high (due to the negligible costs), so that the real
effects of monetary shocks are tiny.
Motivated to obtain larger effects of monetary shocks we study models where the intervals
between optimally chosen observation times are both long and volatile. The first set of results
derives the firms’ observation times as the solution to a fully specified profit maximization
problem, with random and persistent variation in the observation costs. Obtaining long and
volatile observation times, and hence larger effects of monetary policy, is to have observation
costs that are both non-negligible and sufficiently persistent. Indeed, an important innovation
of this paper is to produce from first principles optimal firm decisions that are persistent
rather than i.i.d. as standard in the previous literature. We show that the process of the
observation costs maps into the process for the optimally chosen observation times in a subtle
non-linear way. For instance, a setting with i.i.d. observation costs will produce optimally
chosen constant observation times. As the costs become sufficiently persistent, the optimal
times become responsive to the realization of the observation cost. And hence the frequency
of observation becomes volatile and persistent. The second set of results pertains to the
1
The case of negligibly small observation cost studied by Reis (2006) is one where for any given distribution
of the observation cost θ, the model is solved for a scaled process of the observation cost θ′ = c θ where c → 0
is a scaling factor. In the scaled model, both the mean and volatility of the observation cost go to zero, but
the coefficient of variation stays constant.

1

aggregation properties of an economy with a continuum of firms, for a given Markov process
for the individual firm’s observation times. Methodologically, this aggregation result is new
and generalizes the elementary renewal theorem in statistics where consecutive holding times
(i.e. times between observations in our economic application) are i.i.d. to an environment
where holding times follow a first order Markov process. The paper contains several new
results, summarized below, that extend and complement the ones in the literature.
Microfoundations of optimal observation times. We use a simple general equilibrium
model of price setting to derive the distribution of the optimal times between observations
from the firm’s profit maximization problem. We assume that when the firm pays the observation cost it learns the current value of the production cost, a key piece of information for
price setting, and also obtains a signal about future observation costs. The optimal choice
for the time until the next observation is a function of the signal, a sufficient statistics for
the future observation cost at every future date. We consider several cases, which are interesting both for their relationship to the literature, and for their substantive monetary policy
implications.
The first case is one where the signals are such that the optimally chosen observation
times are i.i.d. This case, while standard in the “rational inattentiveness” literature, has not
yet been derived as the solution of an explicit profit maximization problem with random
variation in the benefit/cost of acquiring information.2 This case yields two novel insights.
First, i.i.d. observation times arise only if the evolution of the observation costs is not
independent of the firm’s decision to observe. Thus the firm gets a new cost every time it
makes an observation. This requirement is specific to the i.i.d. case, and illustrates how
special this arrangement is. The more natural setting in which the evolution of the costs is
independent of the observation times will naturally give rise to the Markov observation times,
discussed next. The second insight yielded by the model with i.i.d. observation times is that
the optimal decision by the firm contains an option value argument: a firm that is facing a
very low cost (for the next observation), has an incentive not to observe immediately, but
rather to save the opportunity for a cheap observation for when it is most valuable in future.
2

An exception is the paper by Woodford (2008) who, in a different framework namely the one of “rational
inattention”, characterizes optimal i.i.d. observation times. He assumes that keeping track of the state and
time elapsed is costly. When the cost of keeping track of time is sufficiently large the optimal observation
times become i.i.d. because the firm cannot base decisions on (any measure of) time and, therefore, base
decisions exclusively on the current value of the noisy signals it receives, even though the process of interest
is persistent. Each of the two frameworks has weaknesses and strengths in this particular application. On
the one hand we view the assumption of no memory using the rational inattention model of Woodford as an
extreme one. On the other hand in the rational inattention the design of the signals about the state space
is chosen by the decision maker. Instead, in the rational inattentiveness model that we use, the signals are
extreme: either complete or no information is revealed upon observation.

2

This implies that the support of the distribution of observation cost must include negative
values in order to generate the arbitrarily small observation times that are common in the
literature, such as the exponentially and i.i.d. distributed observations in Mankiw and Reis
(2002). Both insights suggest that the i.i.d. case is rather special, for this reason we explore
the more general, and more realistic case, which gives rise to persistent observation times.
The other major case explored in this paper is one where, unlike the i.i.d. case, the
evolution of the costs is independent of the firm’s decision to observe. In this case the optimal
decision rules imply that the times between successive observations form a Markov process.
We characterize the properties of the observation cost process that leads to variability in
the times between observations. This is important since, as mentioned, the variability of
the times between observations maps into the size of the effect of a monetary shock on real
output. Notice that variable observation times require both variability in costs and that the
optimal decision rule is sensitive to the realization of the cost shock. An early contribution
for volatile observation times was given by Reis (2006), who provides a micro foundation
in the limiting case of negligible observation costs. His model makes the times between
observations random, and hence volatile, but it produces very frequent observations (due to
the small costs), so that the real effects of monetary shocks are tiny. We provide a global
characterization of the decision rule, which allows for both negligible (reproducing Reis’
result) as well as non-negligible observation costs. The latter are essential to get infrequent
observations. Interestingly, we show that for any given variability of the observation costs, the
persistence of the costs affects the sensitivity of the optimal decision rule with respect to the
cost. And hence the persistence of the observation costs determines the variability of times
between observations. Higher persistence amplifies the variability of optimal observation
times and, therefore, the size of the real effects of monetary shocks. On the one hand we
show that for any given (non-negligible) expected value of the observation costs, the volatility
of observation times converges to zero if persistence is sufficiently low. In the limiting case
where the observation costs are i.i.d., the volatility of times between observations converges to
zero and the real effects of monetary shocks are those of a model with constant times between
observations. On the other hand, the real effects of monetary shocks can be substantially
larger, close to those of a Calvo model with a realistic parametrization, with observation cost
that are non-negligible and sufficiently persistent.
Results on aggregation.
Another set of results pertains to the aggregation properties
of an economy with “inattentive producers”. We denote by H(t′ |t) the right CDF of the

optimally chosen times larger than t′ , conditional on a gap of time equal to t between the
preceding two observations. This distribution is derived simply from the assumptions about

3

the observation costs, the signals and the optimal decision rules described above. While
in our model the distribution H(t′ |t) is the outcome of the solution to the firms’ problem
facing random and persistent variability in observation cost, our results on aggregation are
independent of the specific model micro founding a given H. In particular, for a given H,
we aggregate the times until the next observation across a continuum of firms to characterize
the stationary cross-sectional distribution of the times until the next observation, which
we denoted by Q. The distribution Q is key in determining the propagation of monetary
shocks as it determines the time it takes before a given fraction of firms makes at least one
observation and, therefore, incorporates new information into prices.3 We show that the
density q associated to the cross-sectional distribution Q is given by q(t) = R K(t), where
R is a constant (the unconditional frequency of observations per unit of time), and K is the
invariant distribution of the Markov process formed by the time elapsed between consecutive
observations.4 And so by the law of large numbers, K(t) measures the cross-sectional fraction
of firms that have waited at least t periods since the last observation.
We use this result to illustrate several applications. First, we show that the cumulative
output response increases with both the average and the coefficient of variation of times
between consecutive observations, as measured in the cross section according to the distribution K. This finding generalizes a result by Carvalho and Schwartzman (2012), obtained for
the case of i.i.d. durations, to a framework where durations form a first order Markov process. This extension is important because quite special assumptions are needed to generate
i.i.d. durations, as discussed above. This result is quantitatively relevant because persistent
shocks, and the associated persistent times between observations, are essential to generate
a sizable cross sectional variation of observation times from a reasonable variation in the
observation cost.
Second, our analysis of the mapping from H to Q clarifies a related theoretical result
in Reis (2006) concerning the aggregation of individual firms decision. Within the class of
i.i.d. observation times, Reis derives conditions on the distribution of the individual firm’s
distribution of observation times that deliver an exponential cross sectional distribution Q as
assumed e.g. in Mankiw and Reis (2002). We clarify that a necessary and sufficient condition
to obtain an exponential cross sectional distribution Q is that the firm level distribution
of observation times H must be exponential itself. Hence the exponential distribution of
observation times, a case often used in the literature, turns out to be obtained as an optimal
decision rule only in a very special case.5
3

Reis (2006) labels Q the “distribution of inattentiveness”.
Formally K(t) is the invariant cumulative distribution associated to the transition function H(t′ |t), as
standard in the definition of the invariant distributions for a discrete-time continuous-state Markov process.
5
Indeed, we solve analytically for the distribution of costs that implies an exponential distribution of
4

4

Third, under the assumption that price changes only occur upon observation dates, we
derive a mapping between the cross sectional distribution of observation durations, K, and
the kurtosis of the size-distribution of price changes.6 This mapping can be used to calibrate
the model.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. For expositional convenience, we first
derive in Section 2 the mapping from the individual firm’s distribution of the times between
observations H to the cross sectional distribution Q, and discuss three main applications of
this new aggregation result. Section 3 describes a general profit maximization problem, in
the presence of a fixed cost of observing the state. The solution to this problem yields the
optimal decision rules that micro founds the stochastic observation times of an individual
firm. Section 4 shows the general solution to the firm’s problem, in which case the optimal
observation times form a first order Markov process. Section 5 consider a particular setup for
the firm’s problem, in which case the optimal observation times are i.i.d. Section 6 concludes.

2

Aggregating the behavior of inattentive producers

This section characterizes the linkages between an individual firm’s behavior and the crosssectional features that are important for modeling the propagation of an aggregate shock in
an economy with “rationally inattentive” firms.
We are interested in an economy populated by firms that observe the state underlying
their prices at randomly spaced times. The interpretation of “making an observation” is that
the firm pays a cost to gather (aggregate, and process) information to be used to set prices.
Upon each observation the firm chooses a new path for prices until the next observation.
The primitive for the analysis in this section is a distribution of the firm’s times between
consecutive observations, as summarized by its right cumulative distribution function (CDF),
which we denote by H.7 Starting from a given H, this section aggregates the times between
observations across firms to characterize the stationary cross-sectional distribution of the
“times until the next observation”. That is, the fraction of firms that, at any point in time,
will wait at least t units of time until the next observation. We denote the right-CDF of such
distribution by Q(t).
The distribution Q(t) is a key object in models with rational inattentive producers because
observation times, which has two features that we find implausible: a large proposition of costs that are
negative and a very large variability of observation costs.
6
A micro foundation of price changes occurring only upon an observation dates can be the presence of
menu costs. As shown in Proposition 1 of Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello (2011), relatively small menu costs
make price-plans not optimal in this environment at moderate inflation rates.
7
The use of right CDF, i.e. the probability mass that the time between observations is above a given
threshold, is more convenient algebraically than the traditional (left) CDF.

5

it determines the time left before a given fraction of firms will conduct an observation and
adjust their behavior to the new information obtained. Therefore Q directly determines
the time it takes for an aggregate shock to be incorporated into the information set of a
given fraction of firms. And Q determines the speed at which a monetary shock affects the
aggregate price level. In a stationary environment there is a constant rate of observations per
unit of time, which we denote by R. In this section we will derive both Q and R as implied
by a given H. In Section 3 we will study a model where the distribution H is itself derived
from the firm’s optimal price setting choices subject to an information gathering friction.
Before providing an exhaustive formal analysis, we sketch two examples to fix ideas. The
first one is a classic Taylor’s model where each firm observes the state at deterministically
spaced time intervals of length T . This assumption amounts to an i.i.d. H(t) distribution
which is piecewise continuous: constant and equal to 1 for t ∈ [0, T ), and zero otherwise. It
is easy to see how this H(t) implies a unique invariant cross-sectional distribution Q(t) of
times until the next observation, with a density q(t) that is uniform for t ∈ (0, T ), and an

observation rate given by R = 1/T .
The second example is the widely used Calvo pricing. It assumes that the distribution
of times between observations for a firm follows a Poisson process, so that the probability
that a firm waits at least t periods after adjusting is given by the exponential distribution
H(t) = e−λt for t ∈ (0, ∞). Aggregating a continuum of firms that follow this H(t) rule gives

a cross section distribution of times until the next observation, Q(t), that is also exponential,
and a rate of observations per unit of time R = λ. While the mapping from H to Q for
these simple examples can be solved using intuition, a general treatment is useful. It will
allow us to extend the mapping along two important dimensions: first, to cases where the
firm hazard rate of observations is not constant (so that H(t) is not exponential); second,

and perhaps more interestingly, to allow for non i.i.d. observation times at the firm level. In
the latter the distribution of the times t between observations is allowed to depend on the
length s of the time since the last observation and denoted by H(t|s). Markovian observation
times appear to be a robust feature of a micro founded model, we thus see this case as an
important extension of the i.i.d. observation times.8
We consider set-ups where the optimal decision of the firm will be such that, in a stationary
environment, the time elapsed between consecutive observations forms a stationary Markov
process. As already mentioned, the primitive of the analysis in this section is the conditional
right-CDF H(t|s) for the times between consecutive observations of a firm. The function
H : R2+ → [0, 1] satisfies the following: i) H(0|s) = 1 for all s ≥ 0, ii) H(t|s) ≥ H(t′ |s) for all
8

See Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello (2011) for an example of a micro founded model where the optimal
observations times are not i.i.d. We note that there is no systematic treatment of this problem in the
literature.

6

t′ ≥ t, iii) limt→∞ H(t|s) = 0 for all s ≥ 0, and iv) H(t|·) is Borel-measureable, for all t ≥ 0.

The interpretation of H(t|s) is that if the gap between the preceding two observations is equal
to s, then the probability that the time between the current and the next observation is at
least t is H(t|s). We assume that the stochastic process for observation times is independent
across firms, and that the law of large number holds.
Let K(s) denote the invariant cumulative distribution function of the times between

consecutive observations of length up to s. Formally, K(s) is the invariant distribution
associated with the transition function H(t′ |t), as will be shown below. In particular, in an
interval of time (t, t + dt) there are R dt observations that take place. Of those, a fraction
K(s) is characterized by a gap between the preceding two observations greater or equal than
s. Using the definition of K(s) we can compute the cross sectional distribution of times until
the next observation, whose right CDF is9
Q(t) = −R

Z

∞
0

Z

∞
0

H (u + t | s) dK(s)



du = −R

Z

t

∞

Z

0

∞

H (u | s) dK(s) du .

(1)

The expression is easy to interpret: the firms that will wait at least t periods before the next
observation are those that drew an observation time larger than u + t some u periods ago.
The integral inside the parenthesis measures those firms. The probability that a firm must
wait this long depends on the gap s between the preceding two observations and is given
by H(u + t, s). In the integrand, this is then weighted by (the negative of) dK(s), which
gives the fraction of firms whose preceding two observations were separated by s. Integrating
over both the time until the next observation, u, and the time between the preceding two
observations, s, and multiplying by the frequency of observation, R, gives Q(t). Note that
the minus sign comes from using a right CDF for K(s). The value of R is easily computed
from equation (1), using that Q(0) = 1.
Differentiating this expression we obtain the density of the cross-sectional distribution of
times until the next observation, as we summarize in the following lemma:
Lemma 1. Given the conditional right-CDF, H, and its corresponding invariant distribution
of times between observations, K, the density of the times until the next observation q(t) is:
∂Q(t)
= −R
q(t) ≡ −
∂t
9

Z

0

∞

H (t | s) dK(s) ≥ 0 ,

Integration follows Lebesgue-Stieltjes. Q(t) is also referred to as distribution of the forward times.

7

(2)

where the number of observations per unit of time is
R = −R ∞ R ∞
0

0

1
≥0.
H (u | s) dK(s) du

(3)

To complete the characterization of Q we need the (invariant) distribution of times between observations, K(s). We distinguish between two cases: one where the distribution H
is absolutely continuous, another where H is discrete. If H(·|s) is absolutely continuous the
invariant distribution K will be differentiable with density k(t) = −∂K(t)/∂t solving:
k(t) =

Z

0

∞

h (t | s) k(s) ds for all t ≥ 0

where h (t | s) ≡ −

∂H(t|s)
≥ 0 for all t, s ≥ 0 .
∂t

Likewise, since H is differentiable almost everywhere, the right-CDF of the invariant measure
solves
K(t) = −

Z

∞

H (t | s) dK(s) for all t ≥ 0 .

0

(4)

The second case occurs when H(·|s) is a step-function, so that there are countably many
observation times T with non-zero probabilities. Let T = {t1 , ..., ti , ...tI } with ti < ti+1 for


i ≥ 1 and h = hti ,tj be a matrix defined as
hti ,tj ≡ lim H (t|tj ) − H (ti |tj ) ≥ 0 .
t↑ti

Using this notation, {k(t)}t∈T is the corresponding invariant measure, i.e. a positive eigenvector associated with h solving:
k(ti ) =

X

tj ∈T

hti ,tj k(tj ) for all ti ∈ T .

(5)

In this case the invariant measure is given by:



1
if t < t1


P
K(t) =
,
ti >t k(ti ) if t1 ≤ ti < tI



0
if t ≥ tI

(6)

where the k(ti ) elements solve equation (5). We collect these results in the following lemma:
Lemma 2. Given a conditional right-CDF H for the times between consecutive observations,
the invariant distribution K is given by the solution of equation (4) if H(·|s) is absolutely
8

continuous for each t, or by the solution of equation (6) if H(·|s) is a step function.
The results for existence and uniqueness of invariant distributions for a discrete-time
Markov process give the exact conditions for existence and uniqueness of the invariant distribution K. We combine the results of Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 and obtain the following
proposition.
Proposition 1. Let K(t) be the invariant (right) cumulative distribution of times between
consecutive observations as in equation (4) or in equation (6). The density q(t) of the
stationary cross-sectional distribution of times until the next observation is proportional to
K(t):
1
q(t) = R K(t) for all t ≥ 0 and where R = R ∞
.
(7)
K(s) ds
0
The right CDF Q(t) is readily found by integration using that Q(0) = 1.

For a proof see Appendix A. The results of Proposition 1 substantially generalize the
results in the literature about the way the economy aggregates starting from a given individual
firm distribution of observation times H(t|s). Existing results in the literature (e.g. Reis
(2006), Carvalho and Schwartzman (2012)) are based on the case of i.i.d. observations, i.e.
H(t|s1) = H(t|s2 ) for all s and all pairs (s1 , s2 ). The interpretation of Proposition 1 is simple:
in a cross section there is a mass K(t) of firms who will wait at least t periods before the
next observation. The parameter R, measuring the average frequency of observation, scales
the density proportionately. Notice that the function q(t) is a density function even in the
cases in which the invariant distribution of times between consecutive observations K(t) does
not have a density, as in the case where K(t) is a step function (e.g. the example of Taylor’s
model discussed above) or, more generally, the case discussed in equation (6).

2.1

Three applications of Proposition 1

Next we discuss three applications of Proposition 1. In the first one we show that the cross
sectional distribution of times between observations, K(t), is a key determinant of the real
effects of monetary shocks. The second application is literature driven: we derive necessary
and sufficient conditions under which the firm distribution of observation times H(t|s) yields
a distribution K(t) that is both i.i.d. and exponential, a case studied by Reis (2006) and
extensively used in applications following Mankiw and Reis (2002). The third application
studies the mapping from the distribution K(t) to the size distribution of price changes. This
mapping can be used to identify the relevant statistics about the distribution K(t) using data
on the size distribution of price changes.

9

2.1.1

The distribution of observations and the effect of monetary shocks

The cross sectional distribution of the times until the next observation, Q(t), is a key ingredient in the propagation of monetary shocks into prices and output. We summarize this
effect in a single statistic which measures the real cumulative effect of a monetary shock, M:
M≡

Z

∞

Q(t) dt .

0

Because Q(t) measures the mass of firms that do not make an observation for at least t periods
after the shock, then M is the mass of firms that will not update their prices cumulated over
all future horizons. This value ranges between zero, when all firms adjust immediately so
that Q(t) = 0 for all t ≥ 0, to infinity when firms never adjust so that limt→∞ Q(t) = 1.
It can be easily shown that in a framework like the one of Golosov and Lucas (2007), M
is proportional to the size of the real effects of a money supply shock (see Appendix D for
details). In particular, if an unexpected permanent shock increases, once and for all, the level
R∞
of the money supply by δ log points, then t0 log(Mt /Pt ) dt ≈ δ M (where Mt is the stock of

money and Pt is aggregate price level). In such a framework, the statistic M measures the
(cumulative) time it takes for any shock to be incorporated into the agents’ information set
and, therefore, into prices. Smaller Q(t) (for any t) causes information about the monetary

shock to be incorporated faster into the aggregate price level. This, in turn delivers a smaller
cumulated response of real balances Mt /Pt and, therefore, output. Accordingly, we treat M

as a proxy measure of the real effects of a monetary shock.
This measure M is completely characterized by the mean and variance of the crosssectional distribution of times between observations:
Proposition 2. The statistic M ≡
M=

R∞
0

Q(t) dt is given by

EK (t)
(1 + (CVK (t))2 ) ,
2

(8)

where EK (t) and CVK (t) are, respectively, the average duration and coefficient of variation
of times elapsed between consecutive observations.
For a proof see Appendix A. Both the mean and the variance of the time between consecutive observations have a first order effect on M and therefore on the real effects of monetary

shocks (as shown in Appendix D). Notice that the results of Proposition 2 are independent of
the assumptions about the primitive distribution of times between observations of the firm,
H.
A result similar to Proposition 2 has been obtained by Carvalho and Schwartzman (2012)
10

for i.i.d. observation times. In our framework this corresponds to the case where H(t|t1 ) =
H(t|t2 ) for all t and all pairs (t1 , t2 ). Proposition 2 extends Carvalho and Schwartzman’s
(2012) results to a more general environment that allows for observation times to follow a
Markov process. Such a situation may arise when the variability of observation times is not
attributable to a single source, such as the size of innovations as well as the persistence of
value of observations.
To illustrate the economics of Proposition 2 by means of a simple example, consider
an economy where each firm draws an observation of length T with probability 1 − p, and
otherwise an observation of length T̄ > T , independently of the length of the last observation.
The distribution of the firm’s observation times is given by Ĥ(t) ≡ H(t|t′ ) for all t > 0, where:

Ĥ(t) =




1



p



0

if t ∈ [ 0, T ]

if t ∈ ( T, T̄ ] .
otherwise

Given that observations are i.i.d. over time, the cross-sectional distribution of times between
consecutive observations equals the firm’s distribution of times between observations. That
is, K(t) = Ĥ(t) for all t (as implied by Lemma 2). Let T̂ ≡ (1 − p) T + p T̄ denote the
average length of time between consecutive observations. Using Proposition 1 we obtain that
R = 1/T̂ and the invariant (right) CDF of the cross-sectional times until the next observation
is



1 − t/T̂
if t ∈ [ 0, T ]


Q(t) = 1 − T /T̂ − p (t − T )/T̂
(9)
if t ∈ ( T, T̄ ] .



0
otherwise
To understand equation (9) it is useful to compare two example economies. In the first

economy, indexed by a subscript 1, p1 = 1 and T1 = T̄1 = T̂ . Then H1 (t) is degenerate;
the time between consecutive observations is always T̂ . This is a case studied, for instance,
by Caballero (1989) and Reis (2006). In the second economy, indexed by a subscript 2,
p2 ∈ (0, 1), so that T2 < T̂ < T̄2 , and observation times are truly random. As the mean
time between consecutive observations is the same in the two economies, the distribution of
observation times in economy 2 is obviously a mean-preserving spread of those in economy 1.
And so Proposition 2 implies that the more variable times between observations in economy
2 cause larger real effects of a monetary shock.
This example is also simple enough to make clear the economics of Proposition 2. Intuitively, Q2 (t) decays more slowly than Q1 (t) (at least for t > T2 ), so that the cumulative

11

effect summarized in M is larger. Both functions start from the same point Q(0) = 1 but in

economy 2 there is a longer tail of possible observation times. This tail boosts the real effect
of a monetary shock by delaying the response of some firms, slowing the incorporation of the
shock into prices and so prolonging the real effect.

It is easy to see this formally either by using equation (8) or integrating Q(t) directly to
give M = (T̂ /2) × [(1/p) (1 − T /T̂ )2 + (T /T̂ ) (2 − T /T̂ )]. This shows how, for a given average

time between observations T̂ , the size of the real effects of a monetary shock decreases with
p and T . Notice that M is minimized at p = 1, where it takes the value of T̂ /2. This
corresponds to economy 1 discussed above. A mean preserving spread of times between
consecutive observations increases the real effects of monetary shocks.
2.1.2

The case of exponential i.i.d. observations

The case where observation times are i.i.d. has been first studied by Reis (2006). This
case occurs when H(t|s) does not depend on s, so we denote it simply by Ĥ(t). Using
Proposition 1 we obtain that the invariant distribution K coincides with H and thus:
q(t) = R Ĥ(t) for all t ≥ 0 ,
where the number of observations per unit of time is given by R = 1/
immediate implication of equation (10) is that:
Corollary 1.

(10)
R∞
0

Ĥ(t) dt.10 An

Let the observation times be i.i.d. so that H(t|s) = Ĥ(t) for each s ≥ 0.

The cross sectional distribution of the times until the next observation, Q, is exponential if
and only if the firm’s distribution of the times between observations, Ĥ is exponential.
The proof follows since an exponential density is proportional to its right CDF, a property
shared by q(t) ∝ Ĥ(t) in equation (10). Corollary 1 clarifies an important result in Reis’s
(2006), namely his Proposition 6, in which the result is obtained under the same assumptions

of this section about the distribution H (i.e. firms observation times being i.i.d. so that
H(t′ |t) = Ĥ(t) for all t′ and t), but where the requirement that the distribution H has to be

itself exponential in order for the cross-sectional distribution Q to be exponential is not as
explicit.11 This clarification is important because the case of an exponential cross-sectional
distribution Q has been extensively used in the “rational inattentiveness” literature that

followed the seminal work by Mankiw and Reis (2002). We conclude that the conditions for an
10

Note that this is the case considered for a renewal process, where Q is the forward recurrent time as, for
instance, in Karlin and Taylor (1998).
11
In private correspondence Reis has clarified that this result follows from his definition of stationarity in
Reis’s (2006) Definition 1.

12

exponential cross-sectional distribution Q are rather restrictive: Ĥ(t) can only be exponential.
Section 5.1 below will further explore this case by establishing what primitive assumptions
about the firm information and the distribution of observation costs are necessary for the
firm distribution of observation times to be exponential.
2.1.3

From the distribution of observations to the distribution of price changes

We conclude this section by deriving the mapping from the cross sectional distribution of
times between consecutive observations, K, to the size distribution of price changes. This
mapping is useful to identify statistics on the distribution K from observable statistics on the
distribution of price changes. Given the result of Proposition 2 we are particularly interested
in identifying the variability of observation times. We assume that a firm’s optimal frictionless
price, p∗t , evolves according to a Brownian motion, d log(p∗t ) = µp dt + σ dBt , where Bt is the
realization of an idiosyncratic Wiener process. In Section 3 we will show that this process for
p∗t arises naturally in a standard model where monopolistic firms face a constant elasticity
downward sloping demand, produce output with a production technology which is linear in
labor, and labor productivity follows a Brownian motion.
In absence of additional costs that prevent the firm from adjusting prices between observation dates, the presence of a non-zero drift in p∗t implies that prices would change continuously
in our model as the firm indexes its price to the expected growth in p∗t between observation
dates. This is a common element in models of rational inattentiveness that lack a physical
cost of price adjustment. A robust pattern in the data is, however, that prices change infrequently. A simple way to obtain infrequent price changes in our model is to assume that
µp = −σ 2 /2, implying that p∗t is a martingale.12 As a result, price changes only occur when
new information arrives, so that the frequency of price changes coincide with the frequency of
observations. In this specification of the model, the cross-sectional invariant distribution of
log-price changes, ∆ log(p), is given by a mixture of normals indexed by t, where the mixture

has density corresponding to the cross sectional distribution of times between consecutive
observations, i.e. k(t) = −K ′ (t), and each of the normals has mean and variance (0, σ 2 t).
The next lemma characterizes two useful moments of the size distribution of price changes:

Lemma 3. Let the target price p∗t be a martingale, then the variance of the log-price changes
is
V ar(∆ log(p)) = σ 2 EK (t)
(11)
R∞
where EK (t) = 0 K(s) ds = 1/R is the average duration of time between observations, and
12

See Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello (2011) for a model where information acquisition costs are combined with
physical costs of adjusting prices to obtain infrequent price adjustments as well as infrequent observations.

13

the kurtosis of the log-price changes is equal to:


Kurt(∆ log(p)) = 3 (CVK (t))2 + 1 ,

(12)

where CVK (t) is the coefficient of variation of times between consecutive observations (taken
with respect to the distribution K).
See Appendix A for the proof. Lemma 3 is useful for two reasons. First, combined with
the results of Lemma 2, it allows to obtain statistics about the cross-section distribution of
price changes from the primitive assumptions about the individual firm distribution of times
between observations H. Second, combined with observable statistics on the distribution
of price changes, it allows to identify the coefficient of variation in observation times from
the kurtosis of the the distribution of price changes, as well as to identify the volatility of
the target price from the variance and frequency of price changes. For instance, if we use a
kurtosis of price changes equal to 4, consistent with the estimates by Alvarez, Le Bihan, and
p
Lippi (2014), we obtain a coefficient of variation equal to CVK (t) = 1/3. Combining such

estimate for CVK (t) with the results of Proposition 2, we obtain that the cumulative real
effects of a permanent innovation to money supply is about 35% larger than the corresponding
figure predicted by models with deterministic observation times (where CVK (t) = 0, such

as Caballero (1989) and Reis (2006)), and about 1/3 smaller than predicted by models with
exponential observation times (where CVK (t) = 1, such as Mankiw and Reis (2002)).

3

A firm problem leading to optimal observation times

This section studies a model of the firm’s optimal decision for observation times. This
problem gives rise to a Markov process for observations that can be represented by the
conditional distribution H(t′ |t), the primitive of our analysis in Section 2. We set up the
firm’s decision problem in a relatively general formulation that encompasses several cases
of interest in which the duration of the optimally chosen observation times are constant, or
follow a first-order Markov process (Section 4), or are i.i.d. (Section 5). We characterize the
firm’s optimal decision in these different cases, and use it to discuss the key determinants
of the variation in observation times and, therefore, the real effects of monetary shocks.
The distinction between models of constant observations (e.g. Caballero) and models of
random observations is important since the variability of observations increases the real
effects of monetary shocks (Proposition 2). Within the class of models that deliver variation
in observation times, the case of Markov persistent durations of the time between observations
is appealing both because we think it is a realistic representation of firms’ behavior and
14

because, for a given variability of the observation costs, more persistent durations of the
time between observations increase the real effects of monetary shocks. The case of i.i.d.
observations is interesting mostly because a large literature has focused on its implications
for macroeconomic dynamics as discussed above. Despite its widespread use, the “rational
inattentiveness” literature has not provided a characterization of optimal i.i.d. observations
originating from random variation in the benefit/cost of acquiring information. This paper
fills that gap and shows what features of the primal problem, such as variance and persistence
of the observation costs, are relevant to determine the real effects of a monetary shock. This
section sets up a general environment where the firm’s optimal stopping times can be studied.
Section 4 discusses the general case of Markovian observation times. Section 5 specializes the
model to obtain i.i.d. observation times, a standard benchmark in the literature..
The underlying economy is a simple variant of Golosov and Lucas (2007). Firms take
two types of decisions: i) they decide when to acquire information, and ii) set the price
at which they are willing to sell their good. In particular, there is a continuum of firms,
each producing a variety denoted by i, and facing a downward sloping demand given by
C(Pi,t /Wt ) = A (Pi,t /Wt )−η , where A > 0 is a constant, η > 1 is the price-elasticity, Pi,t is the
nominal price of variety i, and Wt is the nominal wage in period t. The production technology
of each variety is linear in labor with idiosyncratic labor productivity zi,t . It is well known that
in this environment the frictionless optimal pricing strategy of each firm is given by a constant
markup over nominal marginal cost, given by Wt /zi,t . The (log) of the labor productivity
follows a brownian motion with drift φ and volatility σ: d log(zi,t ) = φ dt + σ dBi,t , where
Bi,t is the realization of an idiosyncratic Wiener process. We also assume that the product
of the firm is replaced (“dies”) with a constant probability per unit of time equal to λ, and a
new product is born with productivity z = 1. From a modeling point of view the exogenous
substitutions allow for an invariant distribution of firm’s productivities and for bounded
output. Finally, we assume that the nominal wage grows at a constant rate µ, so that its
dynamics between t and t + T are given by Wt+T = Wt eµ T .
Information gathering and price changes.

In the spirit of the rational inattentiveness

literature we assume that to gather information about the nominal marginal cost the firm
must pay a fixed information-gathering cost (see e.g. Reis (2006)), an activity we refer to
as an observation. Hence, at observation times, there is a discrete change in the information
about the nominal marginal cost. While acquiring the information is costly, firms can change
prices at any time at no cost.13 Price changes between observation dates are referred to in
13

This differs from the models in which firms face a joint cost of observing the state and adjusting the
price as in Bonomo and Carvalho (2004), where the two costs are associated, or Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello
(2011) where the firm can decide to selectively incur each of the costs.

15

the literature as price plans: such price changes are based upon the information gathered in
the last observation and the law of motion of the relevant states.
The value of information. We first develop notation to quantify the value of information.
For expositional simplicity, we drop the time and firm sub-indexes. The firm’s period profits,
scaled by the nominal wage, are given by


1
P
Π(p, z) ≡ C (p) p −
, where p ≡
,
z
W

(13)

so that real profits are a function of the ratio of the nominal price to the nominal wage, p,
and of productivity, z. When prices are set conditional on perfect information of the current
productivity z the expected profits are
∗

Π (z) ≡ max Π(p, z) = A
p



1
z(η − 1)

1−η

η −η , with maximizer p∗ (z) =

η 1
η−1 z

where p∗ (z) denotes the instantaneous profit maximizing price as a function of productivity.
We notice that p∗ (z) is the standard markup pricing of monopolistic competition.
To highlight the role of imperfect information, we compare the T -periods ahead expected
profits under perfect information with the expected profits under imperfect information. Let
L(· ; T |z) denote the CDF of T -periods ahead productivity conditional on the current productivity, z. Given the assumptions on the process for z, L(· ; T |z) is a log-normal distribution.
In the case of perfect information, the T -periods ahead expected profit evaluated conditional
on current productivity z and the optimal pricing function p∗ (z ′ ), is given by
Z

0

∞

Π∗ (z ′ ) dL(z ′ ; T | z) = Π∗ (z) eb T , where b ≡ (η − 1)(φ − σ 2 /2) + η (η − 1) σ 2/2 . (14)

Alternatively, in the case of imperfect information the expected profits T periods ahead,
conditional on current productivity z, is a function of the best estimate of productivity z ′ :
Z

∞

Π(p, z ′ ) dL(z ′ ; T | z) ,

(15)

η 1 (σ2 /2−φ)T
1
dL(z ′ ; T | z) =
e
.
′
z
η−1 z

(16)

Π̂(T, z) ≡ max
p

0

with maximizer p̂(T, z) given by
η
p̂(T, z) =
η−1

Z

0

∞

The optimal price p̂(T, z) is thus given by the markup η/(η − 1) times the T periods ahead
16

expected value of the marginal cost 1/z ′ (normalized by wages), conditional on the last
observed productivity z. We notice that p̂(0, z) = p∗ (z). Equation (16) illustrates the
workings of price plans: at each time T following the last observation, the firm charges the
price that maximizes expected profits. The nominal price of the firm grows at the rate
µ + σ 2 /2 − φ, where µ is the component reflecting nominal wage growth (recall that we are
using p = P/W as the control variable), and the σ 2 /2 − φ reflects the expected growth of

productivity. Thus, if µ −φ + σ 2 /2 6= 0 then the optimal price plan implies that prices change
continuously. On the other hand, if the level of the nominal marginal cost is a martingale,
i.e. µ − φ + σ 2 /2 = 0, then the optimal price plan features a constant nominal price between
consecutive observations.
Using equation (15) into equation (13) we can write Π̂(T, z) as

Π̂(T, z) = Π∗ (z) ea T , where a ≡ (η − 1)(φ − σ 2 /2) .

(17)

The two expected profits in equation (14) and equation (17) are taken with respect to the
same T -periods horizon. The difference between the two expressions lies in the information
used to set prices. When prices are set based upon T -periods-old information the expected
profits grow at the rate a. Instead when prices are set with complete information the expected
profits grow at the rate b > a. Hence B ≡ b − a = η (η − 1) σ 2 /2 captures the rate at which
the benefit of acquiring information increases as a function of the time elapsed since the
last observation.14 Notice that the value of information equals (one half) the curvature in
the profit function, η (η − 1), times the incremental uncertainty σ 2 . Intuitively, a higher the
volatility of productivity innovations (σ) lowers the information content of past observations,
increasing the value of information. Likewise, a higher demand elasticity (η) boosts the
impact of a given error in pricing on the firm’s profits, thus increasing the value of information.
The cost of gathering information. We assume that acquiring information about the
level of the production cost 1/z requires the payment of an observation cost. The economic
interpretation of the observation cost captures the time cost of decision making in firms when
gathering and aggregating information as well as the physical cost of acquiring the information
needed to make the price decision (e.g. Zbaracki et al. (2004), Reis (2006)). The firm incurs
an observation cost any time it acquires information about the state. Upon payment of the
observation cost, the firm learns the current value of z.15 No information on the state arrives
14

Abel, Eberly, and Panageas (2007) also solve for optimal observation times in a framework where the
benefit of doing an observation increases at a constant rate as a function of time elapsed.
15
Notice the difference with the rational inattention literature that developed after Sims (2003) where there
is a constraint on the amount of information that can be processed per period, and agents typically process
a limited amount of information every period.

17

Figure 1: Time line

current observation date:

τ periods later:

pay observation cost θ Π∗ (z)

learn z ′ ∼ L(· ; τ |z)

draw θ′ ∼ F (· ; τ |ζ)

learn production cost z

draw ζ ′ ∼ G(·|θ′ )

learn signal ζ

between observation dates. We assume that the observation cost is equal to θ Π∗ (z), so that
it is proportional to the value of the static monopolist profit under complete information.
This assumption serves two purposes. First, this assumption reduces the technical difficulty
of the problem. The two expected profits in equation (14) and equation (17) show that the
benefits of information are proportional to Π∗ (z). Making the costs scale similarly leaves the
entire firm’s problem homogeneous in Π∗ (z), and so simplifying the analysis. Second, when
z is persistent, this assumption is also necessary to produce i.i.d. times between observations
as we will do in Section 5.
We will call θ the observation cost. We allow for θ to be random, with a finite lower bound
θ. The processes of the observation cost θ and of the production cost z are assumed to be
independent. Immediately after paying the observation cost, the firm not only learns the
current value of z, but also receives a signal ζ ∈ [ζ, ∞) which is informative about the future
realizations of θ. In particular, the signal ζ summarizes all the information about the value
of the observation cost to be paid τ periods from now, for any τ ≥ 0. Mathematically we

write F (θ′ ; τ |ζ) to be the CDF of the observation cost θ′ ∈ [θ, ∞) to be paid τ periods after
the current observation, conditional on the signal ζ. The dependence of the distribution F

on τ allows the distribution of the observation cost θ′ to vary with the time elapsed between
observations. In practice, we will work with a specification where the signal ζ is proportional
to the expected cost of the next observation for any given τ , i.e. E[θ′ ; τ |ζ] ∝ ζ. Upon the

next observation, when a particular cost θ′ is realized, a new signal ζ ′ ∈ [ζ, ∞) is drawn from
the CDF G(·|θ′). The timeline in Figure 1 describes the structure of the observation cost θ,
the associated signal ζ and production cost z, for an observation date that occurs τ periods
after the current observation.
The functions F and G fully characterize the process for the observation cost, and provide
enough flexibility to cover cases discussed in the literature as well as generalizations that we
find useful. For instance, the model of deterministic observation times studied by Caballero

18

(1989) and Reis (2006) is encompassed by our framework if the signal is uninformative about
the future observation cost, which is the case if F (θ′ , τ0 | ζ0) = F (θ′ , τ1 | ζ1) for all θ′ and all
pairs (τ0 , ζ0). In this case, the distribution G is irrelevant because, given that the signal is
uninformative, the mechanism to obtain the new signal is irrelevant.16
Another case discussed in the literature is one where the firm’s observation times are i.i.d.,
as proposed by Reis (2006). Our model provides a foundation to i.i.d. observation times: the
firm has to draw a signal about the future observation cost that is both informative about
the next observation cost and independent of all other shocks (including the current value
of the observation cost). In this case, the particular form of the distribution G is relevant.
Formally, observation times are i.i.d. in our model if and only if G (ζ ′ | θ0 ) = G (ζ ′ | θ1 ) for
all ζ ′ and all pairs θ1 , θ0 . The distribution F shapes the precision of the signal. Finally, the
more general case where G (ζ ′ | θ0 ) 6= G (ζ ′ | θ1 ) for at least some ζ ′ and some pairs θ1 6= θ0
allows us to extend our analysis to the case of observation times correlated over time, a case
which we find more reasonable than the i.i.d. assumption.
The firm’s Bellman equation. Without loss of generality we consider the problem of the
firm right after it has paid the observation cost, when it is deciding the length of the time
until the next observation which we denote as τ . The state of the firm at this date consists
of both the signal ζ and the productivity z. The value of the firm V (ζ, z), i.e. the expected
discounted value of the profits net of the observation cost, solves the following recursive
problem
V (ζ, z) = max
τ ∈R̄+

+ e−(ρ+λ) τ

Z

∞
−∞

Z

τ

e−(ρ+λ) s Π̂(s, z) ds +

(18)

0

Z

θ

∞

−θ′ Π∗ (z ′ ) +

Z

ζ

∞

!

V (ζ ′, z ′ ) dG(ζ ′|θ′ ) dF (θ′ ; τ |ζ)dL(z ′ ; τ |z),

where real profits are discounted at rate ρ + λ, with ρ capturing the agent’s preferences
discount rate in the set-up of interest (described in the appendix of Alvarez and Lippi (2014)),
and λ is due to the substitution of products. The firm chooses the time τ ≥ 0 between the
current and the next observation, where τ = ∞ represents the case of never observing. The
first term on the right-hand side of equation (18) reflects the expectations of cumulated profits
until the next observation. Equations (14)-(17) imply that the s-periods ahead expected
profits, Π̂(s, z), scale with Π∗ (z), i.e. E[θτ Π∗ (zτ ) | ζ0, z0 ] = E[θτ | ζ0 ] eb τ Π∗ (z0 ). The second
term on the right-hand side of equation (18) refers to the discounted expectation of the
16

In Caballero (1989) and Reis (2006) the cost is fixed, which amounts to a degenerate F . Our setup thus
delivers a small generalization: absent an informative signal, observation times will be constant even if F is
not degenerate.

19

continuation value upon the next observation, V (ζ ′, z ′ ), conditional on the next observation
date taking place τ periods from now, the current productivity being z, and the current
signal being ζ. The integrals on the right-hand side of equation (18) reflect the expectation
of V (ζ ′, z ′ ) with respect to the possible realizations of z ′ and ζ ′ (which also depend on the
realization of θ′ ).
We use that both expected profits and observation cost scale with Π∗ (z), together with
the independence of z ′ and θ′ , to express the value function as V (ζ, z) = v(ζ) Π∗(z), where
the function v(ζ) solves the following simpler recursive problem:
v(ζ) = max
τ ∈R̄+

Z

τ

e−(ρ+λ−a)t dt + e−(ρ+λ−b)τ

0

Z

∞
θ

Z

ζ

∞

v (ζ ′ ) dG (ζ ′ | θ′ ) − θ′

!

dF (θ′ ; τ | ζ) .
(19)

We denote by the function τ (ζ) the optimal policy that solves the firm’s problem. Notice
that this problem has relatively few parameters. The functions v(·) and τ (·) depend only on
three scalars (a, b and ρ + λ), and two functions (G and F ). The first term on the right-hand
side of equation (19) contains the value of expected profits using only current information.
The second term contains the value of expected profits after a new observation, as well as the
expected future observation cost. The optimal choice of τ balances the value of information
(summarized by b > a) against the expected cost of a new observation θ′ . An immediate
result of equation (19) is that the optimal time between observations only depends on the
realization of the signal ζ, and not on productivity z. Finally, in order to have a finite value
of a firm in the frictionless case, we assume that λ + ρ > b. Hence the value function is
bounded below and above as follows:
0<v≡

1
1
≤ v(ζ) ≤ v̄ ≡
< ∞ for all θ ∈ (0, +∞),
ρ+λ−a
ρ+λ−b

where the lower bound is obtained by setting τ = ∞, while the upper bound is obtained
in the perfect information case when observation is always costless, and the firm observes
continuously.

Obtaining H(t′ |t). We can use the solution to the firm’s problem τ (ζ), and the properties of
the process governing the signal ζ, to derive the conditional right-CDF for the times between
consecutive observations, which in Section 2 was denoted by H(·|t). In particular, assume
that τ (·) is strictly increasing in ζ, a property which will be satisfied in our applications,
and let ζ = ζ̂(t) denote the mapping from an observation of length t to the associated signal
ζ, where ζ̂(t) = τ −1 (t) is the inverse function associated to the optimal policy τ (·). For
20

simplicity, consider the case with no substitutions, i.e. λ = 0.17 In this case, the distribution
R∞
H is given by H(t′ | t) = θ (1 − G(ζ̂(t′ ) | θ′)) dF (θ′ ; t | ζ̂(t)), which equals the probability of
drawing a signal ζ ′ ≥ ζ̂(t′ ) at the next observation, conditional on having drawn a signal
ζ = ζ̂(t) at the last observation, which occurred t periods ago. This requires integrating over
all possible realizations of the future observation cost θ′ , since the realization of θ′ determines
the distribution from which the signal ζ ′ will be drawn upon the next observation.

3.1

The case of constant optimal observation times

This subsection presents a specification of the observation cost process which implies that
the optimal (consecutive) observation times have equal duration. This case serves as a useful
benchmark, and is a limiting case, of the more general case of random observations that will be
considered in the next sections. In particular, we assume that signals are uninformative about
future observation costs, so that firms face the same problem upon every observation and
choose the same time to the next observation. We assume that F (θ, τ0 | ζ0) = F (θ, τ1 | ζ1) ≡
F̂ (θ) for all θ and all pairs (τ0 , ζ0 ) and (τ1 , ζ1 ) and that G is arbitrary. The assumption on F
means that the signal is uninformative about future observation costs. Note that the signal
could be uninformative and yet F̂ (θ) does not need to be degenerate. The function G can
be left unspecified because, given that the signal is uninformative, the mechanism to obtain
the new signal is irrelevant. Using these assumptions on F in equation (19), one obtains that
τ (ζ) = τ̂ and v(ζ) = v̂, so neither function depends on ζ. In particular, letting the expected
R∞
observation cost E[θ] = 0 θ dF̂ (θ) > 0, the Bellman equation becomes:
v̂ = max
τ ∈R̄+

Z

τ

0

e−(ρ+λ−a)t dt + e−(ρ+λ−b)τ (v̂ − E[θ]) .

(20)

The analysis that follows characterizes the comparative statics of the optimal decision rule,
summarized by the constant τ̂ , as a function of the model parameter E[θ], i.e. the expected
value of the observation cost. To do so, as well as for future use, we define the function τ̃ (·)
so that the optimal policy is τ̂ = τ̃ (E[θ]). The function τ̃ (·) is

where
17


 1 [ln(v̄) − ln(ṽ(x) − x)] if 0 < x < v
,
τ̃ (x) = B
∞
if x ≥ v

1
smallest solution of ṽ = v + B v v̄ ṽ−x  Bv
v̄
ṽ(x) =
v

(21)
if 0 < x < v

,

(22)

if x ≥ v

The case with substitutions follows a similar logic, but is algebraically more involved (see Appendix B).

21

and B ≡ b−a = η(η −1)σ 2 /2 summarizes the value of information. The following proposition
collects these results (see Appendix A for the proof):

Proposition 3. Assume that signals are not informative, i.e. F (θ, τ0 | ζ0) = F (θ, τ1 | ζ1) ≡
F̂ (θ) for all θ and all pairs (τ0 , ζ0 ) and (τ1 , ζ1), and E[θ] > 0. The optimal observation time
is given by τ̂ = τ̃ (E[θ]), which is strictly increasing in E[θ] for 0 < E[θ] < v, and infinite for
E[θ] ≥ v.
The optimal time between observations is increasing in the expected observation cost:
the larger the expected observation cost, the more time must elapse before the benefit of an
observation is large enough to induce the firm to pay the observation cost. As the expected
value of the observation costs becomes small, formally as E[θ] ↓ 0, the optimal observation
p
time is approximated by the square root function τ̂ ≈ 2 E[θ]/B. This limiting case in which
E[θ] ↓ 0 reproduces Reis’s (2006) in Proposition 5, where a perturbation method was used
to derive an approximation for τ̂ . Proposition 3 generalizes Reis’s results by characterizing
the solution away from the case where E[θ] is small. These results will be useful in the
next section to characterize the determinants of the shape of the optimal observation times
in general as a function of the expected value of the observation cost shocks and of their
persistence.

4

Optimal Markov observation times

The results of Proposition 2 imply that the case of constant observation times studied in the
literature and discussed in the previous section predicts the smallest real effects of monetary
shocks for given average time between observations EK (τ ) = τ̂ , as the associated coefficient
of variation of observations is CVK (τ ) = 0. Studying the underpinnings of variability in
observation times is important because such variability increases the size of the real effects of
monetary shocks. This section presents a specification of the process for the observation cost
implying that optimal observation times form a first order Markov process. The solution to
the firm’s problem will provide a mapping from the realization of the observation cost to the
optimal time between consecutive observations, τ .
We will use this mapping to obtain a relationship from the coefficient of variation of
observation costs, CV (θ), to the coefficient of variation of observation times, CVK (τ ). This
mapping is useful to appreciate the ability of the model to generate a given variation in
observation times, for a given variation of the observation costs.

22

4.1

Solving for the observation time with a specific cost distribution

We assume that the observation cost θ ≥ 0 follows a continuous time process, and the firm
learns about the current value of θ only upon the time it observes. The observation cost is
modeled in a way that parallels the production cost. Both of them follow a continuous time
stochastic process whose distributions are independent of whether and when the firm chooses
to observe them.18 A special case of the process for the observation cost is the one where
the observation cost is constant until a new value is drawn from the distribution F̂ (·) with
support on (0, ∞). The cumulative distribution in this case is given by
τ

τ

F (θ′ , τ |θ) = e− κ 1θ′ ≥θ + (1 − e− κ ) F̂ (θ′ )

,

κ<∞.

(23)

The arrival rate of the new value is given by the constant 1/κ (i.e. it is a Poisson process),
and it is independent of the current value of θ. We will refer to κ as the parameter governing
the persistence of observation cost, with a higher κ associated with a higher persistence. We
assume that the current realization of the observation cost is the best and only predictor
of future realizations of the observation cost. Formally we assume that ζ = θ, implying
G (ζ | θ) = 1ζ≥θ . Without loss of generality we can replace ζ with θ as the argument of the

firm policy and value function, i.e. τ (θ) and v(θ).
Given the process for θ implied by equation (23), we can rewrite the Bellman equation in
equation (19) as:
v(θ) = max
τ ∈R̄+

Z

0

τ

e−(ρ+λ−a)t dt + e−(ρ+λ−b)τ


τ 
τ
e− κ (v(θ) − ζ) + 1 − e− κ (E[v] − E[θ]) ,

(24)

R∞
R∞
where E[v] ≡ 0 v (θ) dF̂ (θ) and E[θ] ≡ 0 θ dF̂ (θ). The next two propositions characterize
the shape of the decision rule τ (θ) that solves the problem in equation (24): the general
message is that the shape crucially depends on two parameters, the expected value, E(θ),
and the persistence, κ, of the observation cost. As shown by Reis’s (2006) proposition 4
(on the optimal decision rule around a situation when planning is costless), it will be true
that as the expected value of observation costs becomes tiny, i.e. as E(θ) → 0, the decision
rule, τ (θ), is a square root formula for any given level of persistence κ. The next proposition
extends that characterization around small values of the cost realization θ. For instance, it
shows that, for any given expected value of the costs, E(θ) > 0, there will be a threshold for
the persistence κ such that, if the persistence is low enough, unlike a square root formula,
18

The assumption that the evolution of the observation costs is independent of the decision to observe will
need to be abandoned to generate i.i.d. observation times, as discussed in Section 5.

23

the firm chooses a strictly positive time until the next observation even if the observation
cost is arbitrarily small:
Proposition 4. Assume that E[θ] < v, then,
(i) for any 0 < κ < ∞ we have τ (θ) > 0 and τ ′ (θ) > 0 if θ > 0, with limθ→∞ τ (θ) = ∞
and limθ→∞ τ ′ (θ) = 0;
(ii) let κ ≡ E[θ]/(B v) < κ̄, then for all κ < κ we have limθ→0+ τ (θ) > 0;
(iii) let κ̄ ≡ v + E[θ]/(v̄ B), then for all κ ≥ κ̄ we have limθ→0+ τ (θ) = 0 and
limθ→0+ τ ′ (θ) = +∞.

The proposition holds for a sufficiently small level of the expected future costs, i.e. for
E[θ] < v (see Appendix A for the proof). If this condition is not satisfied, the optimal
time between observations diverges: the expected cost of the next observation is so high
that the firm is better off not observing. Figure 2 illustrates the results of our proposition
through numerical examples that reproduce the average frequency and size of price changes
estimated by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008). In these examples, and in the ones that will
follow later in the paper, we will concentrate on the case in which the nominal marginal cost
is a martingale (i.e. µ − φ + σ 2 /2 = 0) because, as it is well documented, prices change
infrequently.19
The first point of the proposition states that the time between consecutive observations
is strictly positive provided that θ > 0, since the firm would face unbounded losses in a finite
period of time if it were to observe the state continuously. Moreover, point (i) also states
that the optimal observation time is strictly increasing in the current value of the observation
cost θ, since a higher θ signals a higher expected value of the future observation cost.20
The next two points of the proposition are crucial to see how the shape of the optimal
rule at small values of θ depends on the persistence of the cost shocks, κ. Point (ii) states a
sufficient condition on the persistence parameter κ such that if the persistence is low enough
(i.e. κ < κ) then the optimal time between observations converges to a strictly positive
value as the observation cost converges to zero. Intuitively, as the persistence of observation
costs decreases, the current observation cost becomes a bad predictor of future observation
costs. When the persistence is sufficiently low, such expectation will be dominated by the
19

This is a meaningful benchmark also because if one were to add a separate cost of adjusting prices, the
optimal policy would indeed feature constant prices between consecutive observations as long as the drift in
the marginal cost is not too large (see Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello (2011) for a rigorous characterization).
τ
τ
20
This can be seen noting that E[θ′ ; τ |θ] = e− κ θ + (1 − e− κ )E[θ] increases with θ for any time τ .

24

Figure 2: The optimal observation times rule τ (θ), as persistence κ varies

2

S q u ar e R o ot A p p r ox im at ion
Op t im al R u le , κ = ∞
Op t im al R u le , κ = 4.00 = κ
Op t im al R u le , κ = 1.00
Op t im al R u le , κ = 0.50
Op t im al R u le , κ = 0.33
Op t im al R u le , κ = 0.20
Op t im al R u le , κ = 0.10 = κ

Optimal Time to Observation: τ (θ)

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0.14

0.16

0.18

0.2

Obs er vation Cos t: θ ∝ E [θ ′ |τ ]

Note: The figure reports the optimal time to the next observation τ (θ), in years, as a function of the signal
value ζ = θ on the horizontal axis, and for different values of persistence, as measured by κ. The distribution
F̂ is assumed to be exponential with average observation cost E[θ] = 0.05. Depending on persistence κ, this
cost implies between 1.1 and 1.4 observations per year on average. We set the drift µ − φ + σ 2 /2 = 0 to
obtain infrequent price changes, and σ = 0.114 to match an average size of price changes equal to 10%. The
other parameters
p are η = 5, λ = 0.25 and ρ = 0.02. For more details see Appendix C. The dashed line plots
the function 2 θ/B .

25

unconditional mean, i.e. E[θ]>0, to the point that even when the observation cost is tiny the
firm will still choose to wait for a strictly positive time before making another observation.
A different rule obtains if the persistence parameter κ is sufficiently high (i.e. κ ≥ κ̄),
a condition described under point (iii). In this case the optimal time between observations
converges to zero as the observation cost converges to zero (with an infinite slope at zero).
The reason is that when persistence is high the current observation cost is a good predictor
of the future cost, thus the decision rule becomes responsive to the current cost.

4.2

Two extreme cases

To further illustrate the key role of the persistence of observation costs for optimal observation
times, the next proposition considers two extreme cases for κ: permanent observation cost,
i.e. κ → ∞; and i.i.d. observation cost, i.e. κ → 0 (see Appendix A for the proof). This
proposition is informative about the shape of the decision rule, not just at small values of θ
as done before, showing that it converges pointwise to the decision rule in the problem with
constant time between observations when κ → ∞.
Proposition 5. Assume that E[θ] < v, and let τ (θ; κ) and v(θ; κ) denote, respectively,
the solution to the firm problem and associated value function in equation (24) conditional
on a given persistence parameter κ. Then we have that:
(i) for any θ ≥ 0, limκ→∞ τ (θ; κ) = τ̃ (θ) and limκ→∞ v(θ; κ) = ṽ(θ) where the functions
τ̃ (·) and ṽ(·) are given by equations (22)-(21);

(ii) for any θ > 0, limκ→0

∂ τ (θ;κ)
∂θ

=

∂ v(θ;κ)
∂θ

= 0.

Point (i) shows that when the observation cost is permanent, i.e. κ → ∞, the optimal
observation time is given by the function τ̃ (θ), in equation (21). One can use this expression to
p
show that the optimal policy is approximated by τ̃ (θ) = 2 θ/B +o(θ), implying an elasticity

of observation times to observation costs of 1/2 in a neighborhood of θ = 0. Although the
functional form τ̃ (θ) is the same as in Section 3.1, it is important to notice that the resulting
dynamics are very different. Because θ is Markov here, the conditional mean varies across
firms, and hence the time between observations is not equal across firms. In the previous
example, the expected value of θ was constant both over time and across firms.

Point (ii) shows that as the cost becomes i.i.d. (i.e. κ → 0) the optimal observation time is
insensitive to the realization of the current observation cost and converges to a constant, just
as in Section 3.1. Intuitively, when κ → 0 the current observation cost is uninformative about

the future observation cost, while its unconditional expectation E[θ] is the main determinant
26

of the optimal time to the next observation and the rule becomes flat. In Figure 2 we
illustrate the effects of the persistence parameter κ on the shape of the decision rule τ (θ)
at parameters of the model that imply an average frequency of price changes of about 1.3
adjustments/observations per year, and an average size of price changes equal to 10% (see
Appendix C for more details on the parameters choice). It is apparent that the decision rule
has a square-root like shape only when the persistence of the cost shocks is sufficiently high.
Otherwise the decision rule is flat and unresponsive to changes in the costs.

4.3

The scale of observation cost and the optimal observation times

The results of Proposition 4 and Proposition 5 relate to the findings of Reis’s (2006) Proposition 4, which shows that the optimal time between observations is (in our notation) app
proximately equal to τ (θ) ≈ 2 θ/B for E[θ] → 0. We have extended that characterization
to a more general case when E[θ] is not necessarily close to zero, and show how the shape
of the optimal observation times depends both on the average observation cost E[θ], and
on the persistence of the observation cost, κ. The extension to non negligible E[θ] is important: in the case of negligible costs (i.e. when E[θ] → 0, a situation Reis refers to as

“costless planning”) the mean frequency of observation will be very high (diverging in the
limit), so that the economy becomes one with flexible prices. A new and important result of
this extension is to show that, when the costs are non-negligible, the optimal firm behavior
is well approximated by a square root formula only if the observation costs are sufficiently
persistent. Notice in particular that our propositions imply that, as the realizations of the
observation cost converge to zero (θ ↓ 0), the optimal observation time will not converge to
zero if the persistence is low enough (κ < κ), and that τ (θ) will converge to a constant as

the observation cost process converges to i.i.d. (κ → 0).21 Our results highlight the crucial
role of E[θ] for the shape of τ (θ): the thresholds κ and κ̄ are increasing in E[θ]. To highlight the role of the scale of observation costs, in Figure 3 we plot the optimal τ (θ) when,
everything else being equal, we scale the distribution of observation costs F̂ so that E[θ] is
1/1000 smaller than in the case of Figure 2. It is shown that the optimal time to the next
observation is indeed well approximated by the square root expression, even at very low levels
of persistence. However, the negligible observation costs used in the case of Figure 3 imply
a sizeable increase in the frequency of information gathering, from about 1.3 observation per
year (in the baseline case) to about 40 observations per year. In such a case, the quantitative
behavior of the model is close to flexible prices.
21

It is immediate to see the difference with the square root approximation where the observation time
converges to zero with an elasticity of 1/2 as the observation cost θ converges to zero.

27

Figure 3: The optimal observation times as all costs gets negligible: E[θ] → 0
0.09

S q u ar e R o ot A p p r ox im at ion
Op t im al R u le , κ = ∞
Op t im al R u le , κ = 4.00
Op t im al R u le , κ = 1.00
Op t im al R u le , κ = 0.50
Op t im al R u le , κ = 0.33
Op t im al R u le , κ = 0.20
Op t im al R u le , κ = 0.10

Optimal Time to Observation: τ (θ)

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0

0

1

2

3

4

Obs er vation Cos t: θ ∝ E [θ ′ |τ ]

5

6
−4

x 10

Note: The figure reports the optimal time to the next observation τ (ζ), in years, as a function of the signal
value ζ on the horizontal axis, and for different values of persistence, as measured by κ. The distribution F̂
is assumed to be exponential with average observation cost E[θ] = 0.05/1000: such negligible costs implies
about 40 observations per year on average. We set the drift µ − φ + σ 2 /2 = 0 to obtain infrequent price
changes, and σ = 0.114 to match an average size of price changes equal to 10%. The other parameters are
η = 5, λ = 0.25 and ρ = 0.02. For more details see Appendix C.

28

4.4

The variation of costs and observation times

We conclude from this analysis that combinations of low average observation costs and / or a
high persistence of the observation cost are associated with a higher elasticity of observation
times with respect to the observation costs. This result is useful to determine the mapping
from the variation of observation costs to the variation of observation times. The next
proposition uses these results to characterize the coefficient of variation of observation times
(excluding substitutions) in terms of the coefficient of variation of the observation cost (see
Appendix A for the proof).
Proposition 6. Let E(θ) → 0 and the coefficient of variation of observation cost be such

that CV (θ) > 0 as E(θ) → 0. Let CVK (τ ) denote the coefficient of variation of the times
between consecutive observations conditional on no substitutions. We have that
CVK (τ ) =

p

1
CV (θ) + o
E(θ) .
2

(25)

An increase in the coefficient of variation of observation costs affects the cross-sectional
variation of observation times with a coefficient of 1/2. The result follows from using that, as
p
shown by Reis’s (2006) Proposition 4, the optimal policy is approximated by τ̃ (θ) ≈ 2 θ/B

as E[θ] → 0, so that the elasticity of the time between observations to the observation cost
is 1/2. However, as we showed above, the elasticity of observation times to observation cost
may be much lower when E[θ] is away from zero. In order to study the mapping from the
variation in observation cost to the variation in observation times in the more general case
when E[θ] is away from zero. We assume that the distribution F̂ is a Gamma distribution with
shape parameter α1 and scale parameter α2 . The parameter α1 determines the coefficient of
variation of the observation cost θ. The parameter α2 is chosen so that the average frequency
of observations is 1.3 on a yearly basis. Together with the assumption of no drift in nominal
marginal cost, this matches the estimated frequency of price changes in the U.S. data. We
notice that targeting 1/E[τ ] = 1.3 implies an implicit target for E[θ], an important parameter
in the analysis above to determine the elasticity of optimal observation times to observation
cost.
In Figure 4 we plot the model-implied coefficient of variation of observation times (CVK (τ )
on the vertical axis) as a function of the the coefficient of variation of observation costs, for
different values of κ. The figure also plots the level of variation in observation times that
is consistent with the kurtosis of the empirical distribution of price changes.22 This shows
22

This uses an estimated value for the kurtosis of price changes around 4, consistent with Alvarez, Le

29

Figure 4: From the variation of observation costs to the variation of observation times
0.9

Coe ffic i e nt of Vari ati on of Re v i e ws: C V K (τ )

0.8

κ
κ
κ
κ
κ
κ
κ

=
=
=
=
=
=
=

∞
4.0
1.0
0.5
0.33
0.20
0.10

0.7

0.6
CVK(τ) predicted by kurtosis of ∆ p
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

C o e ffi c i e n t o f Va r i a t i o n o f O b s e r v a t i o n C o s t : C V ( θ )

Note: The figure reports the coefficient of variation of times between observations (including substitutions)
as a function of the coefficient of variation of observation cost, and for different values of persistence, as
measured by κ. The distribution F̂ is assumed to be Gamma(α1 , α2 ), where α1 determines the coefficient
of variation of observation costs upon a new draw, and α2 is chosen to match an yearly average frequency of
observations/adjustments equal to 1.3. We set the drift µ − φ + σ 2 /2 = 0 to obtain infrequent price changes,
and σ = 0.114 to match an average size of price changes equal to 10%. The other parameters are η = 5,
λ = 0.25 and ρ = 0.02. For more details see Appendix C.

that the model can predict variation in observation times consistent with the distribution
of price changes only when persistence in the observation cost is sufficiently large. With
high persistence the model predicts a sizable variation in observation times even when the
variation in observation cost is moderate.23
We conclude this section by stressing that the process of optimal observation times does
not inherit the properties of the process of the observation cost. In fact as the process
of observation cost converges to i.i.d., i.e. κ → 0, the optimal time between observations

converges to a constant. The economic motivation is that when κ → 0 the current observation
cost is uninformative about the cost of the next observation, so that the firm plans according
to its best estimate which is the expected value E[θ]. An immediate implication of these

Bihan, and Lippi (2014), and the results in Lemma 3, which yields the coefficient of variation CVK (τ ) = 0.58.
23
In the case of κ = ∞, the required standard deviation of observation cost is of the same order of magnitude
of its mean, i.e. CV (θ) ≈ 1.

30

result is that the model with a Markovian stochastic process of observation cost cannot
generate i.i.d. observation times, which has been a main focus of the “rational inattentiveness”
literature (see Reis (2006), Mankiw and Reis (2002), Carvalho and Schwartzman (2012)). We
want to remark that this is not a feature of our particular specification of the distribution
function F , but it is a more general result. In order for observations to be i.i.d. over time, we
need an environment where the signal about the future observation costs is both informative
and independent of all other shocks (including the current observation cost). This structure
cannot be achieved with an environment where the observation cost follows a stochastic
process that evolves independently of the observation decisions of the firm. We will therefore
consider a specification of the observation cost process that delivers i.i.d. observations times
in the next section.

5

Optimal i.i.d. observation times

This section presents a specification of the firm problem where the optimal consecutive observation times are i.i.d. random variables. We are interested in this case mostly because
a large literature has investigated the implications of i.i.d. observation times for the real
effects of monetary shocks, such as Mankiw and Reis (2002) or more recently Carvalho and
Schwartzman (2012). The solution to the firm problem will provide a mapping from the realization of the observation costs to the optimal time between consecutive observations, τ . As
in the previous section, we will use this mapping to obtain a relationship from the coefficient
of variation of observation costs CV (θ) to the coefficient of variation of observation times,
CVK (τ ), and hence to the size of the real effects of monetary shocks.
As shown in the previous section optimal i.i.d. observation times cannot be produced in
an environment where the observation cost follows a stochastic process that evolves independently of the observation decisions of the firm. Therefore in this section we have to assume
that the firm receives a signal about the future observation costs that is both informative
and independent of all other shocks (including the current observation cost). Formally, the
observation times are i.i.d. over time if and only if G (ζ ′ | θ0 ) = G (ζ ′ | θ1 ) for all ζ ′ and all
pairs θ1 , θ0 , and hence G (ζ ′ | θ) ≡ Ĝ(ζ ′) for all ζ ′ and θ. The signal ζ ′ has to be independent
of the current realization of the observation cost, θ′ , otherwise ζ ′ would also be correlated

with the previous realization of the signal, ζ, violating the requirement that observation times
are i.i.d.; this is because θ′ and ζ are correlated as ζ is informative about θ′ by assumption.
The specification of the distribution F (θ′ , τ |ζ) determines the predictability of the next
observation cost θ′ conditional on the realization of the signal ζ, and on the time elapsed

31

since the signal was received, τ . A simple tractable case is one where such distribution is
F (θ′ , τ |ζ) = e−γτ 1θ′ ≥ζ + (1 − e−γτ ) F̂ (θ′ ) .

(26)

The parameter γ determines the information content of the signal, which is perfectly precise
if γ = 0, and has no information as γ → ∞. Notice that a higher value of the signal ζ is
R
associated with a higher expected observation cost: E[θ′ |ζ, τ ] = e−γτ ζ +(1−e−γτ ) θ′ dF̂ (θ′ ).
In this case the realization of the signal coincides with the cost of the next observation with a
probability that decreases as time elapses, otherwise the future observation cost will be drawn
from the distribution F̂ (independent of ζ). This specification of F captures the idea that, as
time passes, the precision of the information about the future observation cost depreciates,
while preserving tractability.
Given equation (26) and the assumption G (ζ ′ | θ) ≡ Ĝ(ζ ′) for all ζ ′ and θ, we can rewrite
the firm problem in equation (19) as:
v(ζ) = max
τ ∈R̄+

Z

τ

e−(ρ+λ−a)t dt + e−(ρ+λ−b)τ
0

E[v] −



e−γ τ ζ + 1 − e−γτ E[θ]
,

(27)

R
R
where E[v] ≡ v (ζ ′ ) dĜ (ζ ′) and E[θ] ≡ θ′ dF̂ (θ′ ).24 The proposition below characterizes
the decision rule in this case (see Appendix A for the proof). We will use such characterization
to compare to the decision rule obtained in the case of persistent observation cost in the
previous section.
Proposition 7. Assume that F (·) is given by equation (26) with 0 < γ < ∞ and that
v > E[θ]. Then: (i) there exists a ζ ∗ so that 0 < τ (ζ) < ∞ and τ ′ (ζ) > 0 for all ζ ∗ ≤ ζ < ∞;
moreover if ζ ∗ > ζ, then τ (ζ) = 0 for all ζ ≤ ζ < ζ ∗; (ii) if ζ ≥ 0, then τ (ζ) > 0 and ζ ∗ = ζ.
Point (i) of the proposition states that the time between observations, τ , increases with the
signal about the future observation cost, ζ, and does so strictly for values above a threshold
ζ ∗. Intuitively, a higher realization of ζ is associated to a higher expected observation cost,
so the firm delays the time of the next observation. When the realization of such signal is
low enough, i.e. ζ < ζ ∗ , the expectation of the next observation cost is so low that the firm
finds it optimal to observe immediately. Point (ii) establishes that ζ ∗ must be negative for
the firm to exercise the observation immediately. In fact, if the lower bound of the support
of ζ is positive, i.e. ζ ≥ 0, then τ (ζ) > 0. For instance, even if ζ = 0 so that the cost of

observing immediately would be zero, then τ (0) > 0. We notice that this is true for all values
of γ.
24

Note that the particular specification of the distribution F̂ is immaterial for this problem, as only the
associated mean E[θ] matters.

32

The economics of τ (0) > 0 is very different from the case of persistent observation cost
in the previous section. Here, the firm waits a strictly positive period of time before making
another observation even if the cost of observing (again) immediately is zero because of an
option value argument: if the observation occurs immediately the opportunity to potentially
exercise an observation at a low cost would be wasted because there is no correlation between
consecutive observation costs. Due to the nature of i.i.d. observation times, the setup of the
problem is such that each observation is associated with an i.i.d. draw for the distribution of
the observation cost to be paid upon the next observation. A firm that draws a signal of low
(future) observation cost will wait for the best moment to use this option. The option value
of waiting will turn out to be relevant to determine the smallest time between observations.
For instance, one important implication is that, in order to generate a positive probability of arbitrarily small durations of the time between observations –e.g. in an exponential
distribution– the distribution of observation costs needs to have positive mass on negative
R0
costs, i.e. θ < 0 and θ dĜ(x) > 0.25 This result is interesting as a large part of the literature

that developed after Mankiw and Reis (2002) has focused on quantifying the predictions of
models of rational inattentiveness in which the distribution of the times between observations
indeed features positive mass on arbitrarily small durations. We will come back to this issue
in Section 5.1. More interestingly, the option value of waiting also reduces the variability of
observation times that follows from the variability of observation cost. This in turn reduces
the ability of such model to produce large variation in observation times and, therefore, large
real effects of monetary shocks. We discuss this in more details later.
Next we consider two special cases for the informativeness of the signal, for which we
have an (almost) closed form solution for the optimal policy. In the case where γ = ∞, the
signal carries no information about the observation cost to be paid, and hence the model
coincides with the case characterized in Proposition 3, where the policy τ (·) does not depend
on the realization of ζ. At the other extreme, γ = 0, the signal is perfectly informative
about the cost to be paid at the next observation. The next two propositions describe the
optimal policy and the mapping from the variability of observation cost to the variability of
observation times in the γ = 0 case.
Proposition 8.

Let F (θ′ , τ |ζ) = 1θ′ ≥ζ for all ζ, i.e. γ = 0 in equation (26). The optimal

25

Notice that a negative observation cost is not allowed in the model where the costs are Markovian because
that would give the firm the possibility of unbounded profits by simply collecting the fees infinitely many
times as long as the cost remains negative.

33

Figure 5: Optimal i.i.d. observation times as a function of the signal on the observation cost

2

γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ

Optimal Time to Review: τ (ζ )

1.8

=
=
=
=
=
=
=

0.00
0.25
1.00
2.00
3.00
5.00
10.00

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

Signal: ζ ∝ E [θ ′ |τ ]

Note: The figure plots the optimal time to the next observation τ (ζ), in years, as a function of the signal
value ζ on the horizontal axis, and for different values of precision, as measured by 1/γ. The distribution
Ĝ is assumed to be exponential with average E[ζ] = 0.05, and we further assume E[θ] = E[ζ]. WWe set
the drift µ − φ + σ 2 /2 = 0 to obtain infrequent price changes, and σ = 0.114 to match an average size of
price changes equal to 10%. The other parameters are η = 5, λ = 0.25 and ρ = 0.02. For more details see
Appendix C.

34

policy τ (ζ) is given by

τ (ζ) =




0



1

B



∞

if ζ ≤ ζ ≤ E[v] − v̄
[ ln (v̄) − ln (E[v] − ζ) ]

where the expected value E[v] =

if E[v] − v̄ < ζ < E[v] ,

(28)

if ζ ≥ E[v]
R∞
ζ

v (ζ ′) dĜ (ζ ′ ) is the solution of an explicit equation that

is displayed in the proof. If ζ ≥ 0, then: (i) E[v] < v̄ and τ (ζ) > 0 for all ζ ≥ ζ; (ii)
if Ĝ is first order stochastically higher, then E[v] is smaller; and (iii) if Ĝ is second order
stochastically higher, then E[v] is higher.
See Appendix A for the proof. When γ = 0 the optimal policy τ (ζ) is known in closed
form up to the value of the expected value function E[v]. It features all the properties of the
case of imperfectly informative signals (γ > 0), with the exception of being characterized by
an asymptote, so that if ζ ≥ E[v], then τ = +∞. This is because with γ = 0 the expected
cost of the next observation does not revert to its unconditional mean as time elapses, so
that if it is large enough (ζ ≥ E[v]) making an observation will never be optimal for the
firm. Points (ii) and (iii) of the proposition highlight how the properties of the distribution
of signals, which coincide with observation costs in this case, affect the value of the firm.26
The expression in equation (28) is particularly useful to study the elasticity of τ (ζ) with
respect to ζ. In particular, we note that τ ′ (ζ) = 1/[B (E[v] − ζ)]for ζ ∈ (E[v] − v̄, E[v]). This

implies that when the benefit of information B and/or the continuation value E[v] are larger,
then the slope of the optimal policy with respect to the observation cost is smaller. This
suggests that economies with a higher frequency of i.i.d. observations are characterized by a
lower sensitivity of observation times to variation in observation costs.27 The next proposition
uses the analytical results of Proposition 8 to characterize the coefficient of variation of
observation times (excluding substitutions) in terms of the coefficient of variation of the
observation cost in the case of i.i.d. observations with perfect predicability (see Appendix A
for the proof).
Proposition 9.
Let F (θ′ , τ |ζ) = 1θ′ ≥ζ for all ζ, i.e. γ = 0 in equation (26), and
R∞
G (ζ ′ | θ) = Ĝ (ζ ′ ) for all ζ ′ and θ. Moreover, let E(ζ) = ζ ζ dĜ(ζ) and the coefficient of
variation of observation cost be such that CV (ζ) > 0 as E(ζ) → 0. Let CVK (τ ) denote the
26

We notice that in this case the value of E[θ] is immaterial as observation costs are never drawn from the
distribution F̂ .
27
Note that both the values of B and E[v] are positively associated to the average frequency of observations:
as B increases, observing more frequently is optimal; if the average frequency of observations is optimally
higher, then E[v] increases and gets closer to its upper bound v̄.

35

coefficient of variation of times between observations conditional on no substitutions. We
have that
CVK (τ ) =
where τ̄ =

p


p
1
E(ζ) ,
(ρ + λ − b) τ̄ CV (ζ) + o
2

(29)

2 E(ζ)/(b − a) is a measure of the mean time between observations.

The proposition shows that the mapping from CV (ζ) to CVK (τ ) depends on two terms.
The first term, i.e. (ρ + λ − b), is related to the discount rate in equation (27) and typically
p
has the order of magnitude of the interest rate. The second term, i.e. τ̄ = 2 E(θ)/(b − a),
is of the same order of magnitude of the average duration of observation times. For instance,
an economy with a yearly discount rate of 5% and and average time between observations
of one year, would be characterized by CVK (τ )/CV (ζ) ≈ 0.025. Such a small slope of the
variability in observation times with respect to observation costs is explained by the option
value argument discussed above.
In order to study the mapping from the variation in observation cost to the variation in
observation times in the more general case when signals are not perfectly informative γ > 0,
we do the following exercise. We assume that the distribution Ĝ is a Gamma distribution with
shape parameter α1 and scale parameter α2 . The parameter α1 determines the coefficient
of variation of the observation cost θ, while the parameter α2 is chosen so that the average
frequency of observations is 1.3 on a yearly basis which, together with the assumption of
no drift in nominal marginal cost, matches the estimated frequency of price changes in the
U.S. data. In Figure 6 we plot the model-implied coefficient of variation of observation times
(CVK (τ ) on the vertical axis) as a function of the the coefficient of variation of observation
costs, for different values of γ. The figure also plots the level of variation in observation
times that is consistent with the kurtosis of the distribution of price change, as explained
in Section 4. The results clearly show that a much higher variability in observation costs
is needed to produce a given variability in observation times compared to the case with
persistent shocks (see Figure 4 for comparison), for all values of γ. We conclude that the
model of i.i.d. observations has a hard time generating large real effects of monetary shocks:
for the parametrization presented in Figure 6 there is no level of CV (ζ), no matter how
large, that is able to produce the variation of CVK (τ ) consistent with the kurtosis of the
distribution of price changes.

5.1

An application: micro-founding exponential i.id. observations

In this section we use our results to solve a “reverse engineering problem”: for given distribution of times between consecutive observations K as defined in equation (4), we find
parameters for the firm problem, including the distribution of the observation cost, so that
36

Figure 6: Coefficient of variation of observation times with i.i.d. observation cost
1

γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ

Coe ffic i e nt of Vari ati on of Re v i e ws: C V K (τ )

0.9

0.8

=
=
=
=
=
=
=

0.00
0.25
1.00
2.00
3.00
5.00
10.00

0.7

0.6
CVK(τ) predicted by kurtosis of ∆ p
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

C o e ffi c i e n t o f Va r i a t i o n o f O b s e r v a t i o n C o s t : C V ( ζ )

Note: The figure reports the coefficient of variation of times between observations (including substitutions)
as a function of the coefficient of variation of signals about future observation cost, ζ, and for different values
of precision, as measured by 1/γ. The distribution F̂ is assumed to be Gamma(α1 , α2 ), where α1 determines
the coefficient of variation of observation costs upon a new draw, and α2 is chosen to match an yearly average
frequency of observations/adjustments equal to 1.3. We set E[θ] = E[ζ]. We set the drift µ − φ + σ 2 /2 = 0
to obtain infrequent price changes, and σ = 0.114 to match an average size of price changes equal to 10%.
The other parameters are η = 5, λ = 0.25 and ρ = 0.02. For more details see Appendix C.

37

aggregating the resulting optimal decision rules H(t′ |t) we obtain the target distribution K.

While we could do this for any K, a particular interesting application, given the results by
Mankiw and Reis (2002), is to use an i.i.d. exponential K. The aim of this is to identify the
type of micro-foundation and the parameters of the firm problem in Section 5 that would be
consistent with this popular framework.
Let K̂ denote the invariant distribution of times between consecutive observations conditional on no substitution. We note that the invariant distribution of observation times K
including substitutions (which are exponentially distributed with parameter λ by assumption) is exponential if and only if K̂ is exponential, and satisfies K(t) = e−λ t K̂(t) for each
t ≥ 0. The next proposition describes the distribution of observation cost Ĝ that microfounds
an exponential distribution of observation times, where K̂(t) = exp (−ξ t) for some ξ > 0, in
the case where observations are i.i.d. and signals are perfectly informative, i.e. γ = 0.
Proposition 10. Consider the case when observation times are i.i.d. with γ = 0. Let the
invariant exponential distribution of times between consecutive observations (excluding substitutions) be K̂(t) = exp (−ξ t) with parameter ξ > 0. Then the density of the observation
costs (and signals) is a displaced beta distribution Beta(αl , αr ) with left parameter αl = 1,
right parameter αr = ξ/B, and support (ζ, ζ + v̄), so that the density ĝ(·) = Ĝ′ (·) is given
by:

 ξ −1
E[v] − ζ B
ξ
for ζ ∈ (ζ, ζ + v̄) ,
ĝ(ζ) =
(30)
v̄ B
v̄
where the expected value function and the lower bound of the distribution of cost are
E[v] = v + (v̄ − v)

ξv
, ζ = E[v] − v̄ .
1+ξv

(31)

The implied fraction of negative cost ζ ≤ 0 and the coefficient of variation of cost are
Ĝ(0) = 1 −



 Bξ
v 
v ξ v
> 0, and CV (ζ) =
+ 1−
v̄
v̄ 1 + ξ v

s

ξ/B
2 + ξ/B



1 + ξv
v/v̄



.

(32)

See Appendix A for the proof. This proposition shows that if observation times are
exponential, the observation costs have to be distributed as a displaced beta distribution.
The shape of this distribution is determined by ξ/B − 1, which depends on the ratio of the

exponential parameter ξ to the benefits of information: B = η(η − 1) σ 2 /2. The support
of the cost is the interval (E[v] − v̄, E[v]). Since the exponential distribution has positive
probability for arbitrarily small values of observation times, the option value argument of
38

Figure 7: Exponential i.i.d. observation times: properties of Ĝ as a function of ξ and η
Fraction of “negative" observation cost
0.7

Coefficient of variation of observation cost
60

Coefficient of Var iation of Cos t: C V (ζ )

η=4
η=5
η=6

Fr action of Negative Cos t: Ĝ(0)

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

η=4
η=5
η=6

50

40

30

20

10

0.1

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Fr equency of Reviews: ξ

Frequency of Reviews: ξ

Note: The figure reports the fraction of negative cost (left panel) and the coefficient of variation of cost
(right panel) as a function of the frequency of observations on the horizontal axis, for three different values
of η = {4, 5, 6}, associated to the distribution of Proposition 10. We set E[θ] = E[ζ]. We set the drift
µ − φ + σ 2 /2 = 0 to obtain infrequent price changes, and σ = 0.114 to match an average size of price changes
equal to 10% when the frequency of observations/price adjustments is 1.3 on a yearly base. The discount
rate is ρ = 0.02. For more details see Appendix C.

Proposition 7 implies that the lower bound is negative. The expression for the fraction of
negative cost Ĝ(0) allows us to quantify the importance of this feature.
We next comment on the comparative static of the change in the distribution of the
observation cost as we vary the parameter of the exponential distribution of observation
times. Note that if ξ → 0 observations are very infrequent, then ζ → 0, so that Ĝ(0) → 0
and CV (ζ) → 0. In words, in order to have almost no observations, the distribution of the
observation cost must be almost degenerate, concentrated around its upper bound ζ̄ = v.
At the other extreme, if ξ → ∞ observations are very frequent, then ζ → v̄, the fraction
Ĝ(0) → 1 − exp(−1) ≈ 0.63 and CV (ζ) → +∞. The general case moves monotonically

between these two extremes, with both the fraction of negative costs, Ĝ(0), and the coefficient
of variation, CV (ζ), being increasing functions of the frequency of observations ξ.
In the left panel of Figure 7 we plot the fraction of negative costs as a function of the

average frequency of observations ξ, for selected parameter values. This figure plots three
39

lines, corresponding to three values of η, which change the value of acquiring information
captured by B. Note that for ξ ≈ 1.3, which roughly corresponds to the average frequency of
price changes per year in the US, then Ĝ(0) ≈ 0.55, so that more than half of the observation
costs are negative. We interpret this as saying that the option value effect is very large for this
model to be quantitatively realistic, since negative observation cost have no direct economic
interpretation. We also note that the value of η has marginal impact on the value of Ĝ(0).
Additionally in the right panel of Figure 7 we plot the coefficient of variation of the observation
cost as a function of the frequency of observations, ξ, and three values of η. For ξ ≈ 1.3,
given our parameter values, the coefficient of variation is about 10 at η = 5. We recall that
we are measuring the observation cost (ζ = θ) as a multiple of the frictionless yearly profit,
implying that a large coefficient of variation can be associated to, in our view, unreasonably
high values of the cost of an observation in units of profits. Finally, the coefficient of variation
of cost increases with the value of η. Intuitively, as the value of information increases firms
have incentives to observe sooner for a given realization of the observation cost. And so more
variation in costs is needed to generate large enough durations of observations such that the
observed outcomes are consistent with an exponential distribution.

6

Concluding remarks

We explored the micro foundations, as well as the aggregation, of models where the optimal
price setting decision of the firm is subject to information gathering costs, as in the “rational
inattentiveness” literature. Our analytical results unveil a few shortcomings of the current
literature, as well as potentially fruitful avenues for future research. We showed that a natural
modeling of the firm’s decisions, one that assumes independence of the cost process from the
firm’s decisions to gather information, produces optimal observation times that are persistent
and, for reasonable parameterizations, infrequent. These results, which deviate from existing
models mainly in the fact that observation times are not i.i.d., are also useful for generating
larger real effects of monetary policy.
Our theoretical characterization relies on a number of simplifying assumptions, whose
importance seems of interest for future research. A limitation of our framework is the absence
of physical costs of price adjustments, implying that prices change continuously in presence of
a drift in nominal marginal cost. In Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello (2011, 2012) we explore the
optimal pricing decision of firms, and its aggregate implications, when firms face non-random
observation and adjustment costs. An important result of these papers is that price plans
are not optimal for reasonable paramterizations of the adjustment cost, so that prices change
infrequently even in presence of a drift in marginal cost. A large literature (e.g. Mankiw and
40

Reis (2002)) has emphasized the role of price plans for the propagation of monetary shocks
to inflation and output. As in this literature, we allow firms to use price plans at no cost.
However, the monetary shock we study causes no predictable dynamics in nominal marginal
cost so that price plans are not used by firms in response to it.
Our results on the aggregation of firms actions and propagation of monetary shocks rely,
for tractability, on a framework where there are no strategic complementaries in price setting,
i.e. the profit-maximizing price of a firm is independent of the other firms’ actions. While
allowing for these strategic complementarities may increase the size of the real effects of
monetary shocks, it is not easy to predict how they would affect the mapping from the cross
sectional distribution of observation times to the size of the real effects of monetary shocks.
Finally, we have studied a model where, for simplicity, the cost/benefit of making an
observation varies because of random variation in the observation cost. There are potentially
other interesting sources of variation. For instance, relaxing the assumption that the cost
of making an observation scales with firms’ profits can deliver variability and persistence
in observation times arising from variability and persistence of the productivity process. In
alternative, adding a separate cost of adjusting prices (i.e. a menu cost) would cause firms
to differ in the gap between the price they post and the optimal one. In this specification,
variation in observation times may arise from variation across firms in the benefit, as opposed
to the cost, of the next observation. Further investigating and measuring alternative sources
of variation in the cost/benefit of observations is also left for future research.

References
Abel, Andrew B., Janice C. Eberly, and Stavros Panageas. 2007. “Optimal Inattention to
the Stock Market.” American Economic Review 97 (2):244–249.
Alvarez, Fernando and Francesco Lippi. 2014. “Price Setting With Menu Cost for Multiproduct Firms.” Econometrica 82 (1):89–135.
Alvarez, Fernando E., Herve Le Bihan, and Francesco Lippi. 2014. “Small and large price
changes and the propagation of monetary shocks.” NBER Working Paper 20155, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Alvarez, Fernando E., Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello. 2011. “Optimal Price Setting with
Observation and Menu Costs.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4).
———. 2012. “Monetary Shocks with Observation and Menu Costs.” Tech. rep., University
of Chicago mimeo.
41

Bonomo, Marco and Carlos Carvalho. 2004. “Endogenous Time-Dependent Rules and Inflation Inertia.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36 (6):1015–41.
Caballero, R.J. 1989. “Time Dependent Rules, Aggregate Stickiness And Information Externalities.” Discussion Papers 198911, Columbia University.
Carvalho, Carlos and Felipe Schwartzman. 2012. “Selection and Monetary Non-Neutrality in
Time-Dependent Pricing Models.” Tech. rep., FRB of Richmond.
Golosov, Mikhail and Robert E. Jr. Lucas. 2007. “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves.” Journal
of Political Economy 115:171–199.
Karlin, S. and H.M. Taylor. 1998. An Introduction to Stochastic Modeling, vol. 1. Academic
Press.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis. 2002. “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices:
A Proposal To Replace The New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 (4):1295–1328.
Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson. 2008. “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
Cost Models.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4):1415–1464.
Reis, Ricardo. 2006. “Inattentive producers.” Review of Economic Studies 73 (3):793–821.
Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of rational inattention.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 50 (3):665–690.
Woodford, Michael. 2008. “Information-Constrained State-Dependent Pricing.” Nber working
papers, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Zbaracki, Mark J., Mark Ritson, Daniel Levy, Shantanu Dutta, and Mark Bergen. 2004.
“Managerial and Customer Costs of Price Adjustment: Direct Evidence from Industrial
Markets.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2):514–533.

A

Appendix: Proofs

Proof. (of Proposition 1) Consider the case where H(·|s) is absolutely continuous for all s.
We use a guess and verify strategy, so we substitute equation (7) into equation (2) and write
R K(T ) = −R

Z

0

∞

H (T | s) k(s) ds for all T ≥ 0 .
42

(33)

Note that this expression holds for T = 0 since K(0) = H(0|s) = 1 for all s since both K
and H(·|s) are right-CDFs. Next, differentiate both sides of equation (33) to obtain:
k(T ) =

Z

∞

h (T | s) k(s) ds for all T ≥ 0 ,

0

(34)

which is exactly the definition of an invariant distribution given in equation (1). Consider
now the case where H has positive mass on countably many values, note that for each T we
can write:
q(T ) = R

∞
X
j=1

= R

H (T | tj ) k(tj ) = R

X

∞
X

hij k(tj ) = R

{i : ti ≥T } j=1

∞
X
X

hij k(tj ),

j=1 {i : ti ≥T }

X

k(ti ) = R K(T ),

{i : ti ≥T }

where the first equality uses that times between consecutive observations take countablymany values, the second uses the definition of h, the third permutes the summations, and
the last one uses the definition of an invariant distribution. Note that the density of the
time until the next observation is piece-wise linear, with downward jumps at the observation
times T = ti for all i ≥ 1. 
Proof. (of Proposition 2 ) First we show that
M≡

Z

∞

Q(t) dt = R
0

Z

∞
0

Z

∞

K(s) ds dt = R
t

Z

∞

s K(s) ds
0

RJ RJ
RJ
We write A(J) ≡ 0 t K(s) ds dt and B(J) ≡ 0 s K(s) ds for all J ≥ 0. Note A(0) =
RJ
B(0) = 0. Second, B ′ (J) = JK(J) and A′ (J) = 0 K(J) dt = JK(J), hence A(J) = B(J)
and taking J → ∞ we obtained the desired result.
Second let the unconditional variance of τ be
V ar(τ ) ≡ −

Z

0

∞

 Z
s K (s)ds − −
2

∞

′

′

s K (s)ds
0

2

=2

Z

0

∞

s K(s)ds −

Z

0

∞

K(s)ds

2

,

where the second equality comes from integrating by parts. The latter, together with the
R∞
R∞
definition of R, i.e. 0 K(s)ds = 1/R = E[τ ] implies that 0 s K(s)ds = 1/2 V ar(τ ) +
(E[τ ])2 , which immediately implies the result. 
Proof. (of Lemma 3) Consider first the distribution of log price changes of a firm observing/adjusting τ periods after the last observation/adjustment, ∆ log(p(τ )). Conditional
43

on the next observation taking place in τ periods, the distribution of log-price changes
upon the next observation/adjustment is normal with mean and variance equal to 0 and
σ 2 τ respectively. Let index the distribution of ∆ log(p(τ )) by τ . Recall that the kurtosis
of a random variable x with zero mean is defined as Kurt(x) = m4 (x)/(m2 (x))2 , where
ms (x) = E[x − E(x)]s is the sth centered moment of x. Therefore, the second and fourth
centered moments of ∆ log(p(τ )) are equal to m2 (τ ) = σ 2 τ and m4 (τ ) = 3 σ 4 τ 2 respectively.
Consider now the cross-sectional distribution of price changes, ∆ log(p). Such distribution is
given by the mixture of normals arising from the different firms drawing different times to
the next observation, τ , each with density k(τ ).
The second moment of such mixture of normals is:
Z
Z
2
τ k(τ )dτ.
m2 (τ )k(τ )dτ = σ
The fourth moment of such mixture of normals is given by the weighted average of the fourth
moments of each normal, m4 (τ ):
Z

m4 (τ )k(τ )dτ = 3 σ

4

Z

τ 2 k(τ )dτ.

Thus the kurtosis of the distribution of log-price changes is given by:
Kurt(∆ log(p)) =

3



τ 2 k(τ ) dτ
3 (V ar(τ ) + (E[τ ])2 )
2
=
3
(CV
(τ
))
+
1
. 
=
R
2
(E[τ ])2
τ k(τ )dτ
R

Proof. (of Proposition 3) Taking the first order condition with respect to τ in the right hand
side of the Bellman equation τ̂ = B1 [ln (v̄) − ln (v̂ − E[θ])] . Using this to eliminate τ from the
Bellman equation we obtain


v̄



1

v̂ = smallest solution of v̂ = v + B v v̄ v̂−E[θ] Bv
v̄




v

if E[θ] = 0
if 0 < E[θ] < v ,

(35)

if E[θ] ≥ v


 α1
which can be written as: x = s(x; θ̂, α) ≡ v/v̄ + α x − θ̂ , where x ≡ v̂/v̄ and α = Bv < 1
under our maintained assumptions. We are looking for a solution with v/v̄ ≤ x ≤ 1. Note
that for θ̂ = 0 then there is a unique solution v̂ = v̄ –to see this note that s(x; θ̂, α) is strictly
convex in x and that s′ (1, 0, α) = 1. For θ̂ > 0 there is also a solution of this equation with
44

x > 1, which does not correspond to a solution for the value function. For values of θ̂ where
there are two solutions, the smallest one is in the desired range. Since increases in θ̂ shift
horizontally the function s then the smallest solution decreases with θ̂. Since increases in α
shift the function s up, then the smallest solution increases with α. Finally, if θ̂ = v/v̄ the
smallest solution is v̂ = v. If θ̂ > v/v̄ then there is only one solution of x = s(x) which is not
the solution of the value function, and hence in this case τ̂ = +∞ and v̂ = v. 
Proof. (of Proposition 4) We first prove part (i). We start by arguing that with κ > 0, then
τ (θ) > 0 for all θ > 0. This follows because if τ (θ) = 0 with θ > 0 then the expected time
until there is a change is strictly positive, and at each time there is a strictly positive cost,
so the expected discounted cost diverges to +∞.
Next we derive the first order condition to the firm problem and show it is sufficient for
an optimum. For this, note that the derivative of the objective function in the Bellman
equation (24) with respect to τ is equal to e−(ρ+λ−a)τ [M(τ ) − N(τ, θ)] where these functions
are given by:

M(τ ) ≡ 1 − (ρ + λ − b)e B τ (E[v] − E[θ]) and

N(τ, θ) ≡ (ρ + λ − b + 1/κ)e(B−1/κ) τ [v (θ) − θ − (E[v] − E[θ])] .

(36)

First, we note several properties of M and N at θ > 0: (a) for (i) to hold, i.e. τ (θ) > 0 for
any θ > 0, it must be the case that M(0) − N(0, θ) > 0; (b) M(τ ) − N(τ, θ) is continuous in τ

and limτ →∞ M(τ ) −N(τ, θ) = −∞ for all θ < ∞. From (a) and (b) we obtain that there is at
least one finite solution to the first order condition, τ (θ) < ∞, for all θ < ∞. Next, we show
that there is a unique local maximum. Differentiating the first order condition with respect

to τ we have S(τ ) ≡ Mτ (τ ) − Nτ (τ, θ) = −B + κ−1 1 − (ρ + λ − b)eB τ (E[v] − E[θ]) . We
prove now that the objective function has at least one local maximum where the first order
condition holds. Let’s denote by τ1 the smallest local maximum. Notice that S(τ1 ) < 0 by
definition of a local maximum. If there would be another local maximum τ2 > τ1 , then there
must be a value of τm ∈ (τ1 , τ2 ) that is a local minimum requiring S(τm ) ≥ 0. But notice that
the function S(τ ) is strictly decreasing in τ which is a contradiction of S(τm ) ≥ 0 > S(τ1 )
as τm > τ1 . Finally, notice that as θ → ∞, then τ (θ) → ∞. This follows from equation (36)

given that θ → ∞ implies that N(τ, θ) → −∞ and the first order condition can be satisfied
only if τ → +∞ so that also M(τ ) diverges to −∞.
Next we use the first order condition to prove τ ′ (θ) > 0 if θ > 0 and limθ→∞ τ ′ (θ) = 0.

45

The implicit function theorem gives
∂τ
Nθ
=
>0,
∂θ
Mτ − Nτ
where Nθ = (ρ + λ − b + 1/κ)e(B−1/κ) τ (v ′ (θ) − 1) < 0 because v ′ (·) ≤ 0, and Mτ − Nτ < 0

because τ (θ) is a maximum. Finally, limθ→∞ τ ′ (θ) = 0 follows because Mτ − Nτ diverges to
−∞ while Nθ either converges to zero or diverges to −∞ but at a lower rate than Mτ − Nτ
as θ converges to zero.
Next, we prove part (iii). We argue that if 1/κ is low enough then limθ→0+ τ (θ) = 0.
We notice that if τ = 0 solves the first order condition to the firm problem at θ = 0 then
(E[v]−E[θ])
; substituting this expression for v(0) into
the firm value is given by v(0) = 1+1/κ
ρ+λ−b+1/κ
equation (36) we obtain that indeed τ (0) = 0 is an extreme point. We are left to show
that τ (0) = 0 is a maximum which requires the second derivative at τ = 0 to be negative,

S(0) = −B + κ−1 (1 − (ρ + λ − b) (E[v] − E[θ])) < 0. By using E[v] > 1/(ρ + λ − a), a
sufficient condition for the latter is −B + κ−1 [1 − (ρ + λ − b) (1/(ρ + λ − a) − E[θ])] < 0,

(ρ+λ−b) E[θ]
implying κ > κ̄ ≡ B+(ρ+λ−a)
. Finally, if limθ→0+ τ (θ) = 0 then limθ→0+ τ ′ (θ) = +∞
B (ρ+λ−a)
follows because Nθ (τ ; θ) = (ρ + λ − b + 1/κ)e(b−a−1/κ) τ (v ′ (θ) − 1) diverges as θ → 0+ because
−e−(ρ+λ−b+1/κ)τ (θ)
v ′ (θ) = 1−e
−(ρ+λ−b+1/κ)τ (θ) diverges while Mτ − Nτ converge to a finite negative value.

Finally, we prove part (ii). As above, if limθ→0+ τ (θ) = 0 then the firm value is given
−1 (E[v]−E[θ])
by limθ→0+ v(θ) = 1+κρ+λ−b+1/κ
. By monotonicity of the value function we must have

limθ→0+ v(θ) > E[v], which implies

1+κ−1 (E[v]−E[θ])
ρ+λ−b+1/κ

> E[v] and E[θ]/κ < 1 − (ρ + λ − b) E[v].

b−a
.
By using E[v] > v, we obtain that a necessary condition for τ (0) = 0 is that E[θ]/κ < ρ+λ−a
then limθ→0+ τ (θ) > 0. Notice that E[θ] < v guarantees
Therefore, if κ ≤ κ ≡ (ρ+λ−a)E[θ]
B

that κ̄ > κ. 

Proof. (of Proposition 5) We first prove part (i). Using the first order condition in equation (36) we have that limκ→∞ M(τ ; κ) − N(τ, θ; κ) = 1 − (ρ + λ − b) eB τ (limκ→∞ v(θ; κ) − θ).
Then solving the first order condition immediately implies that limκ→∞ τ (θ; κ) = τ̃ (θ) and
limκ→∞ v(θ; κ) = ṽ(θ) where the functions τ̃ (·) and ṽ(·) are given by equations (22)-(21).
We now prove part (ii). We first establish the following:
(θ;κ)
= limκ→0 ∂τ ∂θ
= 0.
Lemma 4. ∀θ > 0 if 0 < limκ→0 τ (θ; κ) then limκ→0 ∂v(θ;κ)
∂θ

We prove the first limit in this lemma using the envelope theorem and the assumed lower
= limκ→0 1/(1 − e(ρ+λ−b+1/κ) τ (θ;κ) ) = 0. To prove
bounds for the limit of τ : limκ→0 ∂v(θ;κ)
∂θ
the second limit in the lemma we take the limit of the first order condition for τ , namely

46

equation (36),
(ρ + λ − b + 1/κ)e(B−1/κ) τ (θ;κ)



∂v(θ;κ)
∂θ

−1



∂τ (θ; κ)
=
,
∂θ
−B + κ−1 (1 − (ρ + λ − b)eB τ (θ;κ) (E[v(θ; κ) − θ]))
The limit of the numerator is zero given the result we just proved on the derivative of the
value function. The limit of the denominator is infinite given that for each θ, κ we have
v < v(θ; κ) < v̄. This concludes the proof of the lemma.
We complete the proof of the proposition by adding a second lemma, which establishes
that the hypothesis of the lemma holds.
Lemma 5. We show that for each θ > 0 we have limκ→0 τ (θ; κ) > 0.
We prove this lemma by contradiction, supposing that limκ→0 τ (θ; κ) = 0. Define p(θ) =
limκ→0 e−τ (θ,κ)/κ . Taking the limit on both sides of equation (24) and rearranging terms gives
h

(1 − p(θ)) lim v(θ, κ) = −p(θ)θ + (1 − p(θ))E lim v(θ, κ) − θ
κ→0

κ→0

′

i

where we used Lebesgue dominated convergence exchanging the expected value and the limit.
The case in which p(θ) = 1 yields an immediate contradiction with θ > 0. Consider now the
complementary case in which p(θ) < 1 we get
h

′

′

i

lim v(θ; κ) = E lim v(θ ; κ) − θ −

κ→0

κ→0

p(θ)
θ.
1 − p(θ)

Since ∀κ we have that v(θ; κ) is decreasing in θ then it is easy to show that there exist a θ̄ > 0
p(θ)
θ arriving
such that for θ ∈ [0, θ̄) we have limκ→0 v(θ; κ) > E [limκ→0 v(θ′ ; κ) − θ′ ] − 1−p(θ)

to a contradiction. Hence we have shown that τ (θ; κ) > 0 for all θ ∈ [0, θ̄). Finally using
that for each κ the function τ (θ, κ) is strictly decreasing in κ for θ ≤ θ̄ < E[θ], we have that
limκ→0 τ (θ, κ) is weakly decreasing, and thus limκ→0 τ (θ, κ) > 0 for all θ > 0. This completes
the proof of the second lemma. 

Proof. (of Proposition 6) Using the
q results of Reis’s (2006) Proposition 4, we have
2θ
. Let θ̄ ≡ E[θ]. Assuming a constant strictly
that as E[θ] → 0, τ (θ) → τ̃ (θ) =
B
√
positive coefficient of variation ν > 0, so that V ar(θ) = ν θ̄2 , and using the square
root approximation, we have E[τ ] = E[τ (θ̄) + τ̃ ′ (θ̄)(θ − θ̄)] + o(θ̄) = τ̃ (θ̄) + o(θ̄) and

47

V ar(τ ) = τ̃ ′ (θ̄)

2

V ar(θ) + o (V ar(θ)) we obtain

1
V ar(τ )

=
2
(E[τ ])
2θ̄/(b − a) + o θ̄

1 V ar(θ)
=
+ o θ̄ .
2
4 (E[θ])



!2


 −1/2 1
o ν θ̄2
2θ̄

+ o θ̄
V ar(θ) +
b−a
b−a
2θ̄/(b − a) + o θ̄

Proof. (of Proposition 7) The derivative of the objective function in the Bellman equation (27) with respect to τ is equal to e−(ρ+λ−a)τ [M(τ ) − N(τ, ζ)] where these functions are
given by:
M(τ ) ≡ 1 − (ρ + λ − b)e B τ [E[v] − E[θ]] and

N(τ, ζ) ≡ (ρ + λ + γ − b)e(B−γ) τ [E[θ] − ζ] .

(37)

First, we note two properties of M and N: (a) if γ > 0, limτ →∞ M(τ ) − N(τ, ζ) = −∞
for any ζ; (b) N is strictly decreasing in ζ for all τ < ∞, while M does not vary with ζ.
We distinguish two cases. The first case is if M(0) − N(0, ζ) > 0 then (b) implies that

M(0) − N(0, ζ) > 0 for all ζ > ζ. The first order condition then implies that τ (ζ) > 0 for all
ζ and ζ ∗ = ζ. If instead, M(0) − N(0, ζ) ≤ 0, then ζ ∗ ≥ ζ with τ (ζ) = 0 and v(ζ) = E[v] − ζ

for all ζ < ζ ∗. For ζ ≥ ζ ∗, we have that M(0) − N(0, ζ) ≥ 0 which when combined with
(a) it implies that the solution to the firm problem is given by the solution to the first order
condition at a value 0 < τ (ζ) < ∞. Moreover, by differentiating the first order condition at
the interior maximum we obtain

Nζ
∂τ (ζ)
=
> 0,
∂ζ
Mτ − Nτ
where Nζ (τ ; ζ) = −(ρ + λ + γ − b)e−(γ−b+a) τ < 0, and Mτ − Nτ ≤ 0 by the definition of

a maximum. The second case is if M(0) − N(0, ζ) > 0. In this case, the optimal τ (ζ) is
always strictly bigger than zero. Differentiating the first order condition with respect to τ

we have S(τ ) ≡ Mτ (τ ) − Nτ (τ, ζ) = −B + γ 1 − (ρ + λ − b)eB τ [E[v] − E[θ]] . We prove
now that the objective function has at most one interior local maximum. Let’s denote by
τ1 the smallest local maximum. Notice that S(τ1 ) ≤ 0 by definition of a local maximum. If

there would be another local maximum τ2 > τ1 , then there must be a value of τm ∈ (τ1 , τ2 )
that is a local minimum requiring S(τm ) ≥ 0. But notice that the function S(τ ) is strictly

decreasing in τ which is a contradiction of S(τm ) ≥ 0 > S(τ1 ) as τm > τ1 .
To prove point that τ (ζ) is not bounded assume for a contradiction that τ (ζ) has an
48

upper bound. Then, provided that γ < ∞, there exists a ζ large enough for which the value

function is arbitrarily negative, and in particular smaller than v, implying that the upper
bound is not optimal. Once we have established that limζ→∞ τ (ζ) = ∞.
To prove point (ii) assume by contradiction that ζ ≥ 0 and τ (ζ) = 0 then: if ζ > 0,

v(ζ) = E[v] − ζ < E[v], which is a contradiction because v(ζ) ≥ E[v] as v(ζ) is decreasing in
ζ; if ζ = 0, then v(ζ) = E[v] which is only possible if v(ζ) is constant. But this is possible

only if τ (ζ) = ∞ for all ζ, which is contradiction given the arguments above. By definition
of ζ ∗, given that τ (ζ) > 0 it follows that ζ ∗ = ζ.
Finally notice that a stochastically higher distribution of cost Ĝ implies a weakly lower
value function v(ζ) for each ζ and hence a lower value of E[v]. For any interior optimum we
have
ME[v]
∂τ (ζ)
=−
< 0,
∂E[v]
Mτ − Nτ
since Mτ − Nτ < 0 and ME[v] < 0. 

Proof. of Proposition 8 We first prove the part (i) of the proposition in steps.
1. As γ → 0 in the first order condition in equation (37) we have that

lim M(τ ; γ) − N(τ, ζ; γ) = e−(ρ+λ−a)τ 1 − eB τ [ρ + λ − b] [E[v] − ζ] .

γ→0

(38)

Equation (28) is then obtained by setting the expression above equal to zero for a finite
positive value of τ . If this expression is negative at τ = 0, then we set τ = 0, while we
set τ = ∞ if it is strictly positive for all finite τ .
2. Using the optimal policy in equation (28) in the Bellman equation (27) the value function takes the following form

v(ζ) =



E[v] − ζ




v + B v v̄




v



E[v]−ζ
v̄

if ζ ≤ ζ ≤ E[v] − v̄

 ρ+λ−a
B

if E[v] − v̄ < ζ < E[v] ,

(39)

if ζ ≥ E[v]

Integrating both sides of equation (39) with respect to Ĝ we obtain




E[v] = v 1 − Ĝ (E[v] − v̄) + B v v̄
+ v̄

Z

ζ

E[v]−v̄



E[v] − x
v̄



Z

E[v]−v̄

dĜ (x) .

49

E[v]



E[v] − x
v̄

 ρ+λ−a
B

dĜ (x) +
(40)

3. If ζ ≥ 0 then τ̂ (ζ) > 0. Note that E[v] < v̄ since the right hand side is the value of the
case of not observation cost. Hence τ̂ (ζ) > 0, as we argued for the general case.

4. If ζ ≥ 0 equation (40) becomes
E[v] = v + B v v̄

Z

E[v]
ζ



E[v] − ζ
v̄

 ρ+λ−a
B

(41)

dĜ (ζ) .

The first and second derivatives of the rhs of the last equation w.r.t E[v] are
1>

[(ρ + λ) − b]
[(ρ + λ) − b]

ρ+λ−a
−1
B

ρ+λ−a
−1
B

Z

E[v]
ζ



(E[v] − ζ)

ρ+λ−a
−1
B

ρ+λ−a
B

Z

−1

dĜ(ζ) ≥ 0,

E[v]

ζ

(E[v] − ζ)

ρ+λ−a
B

−2

dĜ(ζ) ≥ 0.

Note that the first derivative is zero at E[v] = ζ. If E[v] < 1/(ρ + λ − b) the first
derivative is strictly increasing and strictly smaller than one. Hence there is at most
one solution for equation (41) with E[v] < 1/(ρ+λ−b). If there is a second intersection
where E[v] satisfies equation (41) it must be at a point where E[v] > 1/(ρ + λ − b) since
the slope must be larger than one. Given that the rhs of equation (41) is convex in E[v]
there are at most two intersection. Now we show that there is at least one intersection.
Consider the case where the distribution Ĝ is concentrated at ζ = 0. Then there is a
unique intersection at E[v] = v̄. Next, for any other Ĝ, fixing a given E[v], the rhs of
equation (41) is smaller than in the case of Ĝ concentrated. Hence, there is always an
intersection with slope smaller than one.
5. The solution of the foc is a maximum. Consider a case where E[v] − ζ < ζ < E[v] ,
then the second derivative of the right hand side of the Bellman equation, evaluated at
equation (28) gives:

e−(ρ+λ−a)τ (ζ) −(ρ + λ − a) + eBτ (ζ) [−(ρ + λ) + b]2 [E[v] − ζ] = e−(ρ+λ−a)τ (ζ) B < 0.

i
h
ρ+λ−a
is the expected value of a convex function of ζ for a
6. Since E max (E[v] − ζ, 0) B
fixed value of E[v], a mean preserving spread in Ĝ(·) increases its value. Hence a mean
preserving spread in the distribution of ζ increases the rhs of equation (41) for each
E[v], and thus increases the value of the intersection.


50

Proof. (of Proposition 9) Let θ̄ ≡ E(θ) and τ̄ = τ (θ̄). Integrating the value function in
equation (27) for the case of zero variance of observation cost gives


1 − e−(ρ+λ−a)τ̄ /(ρ + λ − a) − θ̄
v(θ̄) − θ̄ =
1 − e−(ρ+λ−b)τ̄
Combining the right hand side of this equation with equation (28) allows us to write v(θ̄)−θ̄ =
e−(b−a)τ̄
ρ+λ−b

which then gives

τ ′ (θ̄) =

ρ + λ − b (b−a)τ̄
ρ + λ − b √2θ̄ (b−a)
ρ + λ − b √2θ̄ η(η−1)σ2 /2
e
=
e
e
=
b−a
b−a
η(η − 1)σ 2 /2

(42)

where the last equality uses the square root formula derived above for the limit case of no
√
variance. Next, assume a constant strictly positive coefficient of variation ν > 0, so that
p
V ar(θ) = ν θ̄2 . When ν ≈ 0, τ (θ) is approximately given by 2θ/B so that (E(τ ))2 =
2

2θ̄/(b − a) + o θ̄ . Using equation (42), and V ar(τ ) = τ ′ (θ̄) V ar(θ) + o (V ar(θ)) we
obtain

2 
2
q

 1
V ar(θ)

1 + 2θ̄(b − a) + o θ̄ +
2θ̄(b − a) + o θ̄ + ...
2!
2θ̄/(b − a) + o θ̄

o ν θ̄2

+
2θ̄/(b − a) + o θ̄
2

p 

V ar(θ)
ρ+λ−b 

 + o θ̄
1
+
o
θ̄
=
(b − a)
o(θ̄ )
2θ̄/(b − a) 1 + 2θ̄/(b−a)
!
2


p


o
θ̄
V ar(θ) (b − a)θ̄
ρ+λ−b
1
+
o
θ̄
1
−
=
+
o
θ̄
(b − a)
2
θ̄2
θ̄
 3 

p  o θ̄ o θ̄ 2

θ̄
2
1 + o
 + o θ̄
θ̄ −
= (ρ + λ − b) ν
−
2(b − a)
θ̄
θ̄

V ar(τ )
=
(E(τ ))2



ρ+λ−b
b−a

= (ρ + λ − b)2 ν

which, using ν =

V ar(θ)
(θ̄)2


θ̄
+ o θ̄
2(b − a)

> 0, gives equation (29).

Proof. (of Proposition 10) The cumulative distribution function of observation cost is given
by Ĝ (ζ; E[v]) = 1 − K(τ (ζ; E[v])). By differentiating the last equation with respect to ζ, we

obtain

ĝ(ζ; E[v]) = −K ′ (τ (ζ; E[v]))
51

∂τ (ζ; E[v])
for all ζ > ζ .
∂ζ

(43)

Then by replacing the optimal policy and its derivative we obtain
ξ exp (−ξ τ (ζ))
B (E[v] − ζ)

ξ exp Bξ log ([ρ + λ − b] [E[v] − ζ])
=
B[Ev − ζ]
a0
aa10 [E[v] − ζ]a0
exp (log (a1 [E[v] − ζ]a0 ))
= a0
= a0 aa10 [E[v] − ζ]a0 −1
= a0
[E[v] − ζ]
[E[v] − ζ]

ĝ(ζ; E[v]) =

where a0 =

ξ
B

and a1 = ρ + λ − b.
E[v] = v + B v v̄

Z

E[v]



E[v]−v̄

E[v] − ζ
v̄

 ρ+λ−a
B

(44)

ĝ (ζ; E[v]) dζ .

Finally, by using equation (30) we obtain
ξ
E[v] = v + B v v̄
v̄ B
which gives
E[v] = v + B v v̄

Z

E[v]

E[v]−v̄



E[v] − ζ
v̄

 ρ+λ−a+ξ
−1
B

(45)

dζ ,

ξv
ξv
= v + (v̄ − v)
.
1+ξv
1+ξv

The distribution ζ is then a displaced Beta distribution, i.e. ζ = c + dz where z has a
standard beta distribution with shape parameters (ã, b̃) = 1, ξ/B. The displaced parameters
are c = E[v] − v̄ and d = v̄. Hence the coefficient of variation of ζ, denoted by cv(ζ), is:
cv(ζ) =

s

ξ/B
1
,
2 + ξ/B 1 − (1 + ξ/B)(v̄ − E[v])/v̄

and using the expression for E[v] we obtain v̄ − E[v] = (v̄ − v)/(1 + ξv), and then
cv(ζ) =

s

ξ/B
1
  ,

v̄−v
1+ξ/B
2 + ξ/B 1 −
1+ξv
v

which using that v = (1/B)(v̄ − v)/v̄ then becomes
cv(ζ) =

s

ξ/B
2 + ξ/B



1 + (ξ/B)(v̄ − v)/v̄
v/v̄


52



=

s

ξ/B
2 + ξ/B



1 + ξv
v/v̄



Obtaining the distribution H(t′ |t) from the firm policy

B

We can use the solution to the firm problem τ (·), and the properties of the process governing the signal ζ to derive the conditional right-CDF for the times to the next observation,
which in Section 2 was denoted by H(·|t). In particular, let ζ = ζ̂(t) denote the mapping
from an observation of length t to the associated signal ζ, where ζ̂(t) = τ −1 (t). Let also
R∞
J(ζ ′; s | ζ) ≡ θ (1 − G (ζ ′ | θ′ )) dF (θ′ ; s | ζ) denote the right-CDF of drawing the signal ζ ′
upon an observation taking place s periods after the last observation, where the firm drew
a signal equal to ζ. Consider the right-CDF for the planned time to the next observation,
t′ , conditional on the last planned observation time being equal to t, which we denote by
H(t′ |t). Such CDF solves:
′

−λ t

H (t | t) = e





′

J ζ̂(t ); t | ζ̂(t) +

Z

0

t



λ e−λ s J ζ̂(t′ ); s | ζ̂(t) ds for all t, t′ .

(46)

These equations trace the ways in which firms with last planned observation of length t
will plan a time to the next observation of length t′ . The current observation can occurr
either at the planned observation date (t periods after the last observation), or following a
substitution taking place any time s ∈ [0, t] since the last observation. The first term on the
right of equation (46) takes into account of the case in which no substitution has occurred,
which happens with probability e−λ t . The second term on the right of equation (46) takes
into account of the case in which a substitution has occurred at some time s ∈ [0, t], and

weights each of these event with the appropriate density λ e−λ s .
We next apply equation (46) to two cases of interest. First, consider the case of i.i.d.
observations of Section 5. In this case, the distribution J(ζ ′; s | ζ) becomes J(ζ ′; s | ζ) =
1 − Ĝ(ζ ′ ) for all s, ζ ′ and ζ. Substituting the latter into equation (46) we obtain H(t′ |t) ≡
Ĥ(t′ ) = 1 − Ĝ(ζ̂(t′ )).
Next, consider the case of Markov observation times in Section 4. In this case the distribution J(ζ ′; s | ζ) becomes J(ζ ′; s | ζ) = J(θ′ ; s | θ) = 1 − F (θ′ ; s|θ). Using the specification
for F in equation (23) in the latter, and substituting into equation (46) we obtain:

′

H(t |t) =


1 − F̂ (τ −1 (t′ ))

1 − F̂ (τ −1 (t′ ))

κ−1
κ−1 +λ
κ−1
κ−1 +λ




−(λ+κ−1 ) t

1−e

1 − e−(λ+κ

−1 ) t




−

λ
κ−1 +λ

−

κ−1
κ−1 +λ

e−(λ+κ

−1 ) t

if t′ > t

.
if t′ ≤ t
(47)

Finally, we can then use the results of Lemma 2 to obtain the cross-sectional right CDF
R∞
of planned observation times K(T ) = − 0 H(T |t) dK(t) for given CDF H, and from that
53

obtain the cross-sectional right CDF of times between consecutive observations including
substitutions, K̂(T ) ≡ e−λ T K(T ).

C

Calibration

We divide the parameters of the model in two categories. In the first category, we have
parameters determining the benefit of price observations, (ρ, λ, η, σ, φ, µ), which we set exante. In particular, the annual discount rate is set equal to ρ = 0.02. Consistently with
estimates in by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), the frequency of product substitutions is
assumed to be equal to λ = 0.25. We assume a steady state markup of one fourth implying
η = 5. Using Lemma 3, together with the frequency and variance of price changes estimated
by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) for the U.S. CPI, i.e. V ar(∆ log(p)) = 0.01 and R = 1.3,
we obtain that σ = 0.114. We assume that that marginal cost is a martingale, implying
µ − φ + σ 2 /2 = 0, so that prices change infrequently as it is well documented. We note in fact
that if there is a non-zero drift in the level of the nominal marginal cost, i.e. µ−φ+σ 2 /2 6= 0,
then the optimal price plan implies a continuous price change. On the other hand, if the
level of the nominal marginal cost is a martingale, i.e. µ − φ + σ 2 /2 = 0, then there is no
incentive to use price plans, i.e. the optimal price plan features a constant nominal price
between observations.
The second category of parameters refers to the modelling of the cost of the observations,
and in particular to the distributions F and G. We consider two specifications of F and G.
The first specification refers to the case of i.i.d. observations of Section 5. We assume that F
is given by equation (26) and that G (ζ ′ | θ) ≡ Ĝ(ζ ′) for all ζ ′ and θ, with F̂ = Ĝ; Ĝ is given
by a Gamma(α1 , α2 ) distribution where α1 controls the coefficient of variation of observation
cost and α2 its scale. The Gamma distribution is appealing as it encompasses many shapes
with only two parameters. We consider alternative parametrizations of γ and α1 . For each
combination of γ and α1 , we set α2 so that the average (yearly) frequency of observations
is R = 1.3. The second specification of F and G refers to the case of persistent Markov
observations of Section 4, where F is given by equation (23) and G (ζ | θ) = 1ζ≥θ for all θ′

and θ. Similarly to the case of i.i.d. observations, we parametrize the distribution F̂ by a
Gamma(α1 , α2 ) distribution. We consider alternative parametrizations of κ and α1 . For each
combination of κ and α1 , we set α2 so that the average (yearly) frequency of observations is
R = 1.3.

54

D

The real effects of a monetary shock

We describe how the distribution of times between consecutive observations relate to the
real effects of monetary shocks. We assume that at time t = 0 there is an unanticipated
permanent increase in the level of the money supply by δ log points. We use the result
that, for small shocks δ and small average duration of observations, the general equilibrium
feedback effect on firms’ decision rule is negligible, so that ignoring the effect of the shock
on the distribution of times between observations, H(t|t), gives a good approximation of the
firm’s behavior during the convergence to the steady state.28
We study the effect of an aggregate monetary shock of size δ on the deviations of the
aggregate price level P (t) at t ≥ 0 from the initial level P (0), denoted by P(δ, t) = P (t)/P (0),
and on the deviations of the aggregate output ct at t ≥ 0 from the initial level c0 , denoted by
C(δ, t) = ct /c0 . Consider the general equilibrium model described in the appendix of Alvarez
and Lippi (2014), where equilibrium conditions in the money market (i.e. ctǫ = Mt /Pt ) imply
that the equilibrium dynamics of output is given by: log(C(δ, t)) = (1/ǫ) (δ+µ t−log(P(δ, t))).
Let P(δ, t; r ≥ t) and P(δ, t; r < t) be the average price conditional on the subset of firms

that made the last observation, respectively, more and less than r periods ago, divided by
P (0). It follows from the definition of P(δ, t) and Q(t) that P(δ, t) = Q(t) P(δ, t; r ≥ t) +

(1 − Q(t)) P(δ, t; r < t). The last expression implies log(P(δ, t)) = µ t + (1 − Q(t)) δ + o(δ). It
immediately follows that output impulse response t periods after the shock is proportional to
the fraction of firms that are still unaware of the monetary shock, i.e. log(C(δ, t)) ≈ (δ/ǫ) Q(t).

We introduce a measure of the real effects of the monetary shocks, defined by the area
under the impulse response of output for a monetary shock of size δ, i.e.
Z

∞

t0

1
log(C(δ, t))dt =
ǫ

Z

∞
t0

δ
log(Mt /Pt )dt ≈
ǫ

28

Z

∞
0

Q(t) dt ≡

δ
M.
ǫ

(48)

In Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello (2012) we solve numerically various general equilibrium versions of this
model (including menu costs or observation costs or both) and verify the quality of the approximation when
the feedback effect is ignored.

55

