NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLES OF COGNITIVE AND NON-COGNITIVE SKILLS IN MODERATING
THE EFFECTS OF MIXED-ABILITY SCHOOLS ON LONG-TERM HEALTH
Anirban Basu
Andrew M. Jones
Pedro Rosa Dias
Working Paper 20811
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20811

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

Jones and Rosa Dias acknowledge funding from the Economic and Social Research Council under
grant reference RES-060-0045. Basu acknowledges support from NIH research grants RC4CA155809
and R01CA155329. We are grateful for comments on earlier versions of this work from seminar participants
at the University of Bergen, University of Chicago, University of Gothenburg, University of Lugano,
University of Venice Ca’ Foscari, University of Vienna and the 9th World Congress of the International
Health Economics Association in Dublin. Opinions expressed are the authors’ alone and do not reflect
those of the University of Washington, NBER, University of York, University of Bergen and Monash
University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Anirban Basu, Andrew M. Jones, and Pedro Rosa Dias. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Roles of Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills in Moderating the Effects of Mixed-Ability
Schools on Long-Term Health
Anirban Basu, Andrew M. Jones, and Pedro Rosa Dias
NBER Working Paper No. 20811
December 2014
JEL No. C21,C26,I12,I28
ABSTRACT
We examine heterogeneity in the impacts of exposure to mixed-ability ‘comprehensive’ schools in
adolescence on long-term health and smoking behaviour. We explore the roles that cognitive and non-cognitive
skills may play in moderating these impacts. We use data from the 1958 National Child Development
Study (NCDS) cohort, whose secondary schooling years lay within the transition years of a major
reform that transformed secondary education in England and Wales from a selective system of schooling
to mixed-ability comprehensive schools. We adopt a local instrumental variables approach to estimate
person-centred treatment (PeT) effects of comprehensive over selective schooling system. Our results
indicate that the newer comprehensive schooling system produced significant negative effects on long-term
health and increased smoking behavior among a small fraction of individuals, for whom the effects
were persistent over time. The ATE and TT were quantitatively similar and statistically insignificant
indicating that cognitive abilities, the major driver for selection in to comprehensive schools, did not
moderate the effects. The PeT effects indicate that individuals with lower non-cognitive skills were
most likely to be negatively affected by exposure to mixed-ability schools. Our results also show that
cigarette smoking could be a leading transmission channel of the long-term impact on health outcomes.

Anirban Basu
Departments of Health Services,
Pharmacy and Economics
University of Washington
1959 NE Pacific St
Box - 357660
Seattle WA 98195
and NBER
basua@uw.edu

Pedro Rosa Dias
Department of Economics
University of Sussex
Sussex House, Falmer
Brighton, BN1 9RH, UK
P.Rosa-Dias@sussex.ac.uk

Andrew M. Jones
Department of Economics
University of York, University of Bergen and Monas
Heslington, York,
YO10 5DD, UK
andrew.jones@york.ac.uk

1. INTRODUCTION
The recent literature on human capability formation (Cunha and Heckman, 2007, 2008,
2010; Conti et al., 2010, 2011 and Heckman et al. 2014) has amassed compelling evidence
indicating that health behaviors and outcomes, as well as educational choices, are
simultaneously determined from a very early age by a complex network of factors that
include cognitive skills, socio-emotional development and initial health endowments.
Although the positive association between education and health has long been
established, it is vital for the guidance of economic policy to disentangle the causal
impact of education on health from the effect of selection into distinct educational paths.

The applied literature has examined the health returns of two distinct dimensions of
education: the length of schooling, and the type and quality of that schooling.
Concerning the health returns to length of schooling, different identification strategies
have allowed researchers to establish the existence of positive long-term mean effects of
the attendance of further schooling, in particular years of extended compulsory
education, on longevity and a wide range of health-related behaviors and outcomes: see,
for example Currie and Moretti (2003), Lleras-Muney (2005), Kenkel et al. (2006),
Oreopoulous (2006), Grimard and Parent (2007), Silles (2009), and Van Kippersluis et al.
(2011). More recently, this body of evidence has been extended in several important
directions.

Conti et al. (2010, 2011) use data from a large British cohort study to estimate factor
models with unobserved components to go beyond mean effects and recover the full
distribution of treatment effects for attendance at post-compulsory education. Their
results show that the average marginal effect of post-compulsory education is typically
higher than its estimated average treatment effect. The results indicate that the estimated

3

mean effects hide considerable heterogeneity in responses: for example, the effectiveness
of post-compulsory schooling in improving long-term health outcomes is highest for
males with low levels of social development and high levels of cognitive ability.

Heckman et al. (2014) extend this evidence further. They use data from the 1979
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to estimate a sequential discrete choice model
with multiple schooling choices, covering the full range of participation decisions
regarding schooling levels from high school attendance to the completion of a higher
education degree. This model is identified using a set of instrumental variables, thereby
allowing the estimation of policy-relevant treatment effects at different margins of the
length of schooling. As in Conti et al. (2010, 2011), their results do not indicate that there
was selection on gains but that education has beneficial effects on health and cigarette
smoking, although the size of this effect varies considerably between different levels of
schooling. Finally, within each level of schooling, the effect of education depends on
individual characteristics, in particular on levels of ability. On average, high ability
individuals benefit more, in terms of their physical health, from the completion of
college degree than low ability ones. Interestingly, the converse happens in the case of
the effect of college completion on important dimensions of mental health, such as selfesteem: low ability individuals are the only ones to benefit significantly from college
graduation in terms of self-esteem.

The literature on the effect of quality of schooling on health is more recent and much
sparser despite addressing a topical policy issue: are long-term health returns obtained by
simply extending years of education or the quality of that schooling also important?
Johnson (2010) and Jones et al. (2011) show that attending different types of schools can
have long-term effects on health and lifestyle, over and above the influence of years of

4

schooling and academic qualifications attained. It should be noted that quality of
schooling is defined in a broad sense, encompassing qualitative differences in schools’
curricula, endowments of human and material resources, along with differences in the
mix of pupils that may be associated with reference group and peer group effects.

This strand of research has looked mostly at mean effects of quality of schooling. We
advance this literature by going beyond average impacts and by exploiting data from a
policy intervention aimed at transforming the quality, rather than the length, of
secondary education. We examine the role of heterogeneity in the health effect of quality
of schooling, as well as to identify gainers and losers from the changes induced by the
reform. In our work, quality of schooling is determined by the environment in which
students get education. Specifically, we look at the impact of exposure to mixed ability
schools in adolescence. We compare two alternative systems of schooling: one in which
children took a test to determine whether they went to a more academic grammar school
or a more vocational secondary modern school, and the other in which the test was
abolished and all students, with varying abilities, attended comprehensive schools.

We use data from the National Child Development Study (NCDS). The NCDS follows a
cohort of around 17,000 individuals from their birth in the week of 3rd March 1958. The
NCDS cohort-members went through secondary schooling during the 1970s and
attended different types of school since their secondary schooling lay within the
transition period of the comprehensive education reform that was implemented in
England and Wales from the mid-1960s1. This reform restructured secondary education
by replacing the former system of early tracking of students with a non-selective,
Comprehensive schooling was introduced in Scotland much earlier than in England and Wales,
preventing the use of the Scottish sub-sample as an adequate comparison group for types of school and
educational qualifications.
1

5

comprehensive, educational system. Comprehensive schooling was not implemented
simultaneously across the country, hence only some cohort members attended the
selective system of state-funded education, which comprised grammar schools,
secondary modern schools and a small number of technical schools. Among members of
the NCDS cohort, 12 per cent attended grammar schools at age 16, 25 per cent attended
secondary moderns and 57 per cent attended comprehensive schools. An additional 6
per cent attended private fee-paying schools, independent of the state educational system
and reforms2.

These reforms have been evaluated in terms of their direct effect on educational
attainment and subsequent impact on labour market outcomes (Kerkchoff et al., 1996;
Jesson, 2000; Dearden et al., 2002; Galindo-Rueda and Vignoles, 2005). More recently,
Pischke and Manning (2006) and Bonhomme and Sauder (2011) have raised concerns
about the results from earlier evaluations by providing evidence that suggests that these
did not account adequately for the effect of unobserved heterogeneity in the pupil
composition of the two educational systems, as possibility parental selection into, or out
of, the selective educational system. We draw on this literature and adopt a local
instrumental variables approach to deal with the issue of potential endogeneity and
recover the full distribution of the effect of quality of schooling on health and health
related behaviors (Basu, 2014).

Our results indicate that there is substantial heterogeneity in the effects and significant
persistence of these effects over time at the individual level. The newer comprehensive
schooling system produced significant negative effects on long-term health and increased
smoking among a fraction of individuals. However, the ATE and TT were quantitatively
2

This subsample is thus not used in our analysis.

6

similar and statistically insignificant indicating that cognitive abilities, which was the
major driver for selection in to comprehensive schools, did not moderate the effects.
Analysing the PeT effects shows that individuals who had lower non-cognitive skills are
most likely to be negatively affected in the long-run from exposure to mixed-ability
schools. Our results also show that cigarette smoking could be an important transmission
channel of the long-term impact on health outcomes.

2. THE COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATION REFORM
As Kerckhoff et al. (1996: 1-2) describe it, following the Second World War, a cycle of
educational reforms was initiated in Western Europe. This was characterised by a strong
conviction in the importance of educational expansion, and mounting dissatisfaction
with the stratified systems of schooling that most countries had inherited. Countries such
as Norway and Sweden, followed by France and Scotland, spearheaded a move away
from older stratified systems and towards unified, fully inclusive, systems of
comprehensive schooling. From the mid-1960s the comprehensive reorganisation tookoff in England and Wales, and aimed at promoting equal opportunity in society through
an improvement of the quality of the schooling accessible to children from
disadvantaged backgrounds. It replaced the selective educational system with a nonselective, comprehensive system of secondary schooling. This policy reform was
implemented at different speeds at the local level: some local education authorities
(LEAs) implemented it quickly, but others resisted the change. This gradual and uneven
transition allowed the two systems to co-exist for a long period of time. The NCDS
cohort entered state secondary schools at age 11 in 1969 and completed their
compulsory schooling at age 16 in 1974; at that point 40 per cent of the cohort members
still experienced the selective system, while the remaining 60 per cent attended
comprehensive schools.

7

Grammar schools were academically oriented state schools that provided teaching for
the entire age range 11-18, and prepared pupils to go on to higher education. Admission
into these schools was determined by an exam taken at age 11 (the ‘Eleven Plus’) 3. Pupils
whose examination score did not permit entry into a grammar school attended either
secondary modern schools, which were less academically oriented and covered the ages
11-16 or, in a small minority of cases, vocational schools aimed at providing training and
technical apprenticeships4. Grammar and secondary modern schools were significantly
different in terms of their curricula, examinations and academic environment. They were
also very different regarding other qualitative aspects. Among the schools attended at age
16 by the NCDS cohort members used in our analysis, 69 per cent of grammar schools
were single sex, while only 13 per cent of comprehensive schools were single sex.
Streaming of classes by academic ability was common in secondary modern schools (42
per cent) and comprehensive schools (39 per cent) but rare among grammar schools (17
per cent). Some comprehensive schools were former secondary moderns (26 per cent) or
grammar schools (19 per cent), with the rest being newly created. Furthermore, the
distribution of indicators of quality of the school, such as the pupil-teacher ratio and of
the average number of expelled students, also differs across types of schools.

The issue of the relative advantages of early tracking versus late tracking of students in
secondary schools remains a topical education policy issue5. The comprehensive reform
continues to receive considerable attention in the social sciences. In the economic
As part of the comprehensive reform, the Eleven Plus was abolished as a national examination in
England and Wales by the 1976 Education Act. Despite this, the selective system and the existence of
grammar schools has persisted in certain areas, such as Kent.
4 In a few cases, pupils whose CSE grades were sufficient transferred to grammar schools or sixth form
colleges to complete their A-levels.
5 For example, the OECD evaluation of the results of the Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA) - OECD (2005) - devotes great attention to comparing the relative performance of
national education systems with different degrees of selectivity.
3

8

literature, Galindo-Rueda and Vignoles (2004) use the NCDS data to investigate the
effects of the reform on educational outcomes. Since type of school attended by each
cohort member may influenced by third factors, hence endogenous, they propose an
instrumental variables identification strategy, relying on two main instruments: the share
of comprehensive schools in a cohort-member’s LEA and Conservative Party control of
the cohort member’s LEA (which the authors claim to be negatively correlated with the
probability of attending a comprehensive school, but orthogonal to the educational
outcomes). Pischke and Manning (2006) revisit this issue and question the main results
of earlier work. They find that comprehensive areas were poorer and populated by
children with lower ability than selective areas. Thus, the policy impacts on pupils’
examinations scores, reported in the literature, are likely be influenced by observed and
unobserved heterogeneity and, possibly, affected by selection bias. In addition, they also
find that Conservative areas tended to be significantly richer and better educated than
Labour ones, hence the validity of Conservative control of individuals’ constituency as an
instrument for the educational system attended is open to question. These concerns, with
unobserved heterogeneity and selection, have been reinforced by Bonhomme and Sauder
(2011). They model test scores as the output of a production function and use this model
to generalise the difference-in-differences approach to identify the distribution of
potential outcomes. Their results suggest that unobserved heterogeneity, which
incorporates pupils’ initial endowment of cognitive skills, is likely to be a key factor
determining the differences in examination scores between pupils exposed to the
selective and to the comprehensive system of education.

We draw on these concerns and examine more closely the plausibility of the different
instrumental variable strategies proposed in earlier literature as a basis for our own

9

identification strategy. In doing so we allow for heterogeneity in the treatment effects
and estimate the full distribution of these effects.

3. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
As shown by Conti et al. (2010, 2011), individual responses to different types of
education are likely to be heterogeneous. In addition, in our case, it is possible that
selection into comprehensive or selective schooling reflects these heterogeneous effects.
Pischke and Manning (2006) allude to the possibility that the results from earlier
literature on the comprehensive education reform are systematically biased due to the
presence of essential heterogeneity.

To address these issues, we define a model of potential outcomes and treatment choice
using the Neyman-Fisher-Cox-Rubin framework of potential outcomes. Consder two
treatment regimes – comprehensive schools (treated) state denoted by D = 1 and selective schools
(untreated) denoted by D = 0. The corresponding potential individual outcomes in these
two states are denoted by Y1 and Y0. We assume:

(1)

Y1  1( XO , XU ,  ) and Y0  0 ( XO , XU ,  ) ,

where X0 is a vector of observed random variables, XU is a vector of unobserved random
variables which are also believed to influence treatment selection (they are the
unobserved confounders) and  is an unobserved random variable that capture all
remaining unobserved random variables. ( XO , XU )  and XO

XU where

denotes

statistical independence.

10

Selection into treatment (prior to the realization of the outcome of interest) is
determined by:

D = 1 if D ( X 0 , Z ) UD  0 ,

(2)

where Z is a (non-degenerate) vector of observed random variables (instruments)
influencing the decision equation but not the potential outcome equations, D is an
unknown function of X0 and Z, and UD is a random variable that is correlated with XU
and all remaining unobserved random variables influencing choice. By definition,

UD

 , which also defines the distinction between XU and  in (1). Equations (1) and

(2) represent the nonparametric models that conform to the Imbens and Angrist’s (1994)
independence and monotonicity assumptions needed to interpret instrumental variable
estimates in a model of heterogeneous returns. As in Heckman and Vytlacil (1999) we
can rewrite (2) as:

(3) D = 1

if P( X 0  x 0 , Z  z ) V

where V = FUD UD |XO  xO , Z  z  , P(x0,z) = FUD|XO ,Z  D ( xO , z ) and F represents a
cumulative distribution function. Therefore, for any arbitrary distribution of UD
conditional on XO and Z, by definition, V ~ Unif[0, 1] conditional on XO and Z. Under
regular IV assumptions, Heckman and Vytlacil (1999) show that Marginal Treatment
Effects can be identified by:

(4)

E (Y |XO  x 0 , Z  z )
 E ((Y1 Y0 )|XO ,V  v )  MTE( xO ,v ) ,
p

11

where Y = DY1 + (1 - D)Y0 is the observed outcomes and v = P(xO, z).

Basu (2014) extends the LIV methods to identify PeT effects, which, for persons who
choose treatment, are defined by:

(5) EXu|XO ,P ( Z ),D E (Y1 Y0 |xO , P( z ), D  1)  E(Y1 Y0 |xO ,V  P( z ))
= P( z )1 0

P( z )

MTE( xO ,v ) dv .

Similarly, conditional effect for a person who did not choose treatment is obtained by
integrating MTEs over values of V greater than p.

Conceptually, a PeT effect is a weighted version of MTEs. For any given individual, the
PeT effect identifies the specific margins where that individual may belong given its
individual values of XO, P(Z) and D. It then averages the MTEs over those margins, but
not all as in CATE. Therefore, a PeT effect is basically the X-Z-conditional Effect on
the Treated for persons undergoing treatment and is the X-Z-conditional Effect on the
Untreated for persons not undergoing treatment. Further details can be found in Basu
(2014).

3.1 Identification
Endogeneity, induced by unobserved factors influencing both the type of schooling
experienced and the potential outcomes of interest, has been at the heart of the literature
on comprehensive schooling since its inception. Galindo-Rueda and Vignoles (2005)
suggest the existence of unobserved individual heterogeneity and of selection into types

12

of schooling based on unobserved gains (essential heterogeneity). For example, areas
subject to selective schooling may retain of a higher proportion of more able students if
their parents perceive that they would be likely lose from going to a mixed school as the
result of the reform. Galindo-Rueda and Vignoles (2005) propose instrumenting the type
of schooling experienced using the political affiliation of the child’s electoral constituency
(an area that is geographically smaller than the unit of implementation of the reform, the
Local Education Authority (LEA)). The rationale for this is grounded on the gradual and
decentralised implementation of the reform: while Labour areas tended to shift swiftly
towards comprehensive schooling, areas under the control of the Conservative Party
tended to resist and delay the implementation of the reform.

As mentioned above, Pischke and Manning (2006) question the validity of the political
affiliation as an instrument. They estimate the effect of attending the comprehensive
schooling system on test scores administered at age 11 (i.e. before the policy reform) as a
falsification test. They find large and statistically significant effects, thereby disputing the
validity of the political affiliation instrument. The NCDS includes another variable that
has also been used in earlier literature as an instrument to evaluate the reform: the
percentage of comprehensive schools in each individual’s Local Education Authority in
1974. Nonetheless, the transition into either the selective or the comprehensive systems
of schooling takes place in 1969, when cohort members were 11 years of age, rather than
in 1974. In order to use an instrument that adequately reflects the context of this
schooling transition we compiled data on the density of comprehensive schools by LEA,
published in the 1969 Statistics of Education for England and Wales (Department of
Education and Science, 1971). To assess the validity of this instrument we adapt the
falsification test proposed by Pischke and Manning (2006) to the analysis of health
outcomes and estimate the impact of comprehensive schooling on probability of cohort-

13

members suffering from at least four childhood morbidities at age 11 using the 1969
percentage of comprehensive schools in the LEA as an instrument.

3.2 Estimation
In order to estimate the impact of the comprehensive school system and the individual
heterogeneity in these effects, we use local instrumental variable methods (LIV) to
compute person-centered treatment (PeT) effects (Heckman and Vytlacil 1999; Basu
2014).

To estimate PeT effects, we follow the following algorithm (Basu, 2014):
1.

Run the first stage by regressing the indicator for comprehensive system (D) against
observed factors (XO) and the instrument (Z) using a probit model and predict the
propensity score, pˆ ( xO , z ) , for every individual.

2. Ensure that pˆ ( xO , z )

has mass at every value (rounded to 0.01) under both

comprehensive and selective school systems, dropping any observations that do not.
3. Denote minp = min{ pˆ ( xO , z ) } and maxp = max{ pˆ ( xO , z ) }
4. Run the second stage LIV estimand for each binary outcome Y using a probit model
with the following specification (determined by a series of goodness of fit tests): Y =
(0  1  X O   2  pˆ  3  pˆ  X O   4  pˆ 2 ) , where Φ is the cumulative normal

distribution function.
5. Numerical integration: For each individual i:
a. Draw 1000 replications of u~Uniform[minp, maxp]

14

b. Compute d ̂(.)/ dpˆ and evaluated it by replacing pˆ ( xO , z ) with each value of u.
So there are 1000 values of d ̂(.)/ dpˆ for each individual i.
c. Compute D* = 1( pˆ ( xO , z ))  1(1  u ) also generating 1000 values for each
individual i.
d. Compute the PeT by averaging d ̂(.)/ dpˆ over values of u for which (D* > 0)
if D=1, otherwise, by averaging d ̂(.)/ dpˆ over values of u for which (D* ≤ 0)
if D=0.
6. Estimated PeT effects provide individualized effects of treatment effects. Mean
treatment effect parameters are computed: averaging PeTs over all observation gave
ATE, averaging PeTs over over D=1 or D=0 gives the TT and TUT respectively.

We estimate the PeT effects of experiencing comprehensive schooling compared to the
selective schooling system on health outcomes (indicators for self-reported excellent
health, malaise and long standing illness) and cigarette smoking (indicator for current
smoking) at ages 23, 33 and 42 years separately. We use the estimated PeT effects to
study the following:
1. Differential drop-out: We compared whether there are systematic differences in
the distribution of PeT effects at age 23 between those who would continue to
participate at age 33 versus those who would drop out before age 33. Similarly, we
looked at PeT effects at age 33 based on drop-out behaviors by age 42.
2. Time dependence of effects: We explored the dependence of PeT effects at age 42
to those of the same individuals at age 23 in order to study the time dependence of
effects.
4.

Effects on multi-dimensional outcomes: We compared the dependence amongst
the PeT effects of malaise versus long standing illness for the same individuals in
15

order to study the multi-dimensional effects of alternative schooling systems. We also
repeated similar analysis between the effects on smoking at age 33 years and malaise
at age 42 years in order to establish a potential channel through which alternative
schooling systems may effect outcomes.
5. Heterogeneity: We studied how the average effects on outcomes among those who
did not attend comprehensive schooling systems differed between those who
attended secondary modern schools versus grammar schools. This comparison helps
to illustrate if exposure to comprehensive schools would have had differential effects
on students who went to the different types of schools within the selective system.
6. Finally, we develop a prediction algorithm based on individual factors that predict
significant PeT effects on malaise and long-standing illness at age 42.

4. DATA
Members of the National Child Development Study (NCDS) cohort are followed from
birth, in the week of 3rd March 1958. In the early waves of the Study information was
obtained from parents, medical examinations, tests of ability and from the child’s school;
extensive data are thus available on the cohort-members’ childhood health, parental
background, and educational achievement. The subsequent waves include self-reported
information on social status in adulthood, health-related behavior and a wide range of
health outcomes.

Our empirical strategy aims at identifying the impact of educational attainment and of
the characteristics of secondary schooling experienced by members of the 1958 cohort
on adult health and health-related behaviors after controlling for a broad set of pre-

16

treatment factors6. These include measures of family socioeconomic status and the local
environment during early childhood; measures of childhood health and use of health care
and health within the family; and measures of cognitive and non-cognitive skills and
social adjustment of the child. Because the comprehensive reform was a secondary
education policy, we also condition on characteristics of the individual’s primary
education, which, in our case, constitute pre-treatment factors. The specific variables
used are described below and listed in Table A.1 in the Appendix.

4.1 Pre-treatment factors
Childhood health, genetic endowments and family background
The NCDS includes extensive information on the childhood characteristics that were
shown to be key predictors of health and lifestyle in adulthood in studies such as Case et
al. (2005) and Currie and Stabile (2004). Following Power and Peckham (1987), we create
morbidity indices by aggregating twelve categories of health conditions, that affect the
child at ages 7 and 11. We complement this with indicator variables for the occurrence of
diabetes, epilepsy and other chronic conditions among parents and siblings, in order to
account for hereditary conditions in the cohort member’s family. Following Carneiro et
al. (2007), parental socioeconomic background is proxied by the occupational social class
and the years of schooling of cohort members’ father. Following Case et al. (2005) and
Lindeboom et al. (2009), we augment this characterisation using data on the incidence of
household financial difficulties during the cohort member’s childhood and adolescence.

Local area characteristics
Rich information about the cohort members’ immediate milieu is available and
aggregated at different geographic levels, allowing a detailed demographic and
As noted by Dearden et al. (2002), these reflect early life circumstances, occur prior to secondary
schooling, and are not influenced by subsequent educational choices.
6

17

socioeconomic characterisation of each individual’s local area: electoral constituency
level, local education authority level and census enumeration district level (the smallest
unit for which census statistics were then available, with an average population of about
500)7. Available variables include the percentage of the local population who are
unemployed or long-term sick, working women, employed in particular sectors
(manufacturing and agricultural), who are in different occupational groups
(professional/managerial, other non-manual, skilled manual, semi-skilled, unskilled),
owner occupiers, council tenants, non-whites, and immigrants (see Dearden et al., 2002;
Galindo-Rueda and Vignoles, 2004; Pischke and Manning, 2006).

Cognitive ability and socio-emotional development
Cognitive skills, socio-emotional development and personality traits have received
growing attention in the literature on human capability formation. In particular, these
factors were shown to be key determinants of health and health-related behaviors in
recent papers such as Carneiro et al., (2007), Keastner (2009) Conti et al. (2010, 2011).
The NCDS provides measures of early cognitive ability and social development collected
before respondents began their secondary schooling. Scores of ability tests taken at age 7
and 11 are available on a series of cognitive dimensions: mathematics, reading, copying
designs and general ability. These test scores are highly correlated at the individual level
leading to multicollinearity. To avoid this, we follow Galindo-Rueda and Vignoles (2005)
and use principal components analysis to construct a single measure of cognitive ability
using the first principal component8.

These small area data are available for the years 1971 and 1981 under a special licence, which imposes
restrictions on the handling and usage of the data.

7

At age 11, the first principal component accounts for 85 per cent of the joint variation and, strikingly, the
weights attached to the three dimensions – 0.583, 0.567 and 0.582 – are virtually identical.

8

18

Serendipitously, the three dimensions of cognitive ability used to construct our index –
mathematics, reading and general ability – along with the fact that the index derived from
the first principal component gives equal weight to each dimension, mirrors the three
elements of the Eleven Plus examination. Cognitive ability score at age 11 can thus be
interpreted as a proxy for performance in the Eleven Plus for those who took the
examination.

We draw on Carneiro et al. (2007) and use the score for the Bristol Social Adjustment
Guide (BSAG) as our measure of early social development. This is a measure of
problems with social adjustment at age 11: teachers were asked to report whether the
child had problems in twelve behavioral domains such as hostility towards children and
adults, anxiety, withdrawal, ‘writing off’ adults, unforthcomingness, depression,
restlessness, acceptance by adults, inconsequential behavior, and other psychological and
nervous symptoms (Stott, 1987). One point is attributed to each positive answer; points
are then summed to obtain the BSAG social maladjustment score.

4.2 Educational attainment and quality of schooling
Detailed information on the cohort-members’ educational attainment is available in the
NCDS. In order to exploit this wealth of data we build a measure of attainment in
secondary education with thirteen categories, ordered according to the grades obtained
and number of passes9. In our empirical analysis we use a simple 0-12 scaling of this
variable as a parsimonious measure of educational attainment, although we have also
used models with dummy variables for each category to check the robustness of the
results.

This is variable ‘E386’ in the NCDS data dictionary; this information was collected in the 1978 Survey of
Public Exams, based on a questionnaire sent to the school attended by NCDS respondents at wave 3.

9

19

Quality of schooling is captured by two sets of variables. First, as described in Section 1,
the NCDS cohort-members attended different types of schools; this is captured by
indicators of the school attended at age 16: secondary modern, grammar, and
comprehensive. Second, we use information on characteristics of the school, which have
been widely used as standard proxies of quality of schooling in applied work on
education and labour (see, for example, Dearden et al., 2002). These include the
teacher/pupil ratio, the ratio of expelled pupils to the total number, and indicators of
whether the school was single sex and whether classes were streamed by ability.

Finally, we control for information about the individuals’ primary schooling and parental
aspirations for their child. This includes the number of children in the child’s primary
school class at age 7 in 1965, whether parents reported that their child was unhappy at
school in 1965, and an indicator for whether parents wished their child to continue
beyond the minimum school leaving age.

4.3 Outcomes: health and health-related behaviors
Information on the particular medical condition associated with the long-standing illness
is available and classified according to the International Classification of Diseases (ICD10). The most prevalent conditions are illnesses of the musculoskeletal system (25.7 per
cent), circulatory system (11.8 per cent), respiratory system (11.4 per cent) and metabolic
problems (9.5 per cent), of which 70 per cent suffer from diabetes.

We also take into account mental illness in adulthood. Respondents answer to a series of
questions from the Cornell Medical Index Questionnaire, each targeting a particular
mental ailment. The number of positive answers given is then used as a malaise score
along the lines of Carneiro et al. (2007). The malaise score is a measure of psychiatric

20

morbidity (with a special focus on depression), developed at the Institute of Psychiatry
from the Cornell Medical Index (Rutter et al., 1970). The NCDS team suggest the use of
a severity scale: individuals are considered normal if they score between 0 and 7 points
and depressed if they score between 8 and 24 points (Rodgers et al., 1999). In our
analysis we use this scale to define an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if
individuals are depressed (malaise score above 7) and zero otherwise.

The NCDS also documents some of important health-related behaviors. The Study
includes self-reported information on the number of cigarettes smoked per day. These
data are only available once respondents are aged 23 and above.

5. RESULTS
5.1 Sample selection, missing values and attrition
Table 1 shows our sample selection and the number of observations lost due to various
exclusion criteria. Some NCDS cohort members are excluded from our estimation
sample because they attended private schools, which are independent from state
education and schooling reforms.
-

Insert Table 1 here -

More significantly, a large number of observations is lost due to item non-response to
parts of the questionnaire that are essential for our analysis or because at some stage they
have attrited out of the NCDS. This is the most important cause of sample size
reduction in the economics literature that uses the NCDS. This is acknowledged in
several papers that feature sample sizes comparable to ours (Dearden et al., 2002;
Galindo-Rueda and Vignoles, 2004, 2005; Pischke and Manning, 2006, Lindeboom et al.,
2009; Jones et al., 2011). The degree, and repercussions, of non-random attrition has
been extensively examined in this earlier literature, which concludes it does not constitute

21

a serious source of bias (for example, Plewlis et al., 2004; Case et al., 2005 and Lindeboom
et al., 2009). Table 2 shows, in the case of our analysis, the comparison between included
and excluded observations. The difference in means for most covariates is small and
statistically insignificant, with a few notable exceptions. Individuals included in our
estimation sample tend to exhibit higher levels of cognitive and non-cognitive ability, to
live in slightly more affluent areas and to be less likely to have experienced financial
hardship in childhood. In light of these disparities, where possible we disaggregate our
key estimation results for included and excluded observations in the following sections.
-

Insert Table 2 here -

It is also informative to compare the mean differences in covariates between the cohort
members in our treatment and control groups; these are reported in Table 3. Average
ability scores are higher amongst selective system pupils, when compared with their
comprehensive counterparts. This difference is also identified in Pischke and Manning
(2006), thereby substantiating their concerns with unobserved factors and parental
selection of the best pupils into the selective system. In addition, similarly to Pischke and
Manning (2006), Table 3 shows that selective areas tend to be slightly more affluent than
comprehensive ones. Importantly, however, Table 3 also shows that these differences are
almost entirely eliminated across the median of our instrument; this balancing of
observed covariates over the distribution of the instrument is reassuring of its ability to
deal with the issues of selection and unobserved heterogeneity.
-

Insert Table 3 here -

In addition, our IV is not rejected by the falsification test. As suggested by Pischke and
Manning (2006), we estimate the impact of comprehensive school on the probability of
suffering from at least four childhood morbidities at age 11. The estimated ATE, TT and
TUT from this placebo regression approach are -0.01 (0.08), -0.001 (0.09) and -0.02
(0.07) and are not statistically significant.
22

5.2 First stage regression results
Table A.4 (in the Appendix) reports the results of the first stage regression: where we
regress the indicator for comprehensive system (D) against observed factors (X) and the
instrument (Z) using a probit model. The results show that the percentage of the cohortmember’s LEA that is comprehensive in 1969 is a strong and statistically significant
predictor of the member’s schooling system. As explained in Section 2.3, we then predict
the propensity score pˆ ( x, z ) for each individual. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the
values of the propensity score amongst treated and untreated observations. Clearly,
pˆ ( x, z ) has mass at almost every value (rounded to 0.01) under both schooling systems –

there are only 20 individuals off the common support, which are dropped before running
the second-stage regression.
-

Insert Figure 1 here -

5.3 Second stage regression results: health outcomes
We examine the effect of experiencing the comprehensive schooling system on our
outcomes of interest, at three different points of the life-cycle: ages 23, 33 and 42. We
also focus on retrieving three causal parameters: the average treatment effect (ATE), the
treatment effect on the treated (TT) and the treatment effect on the untreated (TUT).
Table 4 shows the effect of comprehensive schooling on the probability of cohort
members suffering from depression. The comparison between TT and TUT suggests
that, while this effect is large and positive in the long run (ages 33 and 42), individuals
who attended the comprehensive school system experienced no impact, or even a mild
negative effect in the short run (age 23).

23

Our results suggest that the long-term impacts of schooling are not necessarily related
with exam performance; they can be non-academic, such as an improvement in selfesteem, or, more generally, mental health. Interestingly, these results are also in line with
new evidence brought to the fore in Heckman et al. (2014) regarding the effect of
educational choices on key domains of mental health. Graduating from college improves
self-esteem very significantly, but only for low-ability types. Their results also indicate
that it is the educational pathways (rather than the highest qualifications attained) that
has long-run health effects. Thus, our results suggest that selection into or out of
qualitatively different schooling systems is likely to be one of these pathways, one of the
channels through which education has short and longer-run health effects. We examine
this possibility in greater detail in the following sections.
- Insert Table 4 here As identified in Section 4.1, a significant number of observations are lost due to attrition
and there are discrepancies between the mean values of some important covariates for
included and excluded observations. Figure 2(a) shows our treatment effects, at different
ages, for these two groups of observations. The distribution of these effects is markedly
more compressed at age 33, when attrition begins to slow down, than at age 23.
Nonetheless, these distributional differences do not deviate from the general pattern, of a
null or slightly beneficial effect at age 23, followed by a clear detrimental impact at age
42.
- Insert Figure 2 here -

This pattern of effects is corroborated in the case of the probability of cohort-members
reporting excellent health at ages 23, 33 and 42. As shown in Figure 2(b), this effect
follows the same lifecycle trajectory identified for depression: attendance of

24

comprehensive schooling has a mildly beneficial effect at age 23, but this drops at age 33
and becomes clearly negative by age 42.

Figure 2(c) shows the estimated treatment effects of the attendance of comprehensive
schooling on the probability of cohort members suffering from a chronic condition at
ages 23, 33 and 42. Although our estimates are not statistically significant, the effect of
comprehensive schooling is mildly detrimental throughout the lifecycle.

5.4 Selecting into and out of selection: identifying gainers and losers
Unobserved heterogeneity is likely to influence selection into distinct educational paths,
which, in turn, affect health-related outcomes and behaviors throughout the lifecyle. The
person-centred treatment effects approach can be used to identify the cohort-members
who gain and lose out from selection into a particular schooling system. This is shown in
Figure 3, which illustrates the dependence between PeT effects of comprehensive
schooling on the probability of depression at ages 23 and 42. The agglomeration of
treatment effects in the top-right quadrant indicates that the individuals who, at age 23,
suffer a detrimental effect from having attended the comprehensive system are also those
who suffer a detrimental effect at age 42.
- Insert Figure 3 here -

Heckman et al. (2014) find that the positive effect of choices regarding length of
schooling (for example the completion of a higher education degree) on mental health is
typically concentrated amongst individuals with relatively lower cognitive ability. Our
findings suggest that this concentration of mental health gains (and losses) appears to
also hold in the case of quality, rather than length, of schooling. Figure 4 shows the PeT
effects of comprehensive schooling on untreated individuals, i.e. those who experienced

25

the selective system of education. Interestingly, the mental health losses associated with
comprehensive schooling would be similar amongst cohort-members who actually
attended secondary modern schools (the less academically intensive schools) or the
grammar schools, highlighting that cognitive abilities that distinguishes these two group
of student may not be a driving factor for these effects.
- Insert Figure 4 here -

5.5 Decomposition of the variance of PeT effects on the probability of depression
In order to identify the factors driving the variance in Pet Effects on depression at age
42, we focus on two approaches: 1) a Variance decomposition approach that estimates
how much of the overall variation in the PeT effects are driven by each baseline factor.
2) A stepwise backward logistic regression approach, with very conservative inclusion
criteria of p-value < 0.0001, to identify the group of baseline factors that are most
influential in predicting the individuals for whom comprehensive school would have
significantly increased in probability of depression by age 42.
- Insert Table 5 here The variance decomposition results are shown in Table 5. Factors explaining at least 5%
of the variance in the PeT effects on depression at age 42 are highlighted. Both cognitive
and non-cognitive scores in childhood are identified in this list. However, when we focus
only on those individuals who would be significantly hurt due to exposure to mixed
ability schools, the factors most influencing in identifying these individuals do not
include cognitive ability (Table 6). However, children with one point increase in their
social adjustment scores are at a 10% greater risk of a significant increase in the
probability of depression at age 42.
- Insert Table 6 here 26

5.6 Transmission channels: quality of schooling, cigarette smoking and health
The design of economic policy requires the identification of the channels through which
quality of schooling affects health outcomes, at different stages in life. Earlier literature
(see Jones et al., 2011 and references therein) suggests that the adoption of health-related
lifestyles may be an important transmission mechanism of the health effects of education
policy. To explore this we estimate PeT treatment effects of comprehensive schooling on
the probability of cohort members reporting smoking at ages 23, 33 and 46. These
estimates are shown in Table 7 and in Figure 1(d): the mean effects of comprehensive
schooling are positive at all ages and particularly large, at ages 23 and 33.
- Insert Table 7 here Our results also indicate that the cohort-members for whom PeT effect are the highest at
age 23, are also the ones who are most seriously affected in terms of their physical health
at age 42. This is illustrated in Figure 4: the concentration of PeT effects in the first
quadrant suggests that positive PeT effects of comprehensive schooling on smoking
track higher probabilities of suffering from a long-standing illness at age 42. This
corroborates the role of cigarette smoking as a transmission mechanism of the impact of
quality of schooling on health outcomes.

6. DISCUSSION
The health gradient by levels of education is a well established empirical regularity.
Nonetheless, a growing body of recent evidence indicates that the positive association
between education and long-term health outcomes can be decisively affected by the roles
of selection and unobserved heterogeneity. Conti et al. (2010, 2011) and Heckman et al.

27

(2014) use data from British and US longitudinal studies to unveil the full distribution of
the health returns to different levels of schooling. They provide solid evidence showing
that the effect schooling on health-related behaviors and outcomes varies considerably
between different levels of schooling and depends crucially on individual characteristics.
The health returns to different lengths of schooling are thus likely to exhibit considerable
heterogeneity that needs to be taken into account in the design of policy interventions.

We follow this strand of research and use data from a British longitudinal study to
examine whether heterogeneity is also an important feature of the health returns to
qualitatively different types of edcation. We obtain identification from a large natural
experiment that affected qualitative aspects of schooling, most specifically a mixed ability
environment but also encompassing schools’ curricula, endowments of human and
material resources. We adopt a local instrumental variables and estimate person-centred
treatment effects of different types of schooling, thereby recovering the distribution of
its effect on health and health-related behaviors at different stages of the lifecycle.

Our results indicate that the average impacts of exposure to comprehensive schools
compared to a selective schooling system in adolescence led to - 1) increased smoking
prevalence that peaks at age 33 and 2) increase probability of depression at ages 33 and
42. However, the average effects are not statistically significant. In fact we do not see
differences in the average treatment effect and the effect of the treated, where selection
into comprehensive schools was driven primarily cognitive ability levels. However, we do
find considerable variation in individual treatments effects (in line with Heckman et al.
2014) and the magnitude of these effects are persistent within individuals as they age. We
find that if all children in the NCDS cohort were sent to comprehensive schools, about
50% of them would have significant increases in the probabilities of long-standing illness or

28

depression at some point in their adulthood (up to age 42). Those who would be
significantly worse off on depression score at age 42 due to comprehensive schools are
more likely to be men and those who had lower non-cognitive abilities at age 11.

Finally, our results also show that the attendence of comprehensive schooling has strong
positive impacts on the probability of individuals being cigarette smokers later in life.
This confirms the role of smoking as leading transmission channel of the long-term
impact of type of schooling on health outcomes for this cohort.

29

REFERENCES
Basu A. 2014. “Person-Centered Treatment (PeT) effects using instrumental variables:
An application to evaluating prostate cancer treatments.” Journal of Applied Econometrics
29:671-691.
Bonhomme, S. and Sauders, U. 2011. “Recovering distributions in difference-indifferences models: a comparison of selective and comprehensive schooling.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 93(2): 479 – 494.
Case, A. Fertig, A. and Paxon, C. 2005. “The lasting impact of childhood health and
circumstance.” Journal of Health Economics, 24: 365-389.
Carneiro, P. Crawford, C. and Goodman, A. 2007. “The impact of cognitive and noncognitive skills on later outcomes.” CEE Discussion Papers.
Conti, G., Heckman, J. and Urzúa, S. 2010. “The Education-Health Gradient” American
Economic Review 100(2), pp. 234-38.
Conti, G., Heckman, J. and Urzúa, S. 2011. “Early endowments, education and health”.
Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Working Group Working paper 2011 011 –
University of Chicago.
Cunha, F. and Heckman, J. 2007. “The Technology of Skill Formation.” American
Economic Review 97(2), pp. 31-47.
Cunha, F. and Heckman, J. 2008. “Formulating, identifying and estimating the
technology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation.” Journal of Human Resources
Cunha, F., J. Heckman, J. and Schennach, S. 2010 “Estimating the Technology of
Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation”, Econometrica 78(3), p.p. 883-931.
Currie, J. and Moretti, E. 2003. “Mother’s education and the intergenerational
transmission of human capital: evidence from college openings.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118:1495–1532.
Currie, J. Stabile, M. 2004. “Socioeconomic status and health: why is the relationship
stronger for older children?” American Economic Review 93: 1813-1823.
Department of Education and Science 1971. “Statistics of Education – 1969”, Her
Majesty’s Stationary Office, London.
Dearden, L. Ferri, J. And Meghir, C. 2002. “The effect of school quality on educational
attainment and wages.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 84:1-20.
Galindo-Rueda, F. and Vignoles, A. 2004. “The heterogeneous effect of selection in
secondary schools: understanding the changing role of ability”, IZA Discussion Paper
No. 1245.
Galindo-Rueda, F. and Vignoles, A. 2005. “The declining relative importance of ability in
predicting educational attainment.” Journal of Human Resources, 40: 335-353

30

Grimard, F. and Parent, D. 2007. “Education and smoking: Were Vietnam War draft
avoiders also more likely to avoid smoking?” Journal of Health Economics, 26: 896-926.
Heckman, J.J., Humphries, J.E., Veramendi, G. and Urzúa, S. 2014. “Education, health
and wages”. NBER working paper 19971.
Heckman, J.J., Urzúa, S. and Vytlacil, E. 2006 “Understanding instrumental variables in
models with essential heterogeneity” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3): 389-432.
Heckman, J.J., and Vytlacil E.J. 1999. Local instrumental variables and latent variable
models for identifying and bounding treatment effects. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 96(8): 4730-34.
Imbens G. and Angrist J. 1994. Identification and estimation of local average treatment
effects. Econometrica, 62(2): 467-475.
Jesson, D. 2000. “The comparative evaluation of GCSE value-added performance by
type of school and LEA.” University of York discussion paper No. 2000/52.
Johnson, R. 2010 “The Health Returns to Education Policies: From Preschool to High
School & Beyond” American Economic Review, 188-94.
Jones A.M., Rice, N. and Rosa Dias, P. 2011. “Long-term effects of cognitive skills,
social adjustment and schooling on health and lifestyle: evidence from a reform of
selective schooling”. Journal of Human Capital 5(3) 342-76.
Keastner, R. 2009. “Adolescent cognitive and non-cognitive correlates of adult health.”
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kenkel, D., Lillard, D. and Mathios, A. 2006. “The roles of high school completion and
GED receipt in smoking and obesity”, Journal of Labour Economics, 24: 635-660.
Kerkchoff, A.C. Fogelman, K., Crook, D. and Reeder, D. 1996. “Going comprehensive in
England and Wales: A Study of Uneven Change.” London: The Woburn Press.
Lindeboom, M., Llena-Nozal, A. and Van der Klaauw, B. 2009. “Parental education and
child health: evidence from a schooling reform.” Journal of Health Economics, vol. 28, pp.
109-131.
Lleras-Muney, A. 2005. “The relationship between education and adult mortality in the
United States.” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 72, pp. 189-221.
Oreopoulos, P. 2006. “Estimating average and local average treatment effects of
education when compulsory schooling laws really matter.” American Economic Review, vol.
96, pp. 152-175.
Pischke, S. and Manning, A. 2006. “Comprehensive versus selective schooling in
England and Wales: what do we know?” IZA DP No. 2072.

31

Plewis, I. and Calderwood, L. et al. 2004. “Changes in the NCDS and BCS70 populations
and samples over time”. London, Centre for Longitudinal Studies.
Power, C. and Peckham, C. 1987. “Childhood morbidity and adult ill-health” National Child
Development Study User Support Working Paper No. 37.
Rodgers, B., Pickles, A., Power, C., Collishaw, S. and Maughan, B. 1999 “Validity of the
Malaise Inventory in general population samples.” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology, vol. 34, pp.333-341.
Rutter, M., Tizard, J. and Whitemore K. 1970. “Education, Health and Behaviour”,
London.
Silles, M. 2009. “The causal effect of education on health: evidence from the United
Kingdom”, Economics of Education Review, vol. 28, pp. 122-128.
Stott D. H. 1987. “The social adjustment of children: Manual to the Bristol Social
Adjustment Guides.” London: Hodder and Stoughton
Van Kippersluis, H., O. O'Donnell, and E. van Doorslaer (2011). "Long Run Returns to
Education: Does Schooling Lead to an Extended Old Age?" Journal of Human
Resources 46(4): 695-721.

32

Figure1: Distribution of the propensity score P(X, Z): observations within and off common support

.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
0

P(Z,X)

1

Propensity to choose comprehensive schools

Selected Comprehensive School
Selected Selective school
Using IV = Concentration in 1969

33

.75
.5
.25
0
-.25
-.5
-.75
-1

-1

-.5

0

.5

PeT effects in probability scale

1

Excellent Self-assessed health

1

Depression

20

25

30
35
Age (in years)

40

45

20

Effect for subject with non-missing outcome in next wave
Effect for subject with missing outcome in next wave
Mean Effects

25

30
35
Age (in years)

40

45

Effect for subject with non-missing outcome in next wave
Effect for subject with missing outcome in next wave
Mean Effects

(a)

(b)

Smoker
.75
.5
.25
0
-.25
-.5
-.75
-1

-.5

0

.5

PeT effects in probability scale

1

1

Long Standing Illnesses

-1

PeT effects in probability scale

PeT effects in probability scale

Figure 2: Person-centered Treatment (PeT) effects over time.

20

25

30
35
Age (in years)

40

Effect for subject with non-missing outcome in next wave
Effect for subject with missing outcome in next wave
Mean Effects

(c)

45

20

25

30
35
Age (in years)

40

Effect for subject with non-missing outcome in next wave
Effect for subject with missing outcome in next wave
Mean Effects

(d)

45

Figure 3: Dependence between PeT effects of comprehensive schooling on depression at ages 23 (horizontal
axis) and 42 (vertical axis)

45 %

45 %

6%

4%

0

.25
-.25
-.5
-.75
-1

At Age 42 yrs

.5

.75

1

PeT effect on Pr(Depression)

-1

-.75

-.5

-.25

0
.25
At Age 23 yrs

p< 0.10 for both effects
p<0.10 at Age 42 yrs only only

Corr (95%CI): .22 (-.15, .59)

.5

.75

p< 0.10 at Age 23 yrs only
p> 0.10 for both effects

1

Figure 4: PeT effects of comprehensive schooling on the untreated (i.e. cohort-members who did not attend
comprehensive schools)

.25

Depression
.2

0.19
0.15

.05

.1

.15

0.14
0.08

0.08

-.25

-.2

-.15

-.1

-.05

0

0.01

23yrs

33 yrs
Secondary Modern

42 yrs
Grammar

* p<0.10; ** p < 0.05

36

Figure 5: Dependence between PeT effects of comprehensive schooling on cigarette smoking at age 23
(horizontal axis) and probability of long-standing illness at age 42 (vertical axis)

17 %

56 %

4%

23 %

.5
0

.25
-.25
-.5
-.75
-1

at Age 42 yrs

.75

1

Dependence between effects on smoking at age 23
and long-standing illness at age 42

-1

-.75

-.5

-.25
0
.25
PeT effects on Pr(Smoker)
at Age 23 yrs

p< 0.10 for both effects
p<0.10 at Age 42 yrs only only

.5

.75

1

p< 0.10 at Age 23 yrs only
p> 0.10 for both effects

Corr (95%CI): .27 (-.1, .64)

37

Table 1: Sample selection, missing values and attrition
Criteria
Total subjects in NCDS Cohort at Age 16 years
Private Schools
Comprehensive school penetration rate > 80th percentile
Basic exclusions
Missing covariates, instrumental variable, outcomes at age 23
Further Exclusions
No overlap on predicted propensity score

Excluded
706
2251

Total
16338
15632
13381

9933

3448

20

3428

38

Table 2: Included and excluded observations: mean differences in select covariates
Covariates
Cognitive ability, age 7
Non-cognitive ability, age 11
Parents say pupil unhappy at primary school, age 7
Parents want pupil to stay in school
Male
No. of acute illnesses child suffered up until age 7
0
1
>1
No. of times child was hospitalized up until age 7
0
1
>1
Height at age 7 (in cm)
Epilepsy in family, until age 7
Presence of chronic illnesses in the family
Father SES
Low
Middle
High
Financial hardship episode (un till child age 7)
% of population unemployed or disabled
% of women in formal employment
% of population in employed in mining and
manufacturing
% of population in employed in agriculture
% of population in professional / managerial jobs
% of population in unskilled workers
% of population who is home owner
% of population who is immigrant

Excluded
N = 9,933
-0.05 (1.23)
8.9 (9.14)
6%
73%
52%

Included
N = 3,448
0.12 (1.12)
7.2 (8.08)
6%
77%
49%

p-value

19%
30%
51%

18%
28%
53%

0.12

72%
22%
6%

70%
24%
6%

0.09

6.9%
2.2%

7.3%
2.5%

0.37
0.25

24%
52%
26%
8.2%
5.1%
41.3%

19%
53%
28%
6.6%
4.5%
41.1%

0.001
0.008
<0.001
0.80

37.2%
2.4%
11.8%
7.6%
42.7%
1.6%

37.4%
2.7%
12.5%
6.8%
48.5%
1.4%

0.66
0.26
0.02
<0.001
<0.001
0.05

<0.001
<0.001
0.40
<0.001
<0.001

39

Table 3: Treatment and control group observations: mean differences in select covariates
Covariates

Selective
N = 1,602
(47%)

Comprehensive
N = 1,826
(53%)

p-value

Cognitive ability, age 7
Non-cognitive ability, age 11
Parents say pupil unhappy at primary school,
age 7
Parents want pupil to stay in school
Male
No. of acute illnesses child suffered up until age
7
0
1
>1
No. of times child was hospitalized up until age
7
0
1
>1
Height at age 7 (in cm)
Epilepsy in family, until age 7
Presence of chronic illnesses in the family
Father SES
Low
Middle
High
Financial hardship episode (until child age 7)
% of population unemployed or disabled
% of women in formal employment
% of population in employed in mining and
manufacturing
% of population in employed in agriculture
% of population in professional / managerial
jobs
% of population in unskilled workers
% of population who is home owner
% of population who is immigrant

0.25 (1.1)
6.95 (7.7)

0.05 (1.1)
7.74 (8.7)

<0.001
0.21

p-value
(across
IV
median)
0.32
0.06

5.6%
78%
48%

6.9%
77%
49%

0.50
0.51
0.30

0.08
0.60
0.83

17%
30%
53%

20%
27%
53%

0.13

0.55

69%
25%
6%
122.7 (5.6)
7.4%
2.3%

71%
23%
6%
123.0 (5.7)
7.5%
2.6%

0.31
0.48
0.91
0.50

0.10
0.37
0.22
0.67

18%
53%
29%
5.1%
4.3%
40.3%

19%
54%
26%
6.6%
4.3%
42.2%

0.23
0.24
0.67
0.30

0.11
0.36
0.74
0.20

35.7%
2.9%

37.6%
2.6%

0.001
0.30

0.03
0.65

13.0%
6.5%
50.0%
1.8%

12.3%
6.7%
47.1%
1.6%

0.01
0.04
<0.001
0.29

0.54
0.48
0.19
0.93

40

Table 4: Effect of comprehensive schooling on depression at ages 23, 33 and 42

N
Unadjusted
PeT-based
ATE
TT
TUT

at Age 23
Mean (s.e.)
3426
.001 ( .009 )

Effect on Pr(Depression)
at Age 33
Mean (s.e.)
2831
0.014 (0.009)

at Age 42
Mean (s.e.)
2775
0.015 (0.012)

0.02 (0.08)
-0.005 (0.08)
0.05 (0.09)

0.09 (0.11)
0.07 (0.17)
0.12 (0.17)

0.14 (0.11)
0.11 (0.08)
0.17 (0.15)

41

Table 5: Variance decomposition: factors explaining variation in individual effects on depression at Age
42
Factors

% of total variance in PeT
effects on Depression at Age
42 explained
Parent say pupil unhappy at primary school, age 7
22
Non-cognitive ability, age 11
16
Height, age 7
14
Cognitive ability, age 7
12
No. of hospitalizations, by age 7
9
Parents want pupil to stay in school
6
Male
5
NOTE: Only factors explaining at least 5% of total variance are reported

42

Table 6: Primary identifiers for individuals for whom comprehensive school would have significant
increase in probability of depression by age 42. (Stepwise backward logistic with very stringent inclusion
criteria. i.e. LR p-value < 0.0001)
Covariates
Non-cognitive ability, age 11
Parents say pupil unhappy at primary school, age 7
Parents want pupil to stay in school
Male
No. of times child was hospitalized up until age 7 : 1 (ref 0)
No. of times child was hospitalized up until age 7 : > 1
Father SES - middle
% of population in employed in mining and manufacturing

Odds Ratio
1.1 (0.01)
0.02 (0.01)
36.8 (12.6)
28.6 (6.8)
0.03 (0.01)
4.5 (1.2)
0.03 (0.06)
10.1 (4.6)

43

Table 7: PeT effect of comprehensive schooling on the probability of cohort-member being cigarette
smokers at ages 23, 33 and 42

N
Unadjusted
PeT-based
ATE
TT
TUT

Smoking at Age 23
Mean (s.e.)
3426
.034 ( .02 )

Smoking at Age 33
Mean (s.e.)
2831
.03 ( .017 )

Smoking at Age 42
Mean (s.e.)
2775
.017 ( .016 )

0.10 (0.14)
0.11 (0.14)
0.10 (0.13)

0.15 (0.12)
0.13 (0.11)
0.17 (0.13)

0.05 (0.10)
0.04 (0.10)
0.05 (0.10)

44

APPENDIX
Intuitive explanation on the identification of Person-centered Treatment (PeT)
effects using local instrumental variable methods.
Suppose that in our example, we presume (only to get the general intuition)
comprehensive schooling to be more beneficial, in terms of long-term health, for
children with higher test scores in elementary schools and for children who are selfconfident. Moreover, choice of treatment is influenced by test scores and the selfconfidence of the child. However, our data on children from NCDS do not have a
measure of their self-confidence, and only contains for each student: test scores,
treatment, long-term health outcomes, and a characteristic that all agree is a powerful and
valid instrument. Let the instrument be a continuous variable (e.g. distance to the
comprehensive school). Greater the distance to the comprehensive, less likely will be the
enrolment to that school.

In this case, a traditional naïve regression would produce biased estimate of the average
treatment effect (ATE) and also the conditional average treatment effects (CATEs) for
children groups with low and high test scores groups due to the endogeneity of the
treatment status caused by the missingness of self-confidence levels in the analysis.

A traditional instrumental variable analysis, using a strong and valid IV, will also produce
biased estimates for ATE and CATEs due to the presence of essential heterogeneity, which
suggests that the treatment effects vary over unobserved confounders, which in this case
is the self-confidence status.

45

A local instrumental variable (LIV) approach can be used to overcome these issues when
a continuous instrument is available. LIV methods are used to estimate the marginal
treatment effects (MTEs) parameters. MTEs are the effects for individuals for whom the
influence of the observed characteristics (tests score and distance to comprehensive
school) balance with the influence of the unobserved confounders (self-confidence level)
on treatment choice such that they are indifferent to choosing between using the
comprehensive and selective schools. To estimate an MTE, LIV methods compare the
outcomes of two groups of, say, students with low test scores, where one group is
staying at a distance d from the comprehensive school and the other at a distance d+ε, ε
representing an epsilon (very small) change in distance. Therefore, the two groups are
identical in their distribution of self-confidence. Any difference in outcomes between
these two groups of students should be attributed to the changes in treatment choices
between these two groups, which is only brought about by the difference in distance.
However, since the difference in distance is very small, the effect can be attributed to a
margin of students who were indifferent between two treatment options and were moved to
change treatment choice by the small perturbation of the instrumental variable, i.e.,
distance. For this margin of stduents, one can quantify a normalized level of unobserved
confounders as they must balance the observed levels. Similarly, for another dyad of
distances, d’ and d’+ ε, one can estimate another MTE, which reflects the causal
treatment effect on students at another level of unobserved confounder. In this way, a
full schedule of MTEs can be estimated that vary over the unobserved confounder levels
(i.e. self-confidence) given any level of the observed confounder (i.e. test scores).
Intuitively, LIV methods estimates these MTEs by estimating the partial derivate of the
outcome with respect to the IV-based propensity score (reflecting epsilon changes).

46

Once MTEs are estimated over the range of observed and unobserved levels, they can
then be easily aggregated to form meaningful treatment effect parameters such as the
ATE, CATEs, TT and TUT and also study heterogeneity in effects using personcentered treatment (PeT) effects. The PeT effect for a student in this stylized sample is
conditioned not only on that individual’s test score but his test score-specific MTEs are
also averaged over a distribution of self-confidence statuses that conforms with the
individual’s observed choice of schooling system. Thus these are deemed to be
personalized effect for this student.

47

APPENDIX
Table A.1
Pre-schooling and secondary school characteristics

Pre-schooling
characteristics

Secondary
school
characteristics

Variables
Cognitive ability score (age 7)
Relative rank of cognitive ability (age 11)
Non-cognitive ability (BSAG) score (age 11)
Number of children in primary school class (age 7)
Indicator for unhappy at primary school (age 7)
Indicator for parents’ wanting child to stay in school
Indicator for male
Morbidity index (age 7)
Number of hospitalisations (age 7)
Indicator for diabetes in family
Indicator for epilepsy in family
Indicator for heart disease in family
Indicator for father chronically ill
Indicator for mother chronically ill
Indicator for father’s occupational SES professional
Indicator for father’s occupational SES other non-manual
Indicator for single parent family
Indicator for financial hardship in family (age 7)
Enumeration district: percentage unemployed/long-term sick
Enumeration district: percentage women working
Enumeration district: percentage employed in manufacturing
Enumeration district: percentage emplyed in agriculture
Enumeration district: percentage in professional/managerial
occupations
Enumeration district: percentage in other non-manual occupations
Enumeration district: percentage in skilled manual occupations
Enumeration district: percentage in semi-skilled manual occupations
Enumeration district: percentage in unskilled manual occupations
Enumeration district: percentage owner occupiers
Enumeration district: percentage council tenants
Enumeration district: percentage non-white
Enumeration district: percentage immigrants
Indicator for change of residence between LEAs (age 7)
Indicators for Standard Regions

Indicator for single sex school
Indicator for streaming by ability within school
Pupil-teacher ratio
Ratio of expelled to total pupils

48

Table A.2
Detailed measure of educational attainment
%
20.6
0.6
8.2
9.5
13.6
25.5
5.0
3.5
2.9
3.7
2.7
0.2
4.0
N=11,086
Note: A level points are allocated as 5, 4, 3, 2 and 1 for grades A-E respectively.
No grade at CSE, GCE O or A levels
1+ passes at O level, grades 4 or 5 only
1+ passes at CSE, grades 4 or 5 only
1+ passes at CSE, grades 2 or 3
5+ passes at CSE, grades 2 to 5
1-4 passes at GCE O level or CSE grade 1
5 or 6 passesGCE O level or CSE 1
7+ passes at GCE O level grades A-C, or CSE grade 1
1 pass at A level, grades A-E
2 passes at A levels, up to 8pts
3+ passes at A levels, up to 8pts
2 passes at A levels and 9+ pts
3+ passes at A levels and 9+pts

Table A.3
Breakdown of long-standing illness (LSI) by percentage with specific main conditions (ICD-10)

Infectious & parasitic diseases
Neoplasms
Diseases of blood & immune mechanism
Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic
Mental and behavioral disorders
Nervous system
Eye, ear and mastoid process
Circulatory system
Respiratory system
Digestive system
Skin
Muscoloskeletal system
Genitourinary system
Congenital malformations
Undiagnosed illness
Injury, poisoning etc
Other LSI/uncoded

Wave 7
(age 46)
0.7
1.6
1.5
9.5
5.9
5.9
4.6
11.8
11.4
5.5
2.1
25.7
2.0
0.3
1.8
5.3
4.3
N=2990

49

Table A.4
First-stage regression results.
Covariates
Cognitive ability, age 7
Non-cognitive ability, age 11
Parents say pupil unhappy at primary school, age 7
Parents want pupil to stay in school
Male
No. of acute illnesses child suffered up until age 7: 1 (ref 0)
No. of acute illnesses child suffered up until age 7: >1
No. of times child was hospitalized up until age 7 : 1 (ref 0)
No. of times child was hospitalized up until age 7 : > 1
Height at age 7 (in cm)
Epilepsy in family, until age 7
Presence of chronic illnesses in the family
Father SES - high ( Ref: 'low SES')
Father SES - middle (Ref: 'low SES')
Financial hardship episode (un till child age 7)
Northwest
EW riding
North Midlands
Midlands
East
Southeast
Southwest
Wales
% of population unemployed or disabled
% of women in formal employment
% of population in employed in mining and manufacturing
% of population in employed in agriculture
% of population in professional / managerial jobs
% of population in unskilled workers
% of population who is home owner
% of population who is immigrant
IV: % comprehensive schools (F-stat for IV is 83)
Constant

Coefficient
-0.09 (0.03)
0.001 (0.002)
0.02 (0.08)
0.11 (0.06)
0.03 (0.04)
-0.1 (0.06)
-0.03 (0.07)
-0.09 (0.05)
-0.22 (0.1)
0.002 (0.004)
-0.07 (0.08)
0.05 (0.14)
-0.07 (0.08)
0.03 (0.06)
-0.02 (0.08)
-0.13 (0.19)
0.53 (0.23)
-0.07 (0.21)
0.13 (0.17)
0.08 (0.23)
-0.08 (0.2)
0.04 (0.21)
0.55 (0.24)
-0.12 (0.38)
0.2 (0.12)
0.15 (0.2)
-0.21 (0.24)
0.16 (0.23)
0.01 (0.32)
-0.33 (0.09)
-0.29 (0.43)
0.02 (0.004)
-0.44 (0.54)

p-value
0.002
0.6
0.835
0.055
0.481
0.111
0.662
0.05
0.033
0.672
0.39
0.694
0.344
0.667
0.766
0.483
0.02
0.75
0.453
0.706
0.697
0.843
0.02
0.755
0.109
0.443
0.386
0.484
0.974
0.000
0.5
0.000
0.421

[95% confidence Interval]
-0.15
-0.03
-0.003
0.01
-0.15
0.18
0.005
0.23
-0.05
0.11
-0.22
0.02
-0.16
0.1
-0.19
0.0005
-0.42
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
-0.23
0.09
-0.22
0.33
-0.23
0.08
-0.09
0.14
-0.19
0.14
-0.5
0.23
0.08
0.99
-0.47
0.34
-0.21
0.47
-0.36
0.53
-0.48
0.32
-0.37
0.45
0.09
1.02
-0.85
0.62
-0.04
0.43
-0.24
0.55
-0.68
0.26
-0.3
0.62
-0.62
0.64
-0.5
-0.16
-1.13
0.55
0.008
0.03
-1.51
0.63
50

