NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMMON FACTORS IN RETURN SEASONALITIES
Matti Keloharju
Juhani T. Linnainmaa
Peter Nyberg
Working Paper 20815
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20815

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

We thank John Cochrane, Anders Löflund, Mark Grinblatt, Chris Hansen, Steven Heston (discussant),
Maria Kasch (discussant), Jon Lewellen (discussant), Toby Moskowitz, Stefan Nagel, Lubos Pastor,
Tapio Pekkala, Ruy Ribeiro, Ken Singleton, and Rob Stambaugh for insights that benefited this paper,
seminar participants at Aalto University, Chinese University of Hong Kong, City University of Hong
Kong, Deakin University, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong University, INSEAD, Lancaster
University, LaTrobe University, Luxemburg School of Finance, Maastricht University, Monash University,
Nanyang University of Technology, National University of Singapore, Singapore Management University,
University of Arizona, University of Chicago, University of Houston, University of Illinois at Chicago,
University of Melbourne, University of New South Wales, University of Sydney, University of Technology
in Sydney, and conference participants at 2013 FSU SunTrust Beach Conference, Financial Research
Association 2013 meetings, and 2014 European Finance Association Meetings for valuable comments,
and Yongning Wang for invaluable research assistance. Earlier versions of this paper were circulated
under the titles "Common Factors in Stock Market Seasonalities" and "The Sum of All Seasonalities."
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Matti Keloharju, Juhani T. Linnainmaa, and Peter Nyberg. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Common Factors in Return Seasonalities
Matti Keloharju, Juhani T. Linnainmaa, and Peter Nyberg
NBER Working Paper No. 20815
December 2014
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
A strategy that selects stocks based on their historical same-calendar-month returns earns an average
return of 13% per year. We document similar return seasonalities in anomalies, commodities, international
stock market indices, and at the daily frequency. The seasonalities overwhelm unconditional differences
in expected returns. The correlations between different seasonality strategies are modest, suggesting
that they emanate from different common factors. Our results suggest that seasonalities are not a distinct
class of anomalies that requires an explanation of its own---rather, they are intertwined with other
return anomalies through shared common factors. A theory that is able to explain the risks behind
any common factor is thus likely able to explain a part of the seasonalities.

Matti Keloharju
Aalto University School of Business
P.O.Box 21210, FI-00076 Aalto
Finland
matti.keloharju@aalto.fi
Juhani T. Linnainmaa
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
juhani.linnainmaa@chicagobooth.edu

Peter Nyberg
Aalto University School of Business
P.O.Box 21210, FI-00076 Aalto
Finland
peter.nyberg@aalto.fi

1

Introduction

Figure 1 plots the average coefficients from cross-sectional regressions of monthly stock returns against
one-month returns of the same stock at different lags. What is remarkable about this plot, which is an
updated version of that in Heston and Sadka (2008), is not the momentum up to the one-year mark or
the long-term reversals that follow, but the positive peaks that disrupt the long-term reversals at every
annual lag. This seasonal pattern, documented for many countries1 , emerges in pooled regressions with
stock fixed effects, but it disappears when the regressions include stock-calendar month fixed effects.
The estimates in Figure 1 thus do not mean that stocks “repeat” shocks from the past but that expected
stock returns vary from calendar month to month. A long-short strategy that chooses stocks based on
their historical same-calendar month returns earns an average return of 13% per year between 1963 and
2011.
Return seasonalities are not confined to individual stocks or to monthly frequency. We show that
seasonality strategies that trade well-diversified portfolios formed by characteristics such as size and
industry are about as profitable as those that trade individual stocks. Seasonalities also exist in the
returns of commodities and country portfolios2 and at the daily frequency. Moreover, we show that
the returns on most anomalies—accruals, equity issuances, and others—exhibit tremendous seasonal
variation. A meta-strategy that takes long and short positions on 15 anomalies based on their historical same-calendar-month premiums earns an average return of 1.88% per month (t-value = 6.43);
an alternative strategy that selects anomalies based on their other -calendar-month premiums earns a
slightly negative return! That is, knowing how well an anomaly has performed in other calendar months
1

See Heston and Sadka (2010).
Heston and Sadka (2010) document significant seasonalities within 14 international stock markets. Our analysis differs
from theirs in that we measure seasonalities in the cross section of country indexes, that is, we test whether a stock market
in a country that typically performs well in a particular month relative to the other countries is more likely to do so also
in the future.
2

1

0.02

b̂t

0.01

0.00

-0.01
12

24

36

48

60

72

84

96

108 120 132 144 156 168 180 192 204 216 228 240
Lag, months

Figure 1: Seasonalities in individual stock returns. This figure uses data from January 1963
through December 2011 for NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq stocks to estimate univariate Fama-MacBeth
regressions of month-t returns against month-t − k returns, ri,t = at + bt ri,t−k + ei,t , with k ranging
from one to 240 months. The circles denote estimates at annual lags.
relative to other anomalies is uninformative about how it will perform in the cross section of anomalies this month. Seasonal variation in expected returns for these anomalies thus completely swamps
cross-sectional differences in unconditional expected returns.
Although both individual stocks and factors exhibit return seasonalities, at first glance the connection between the two realms seems surprisingly weak in the data. Heston and Sadka (2008) consider the
possibility that seasonalities reflect systematic risks but find that they survive tests that control, one at
the time, for firm size, industry, exposures to common risk factors, and calendar month. At the same
time, they find that return seasonalities are not driven by seasonalities in certain firm-specific events
such as earnings announcements and dividends.3
We show that the seeming disconnect between seasonalities in individual stock returns and those
in factor premiums is due to the fact that none of the factors alone is responsible for the seasonal
3

Frazzini and Lamont (2007) and Barber, De George, Lehavy, and Trueman (2013) show that stocks earn positive
abnormal returns around scheduled earnings announcements. Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) find that stocks earn higher
returns around ex-dividend days and dividend announcements.

2

patterns in individual stocks. Individual stocks aggregate seasonalities across the factors. To see this,
consider the seasonality in stock returns as a function of firm size. Small stocks tend to outperform
large stocks in January, so firms’ historical January returns are noisy signals of their sizes. A sort of
stocks into portfolios by their past January returns thus predicts variation in future January returns
because it correlates with firm size. The same intuition applies if the seasonalities originate from many
characteristics. A sort on past returns picks up all seasonalities no matter what their origins. A
regression of returns on past same-calendar-month returns is equivalent to a regression of returns on a
noisy combination of attributes associated with return seasonalities.
A simple empirical test shows that the seasonalities in monthly U.S. stock returns must originate from
common factors. The variance of a strategy that trades these seasonalities is five times higher than what
it would be if it took on just idiosyncratic risk. We estimate that at least two-thirds of the seasonalies
in monthly U.S. stock returns derive from common factors associated with firm characteristics such as
size, dividend-to-price, and industry. The prominence of common factors means that seasonal strategies
have to remain exposed to systematic risk, because an attempt to hedge that risk would eliminate the
seasonalities as well.
We show that return seasonalities are remarkably pervasive. Whereas many anomalies falter in some
corners of the market, seasonalities permeate the entire cross section of U.S. stock returns, varying little
from one set of stocks to another. Moreover, unlike every anomaly studied by Stambaugh, Yu, and
Yuan (2012), return seasonalities are about equally strong in periods of high and low sentiment. In
spite of this, different seasonality strategies are at best weakly correlated with each other. Within
U.S. equities, for example, the correlation between the strategies trading seasonalities in small stocks
and in high-dividend-yield stocks is 0.17. The correlations become weaker when the assets are less alike
and are negligible across asset classes: the seasonalities in country index and commodity returns, for

3

example, are unrelated to those in U.S. equities. Similarly, a strategy that trades daily seasonalities is
uncorrelated with a strategy that trades monthly seasonalities.
These low correlations suggest that it is difficult to find one unified explanation, such as a constant
set of macroeconomic risk factors, for all the seasonalities.4 Indeed, we find no measurable link between
macroeconomic risks and the seasonalities when we apply the macroeconomic variables and methods
used by Chordia and Shivakumar (2002) and Liu and Zhang (2008). Instead, our results are consistent
with a world in which there are many risk factors, the premiums on these factors exhibit seasonal
variation, and assets in different corners of the market aggregate seasonalities emanating from risks
specific to that corner.
Our results speak to the striking economic significance of seasonalities. The literature often regards
seasonalities as just another anomaly—and one that is difficult to trade and that may be fading away.
We show that return seasonalities exist almost everywhere, are remarkably persistent over time, and are
often so large that they completely overwhelm the unconditional differences in expected asset returns.
Although seasonality strategies are immensely risky because of their exposures to common factors, they
represent attractive risk-reward tradeoffs at least on the margin. The ex-post maximum Sharpe ratio
constructed from the market, size, value, and momentum factors increases from 1.04 to 1.67 when we
add a HML-style seasonality factor to the investment opportunity set. Even an investor who does
not trade seasonalities directly can benefit by screening on them. An investor can, for example, lower
turnover and enhance returns by delaying a trade whenever the trading strategy calls for selling a stock
whose seasonal pattern predicts a high expected return next month.
Our key insight is that seasonalities are not an isolated or distinct class of anomalies that requires
4

Asset pricing studies find little support for the view that asset pricing is integrated across different regions and
asset classes. Fama and French (1993), for example, create two different models to characterize average returns within
U.S. equities and bonds. Studies such as those by Griffin (2002), Hou, Karolyi, and Kho (2011), and Fama and French
(2012) find that global versions of asset pricing models typically generate significantly larger pricing errors than models
that add factors constructed from local asset returns.

4

an explanation of its own. Rather, our theory and decomposition results suggest that seasonalities are
intertwined with other return anomalies through many shared common factors. This is a promising
result, because it means that any theory that is able to explain the risks behind the factors is also likely
able to shed light on both average returns and seasonalities.
Past research has extensively studied seasonalities in asset returns. Whereas we study seasonalities
in the cross section of asset returns, most of the extant research is about time-series (market-wide)
seasonalities. Kamstra, Kramer, and Levi (2003, 2014) and Garrett, Kamstra, and Kramer (2005), for
example, ascribe the seasonalities in equity risk premium and Treasury returns to seasonal variation in
the price of risk: investors are more risk averse during the winter. Some seasonalities might also stem
from mispricing that affects large groups of stocks.5
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shows how individual asset returns aggregate
seasonalities in factor premiums. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 examines return seasonalities
within U.S. equities. Section 5 documents that return seasonalities can also be found from other
asset classes and from different corners of the U.S. stock market, and analyzes the risk exposures and
investability of these seasonalities. Section 6 concludes.

2

Seasonalities in risk premiums and the cross section of expected
returns

2.1

A stylized model

Seasonal variation in factor risk premiums generates seasonal variation in securities’ expected returns
which, in turn, induces periodicity into return autocovariances estimated from cross-sectional regres5

The turn-of-the-year seasonalities are often attributed to December tax-loss selling and the rebound that follows. See,
for example, Wachtel (1942), Reinganum (1983), and, more recently, Grinblatt and Moskowitz (2004) and Kang, Pekkala,
Polk, and Ribeiro (2011).

5

sions. To illustrate this idea, suppose returns are generated by a single-factor model,6

ri,t = βi Ft + εi,t ,

(1)

where ri,t is the excess return on security i and εi,t is the residual. We assume there is seasonal
variation in the factor premium such that it in calendar month m(t) equals E[Ft ] = λm(t) , where m(t)
is the calendar month (m = January, . . . , December) corresponding to month t. Factor Ft ’s return is
the sum of its risk premium and a shock, Ft = λm(t) + ξt . Both εi,t and ξt are IID and mean zero. The
cross-sectional autocovariance of returns is then

covcs (ri,t , ri,t−k ) = covcs βi (λm(t) + ξt ), βi (λm(t−k) + ξt−k )





= varcs (βi ) (λm(t) + ξt )(λm(t−k) + ξt−k ) .

(2)

The average autocovariance across N calendar-month m(t) cross sections is


X
X

1
1
covcs (ri,t , ri,t−k ) = varcs (βi ) 
λm(t) λm(t−k) + ξt λm(t−k) + ξt−k λm(t) + ξt ξt−k ,
N
N
m(t)

(3)

m(t)

which tends to


1 X
covcs (ri,t , ri,t−k ) = varcs (βi ) λm(t) λm(t−k) .
N →∞ N
lim

(4)

m(t)

When we estimate the autocovariances between same-calendar-month returns, m(t) = m(t−k), λm(t) λm(t−k) =
λ2m(t) ≥ 0. In other words, the covariance spikes every 12th lag if there is seasonality in the risk premium. This means that any seasonality in factor premium always gets transferred to the cross section
of security returns if factor loadings vary across securities, varcs (βi ) > 0.
6

We thank a referee for suggesting this stylized model.

6

2.2

The aggregation mechanism

The periodicity in return autocovariances is not specific to this stylized example, and a model in which
securities are exposed to multiple risks illustrates how returns aggregate seasonalities stemming from
risk premiums. Suppose returns are generated by a J-factor model,

ri,t = βi1 Ft1 + βi2 Ft2 + · · · + βiJ FtJ + εi,t ,

(5)

where the superscripts index factors j = 1, . . . , J and εi,t is the firm-specific shock with mean zero and
variance σε2 < ∞. Similar to above, month-t return on factor j is the sum of its risk premium and a
shock,
Ftj = λjm(t) + ξtj .

(6)

The risk premiums λjm(t) ∼ N (0, σλ2 ) are drawn once in the beginning by nature. We assume that σλ2 > 0,
which means that the risk premiums vary over the calendar year. The draws of λjm(t) are independent
0

across calendar months and factors: E(λjm λjm0 ) = 0 for m 6= m0 and E(λjm λjm0 ) = 0 for j 6= j 0 . Factor
0

shocks ξtj ∼ N (0, σξ2 ) are similarly independent with E(ξtj ξtj0 ) = 0 for t 6= t0 or j 6= j 0 . We assume that
both the factors and firms are symmetric so that the same parameters characterize all factors and firms.
We show in the Internet appendix that the expected slope coefficient from a cross-sectional regression
of month-t returns on month-t − k returns equals

E(bk ) =









2
σλ
2 +σ 2
σλ
ξ

1 −


σε2
2
2 +σ 2
σβ σλ
ξ

(

)

E


1
QJ +





 0

2
σε
σ 2 σ 2 +σ 2
β
λ
ξ

(

 if m(t) = m(t − k),
(7)

)
if m(t) 6= m(t − k),

where QJ ∼ χ2 (J). By Jensen’s inequality, the lower bound on the expected slope coefficient computed

7

from same-calendar-month regressions is

E(bk ) >

Jσβ2 σλ2
Jσβ2 (σλ2 + σξ2 ) + σε2

.

(8)

Equation (7) shows how seasonalities in risk premiums aggregate into larger seasonalities in security
returns. The amount of seasonalities apparent in security returns is strictly increasing in the number of
common factors J. This aggregation mechanism is important. Even if each factor carries only modest
seasonality in its risk premium, the seasonalities in security returns are large if securities are exposed
to a large number of distinct risks.
Equation (7) shows that dispersion in loadings determines the amount of seasonalities in the cross
section. The expected slope coefficient in equation (7) is zero for σβ2 = 0 and strictly increasing in
σβ2 . That is, even if all securities are exposed to a risk factor whose premium varies seasonally, such a
variation leaves no trace in the cross section of security returns if every security has the same loading
against that factor. Conversely, even modest variation in a factor’s risk premium can have a large effect
on the cross section of expected returns if stocks have markedly different exposures against that factor.

3

Data

Our tests use monthly and daily return data on stocks listed on NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq from the
Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP). We exclude securities other than ordinary common
shares. We use CRSP delisting returns; if a delisting return is missing, and the delisting is performancerelated, we impute a return of −30%.7 We use returns from January 1963 through December 2011
to compute portfolio returns and as dependent variables in cross-sectional regressions. However, for
7

See Shumway (1997) and Shumway and Warther (1999). The coverage of delisting returns on CRSP has improved since
these papers. In 2012 CRSP files delisting returns are available for 98.3% of the firms that delist for performance-related
reasons, up from 11.7% in Shumway (1997).

8

right-hand-side returns we use monthly returns going back to January 1943.
All accounting data are from annual Compustat files. We use the Davis, Fama, and French (2000)
data to fill in the gaps in the book values of equity in the pre-1963 Compustat data. We follow the
usual conventions to time the variables that use accounting information. The book value of equity, for
example, is from the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1 and, in computing the book-to-market
ratio, this book value is divided by the market value of equity at the end of December of year t − 1.

4

An analysis of return seasonalities within U.S. equities

4.1

Stocks do not repeat past return shocks

The cross-sectional Fama-MacBeth regressions reported in Figure 1 show that returns in months t − 12,
t − 24, . . . , t − 240 predict returns in month t. Although in our model these seasonalities spring from
calendar-month differences in expected returns, they could also derive from a peculiar autocorrelation
structure in the return shocks. If stock returns equal a constant expected return and an innovation,
ri,t = µi + ei,t , the autocorrelation pattern in ei,t could be such that it “repeats” itself at annual lags.
We can distinguish between these alternative explanations by controlling for each stock’s calendar
month-m(t) expected return in the cross-sectional regressions:

ri,t = at + bt ri,t−k + ct µ̂i,t + ei,t .

(9)

We estimate µ̂i,t by computing each stock’s average same-calendar-month return from the prior 20-year
period. To isolate cross-sectional differences in expected returns, and to take into account the fact that
stocks differ in their availability of historical return data, we demean stock returns in the cross section
before taking the average. We include stocks that have at least five years of historical data at time t.
9

We use the same demeaning procedure and sample selection rules throughout the study. Regression (9)
is equivalent to a regression with stock-calendar-month fixed effects, except that it estimates the fixed
effects from historical data to avoid a downward bias in the estimate of bt .8
If the seasonalities reside with the expected returns, the cross-sectional variation in expected returns
will be soaked up by µ̂i,t , making the coefficients of the lagged returns statistically insignificant at annual
lags. If, on the other hand, the seasonalities arise because the market “repeats” returns from the past,
controlling for differences in the expected-return component will not change the annual-slope pattern.
The thick line in Figure 2 plots the coefficient estimates for lagged returns from the augmented
regression (9). The one-year slope coefficient is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level—
perhaps because of the stock price momentum—but the statistical significance of the lagged returns
fades after this point: only one of the remaining 19 same-month return coefficients is significantly
positive at the 5% level. The slope coefficient on the estimated expected return component, µ̂i,t , is
statistically highly significant. In the k = 240 regression, for example, the average slope coefficient
estimate has a t-value of 10.28. The average same-calendar-month return is thus a powerful signal of a
stock’s expected return in that month.
The absence of seasonality in the augmented regressions stands in stark contrast with the coefficients
from the baseline Fama-MacBeth regressions (the thin line in Figure 2). In these regressions 18 of the
20 same-month coefficients are significant at the 5% level. Importantly, our results are specific to
controlling for stock-calendar month variation in expected returns. We show in the Internet appendix
that if we instead control for unconditional differences in expected returns using stock fixed effects, 19
of the 20 same-month coefficients are significant at the 5% level.
8

Nickell (1981), So and Shin (1999), and Choi, Mark, and Sul (2010) study the downward bias that results from the
use of fixed effects in dynamic panel data models.

10

4.2

Return seasonalities in well-diversified portfolios

If return seasonalities stem from seasonal variation in risk premiums, they should appear not only in
returns on individual stocks but also in those earned by well-diversified portfolios.9 Table 1 examines
the profitability of long-short strategies that trade on seasonalities in value-weighted portfolios formed
by sorts on different firm characteristics. We construct all portfolios except momentum in June of year
t and then compute value-weighted returns on these portfolios from year-t July to year-t + 1 June. The
momentum portfolios are rebalanced monthly.
The first row of Table 1 sets the stage by sorting individual stocks into winner-loser deciles by the
20-year average same-calendar-month or other-calendar-month return. In March 1964, for example, we
sort on either the average March (“Same-month return”) or non-March (“Other-month return”) returns
in 1944–63. The seasonality strategies are long the winner and short the loser decile. The same-month
strategy earns an average return of 1.19% per month (t-value = 6.27) while the strategy based on other
months earns a return of −0.96% (t-value = −4.12). These estimates are consistent with Figure 1’s
regression estimates. The three-factor model does not explain these seasonalities: the alpha for the
difference between the same- and other-month strategies has a t-value of 7.42. This result is consistent
with Heston and Sadka’s (2008) finding that the seasonality strategy’s unconditional covariances against
the market, size, and value factors are small.
The other rows construct the long-short strategies by buying and selling portfolios of stocks. Seasonalities abound in most portfolio sorts: a seasonality strategy based on 10 size portfolios earns an average
return of 1.35% (t-value = 6.64); that based on dividend-to-price earns 0.48% (t-value = 3.12); and the
industry strategy earns 0.70% (t-value = 3.79). The last row, “Composite,” collects size, value, mo9

Lewellen (2002) makes a related argument about stock price momentum. He notes that momentum cannot be attributed to firm-specific returns because well-diversified size and book-to-market ratio portfolios exhibit as strong momentum as individual stocks.

11

mentum, dividend-to-price, and industry portfolios—58 portfolios in all—and constructs the long-short
strategy from the top six and bottom six portfolios. (We exclude earnings-to-price and profitability
portfolios because their data start later.) This strategy earns an alpha of 1.3% per month with a tvalue of 8.65, that is, it earns a higher Sharpe ratio than the strategy that trades seasonalities through
individual stocks. In each of these cases the abnormal returns are specific to the same-month sort; the
average returns on strategies based on other -month sorts are either negative or statistically insignificant,
and the three-factor model alphas for the same-minus-other differences are significantly positive.10
Seasonalities are, however, wholly absent from certain portfolios. Both the same- and other-month
strategies based on momentum portfolios, for example, earn high returns, and the difference between
the two is modestly negative. Similarly, no seasonalities are apparent in the returns on the portfolios
formed by sorts on gross profitability. These counterexamples are important. They show that some
characteristics (such as size and industry) are associated with seasonalities in expected returns while
others (such as profitability) are not.
The right-hand side of Table 1 shows that when seasonalities are present, they are typically not
limited to January. The composite strategy, for example, earns an average return of 0.90% (t-value =
6.95) in non-January months. These results confirm and extend the result documented by Heston and
Sadka (2008) that individual-stock seasonalities are stronger in the month of January, but by no means
limited to it.
10

An important difference between the results in Table 1 and those in Heston and Sadka (2008) is that whereas we find
significant industry seasonalities—the long-short same-calendar-month strategy earns 0.70% per month (t-value = 3.79)—
Heston and Sadka (Figure 5 and Table 6) show that return seasonalities are largely independent of industry effects. The
reason for this seeming discrepancy is that Heston and Sadka study a different question. They sort stocks into portfolios
based on individual stock returns, and then examine the extent to which the industry component of returns explains
seasonalities in individual stock returns. Their Table 6, for example, shows that a long-short strategy that sorts stocks into
portfolios based on month-t − 12 returns earns an average return of 1.15% per month, and that this total return breaks
down to an average industry component of 0.12% and a non-industry component of 1.03%. Our analysis, by contrast,
measures the prevalence of seasonalities in industry returns; it is equivalent to sorting stocks into portfolios by stocks’
industry components. In Section 4.4 we measure the extent to which characteristics such as industry membership explain
seasonalities in individual stock returns. Our estimate of 9.7% is remarkably close to that in Heston and Sadka (Table 6)
even though the two papers use different methodologies.

12

Table 1 shows that the seasonalities in expected returns are economically large. The results for
momentum portfolios—which serve as a counterexample—best illustrate this point. Both the same- and
other-month strategies based on momentum portfolios earn significantly positive returns; the reason is
that the unconditional expected returns vary so much across momentum portfolios. Suppose that we
are given return data on ten momentum portfolios but no information on which one is the “winner”
and which one the “loser” portfolio. Because of the magnitude of the momentum effect, we would
nevertheless be able to infer these portfolios almost perfectly from historical data. A long-short strategy
based on historical same- or other-month returns is thus close to a standard momentum strategy: it
buys the “winner” and sells the “loser” portfolio. The surprising result in Table 1 is that this argument
does not hold for any of the other portfolios.11 The amount of seasonal variation in expected returns is
so large that it completely swamps the unconditional differences.
To formalize this insight, suppose that each portfolio’s return equals a constant plus noise,

rp,t = µp + ep,t .

In that case each portfolio’s average historical return equals µp + T1

(10)

PT

k=1 ep,t−k

and is therefore a good

signal of its expected return. If, on the other hand, portfolio returns vary seasonally, the return process
equals
rp,t = µp,m(t) + ep,t
= µ∗p + (µp,m(t) − µ∗p ) + ep,t ,
11

(11)

Momentum is the only sorting variable for which the strategies based on both the same- and other-month returns
generate statistically significant return spreads and, at the same time, the difference between the two is not statistically
significantly different from zero. The gross-profitability strategies are similar to the momentum strategies in that the
same-versus-other-month difference is not statistically significant, so it could be viewed as another exception. At the same
time, the average returns on the gross-profitability strategies are also low. That is, although there is little evidence of
seasonalities in expected returns in the cross section of gross-profitability portfolios—at least before regressing the returns
against the three-factor model—the cross-sectional differences in average returns are also modest.

13

where the second equality decomposes expected returns into the unconditional and seasonal components. The results in Table 1 imply that, in terms of extracting information about expected returns
from historical returns, the seasonal component µp,m(t) − µ∗p completely overwhelms the unconditional
component µ∗p !
Figure 3 illustrates the seasonalities found in portfolio returns by replicating Figure 1 using portfolio
return data. The data are the returns on the 58 portfolios of the composite strategy in Table 1. The
coefficient patterns in Figures 1 and 3 are strikingly similar: the seasonalities in portfolio returns are
as impressive as those in individual stock returns. The average coefficient is positive in the portfolio
regressions at all annual lags up to 20 years, and 19 of the 20 coefficients are associated with a t-value
of at least 2.12

4.3

Seasonality strategies are risky

If the seasonalities in stock returns stem from seasonal variation in risk premiums, then a sort of stocks
into portfolios by their historical same-month returns groups together stocks with similar factor loadings.
Such a similarity should come at a cost: the extreme portfolios should be exposed to common factor
shocks. That is, although portfolios formed by sorting on historical returns diversify away much of the
idiosyncratic risk, they are left exposed precisely to those sources of systematic risk that generate the
seasonalities in the first place. Forming a long-short portfolio does not wash away this risk, because the
stocks in the long and short legs are systematically different.
We compare the risk of the seasonality strategy to that of a randomized seasonality strategy. Every
month when stocks are assigned into portfolios by their average same-month returns, we also assign them
separately into ten random portfolios, and use these portfolios to generate one long-short strategy. We
12

See the Internet appendix for details.

14

then repeat this process 10,000 times. The average annualized volatility of this randomized strategy—
which uses the same universe of stocks and the same time period as the true seasonality strategy—is
7.35%. The volatility of the true seasonality strategy is much larger, 16.64%. That is, the variance of
the true seasonality strategy exceeds that of its randomized counterpart by a factor of five! This simple
comparison confirms that return seasonalities are intertwined with systematic risk without necessitating
a stance on the identities of those risks.

4.4
4.4.1

Explaining seasonalities with firm characteristics
Time-series regressions

Table 2 measures the extent to which seasonalities in well-diversified portfolios explain the seasonalities
in individual stock returns. The dependent variable is the return on the long-short strategy that buys
the top and sells the bottom decile based on the average same-calendar-month return over the prior 20
years. Columns (2) through (8) regress this strategy against long-short strategies that trade seasonalities
in different portfolios. These explanatory strategies are the same as those examined in Table 1.
The individual-stock seasonality strategy correlates significantly with the seasonalities present in
these well-diversified portfolios and its alpha decreases. The intercept is 0.74% per month (t = 4.49) in
column (7) that regresses the returns against all seasonality strategies. The R2 is 17% in this regression,
suggesting that seasonality-mimicking factors capture a meaningful amount of the return variation of
the individual-stock seasonality strategy. The last column shows that the intercept is 0.60% (t = 3.66)
when the seasonality-mimicking factor is derived from the 58 size, value, momentum, dividend-to-price,
and industry portfolios. Thus, even though the seasonalities in stock returns emanate from multiple
risk factors, in time-series regressions a seasonality strategy constructed from a relatively small set of

15

portfolios already explains half of the profits of the individual-stock seasonality strategy.13

4.4.2

Cross-sectional regressions

We can also use cross-sectional regressions to quantify the importance of firm characteristics in explaining seasonalities in individual stock returns. We take the cyclical pattern in Figure 1 as the starting
point. Ignoring the momentum and long-term reversals, all the coefficients in that figure would be equal
if returns exhibited no seasonality. In Table 3 we measure how much the observed seasonality pattern
“flattens” as we control for different firm characteristics. We measure this decrease in seasonality by
comparing the sum of squared deviations of the annual-lag coefficients in regressions with and without
controls for firm characteristics.
We augment the baseline regression with dummy variables for five groups of firm characteristics:
10 dummy variables each for market beta, firm size, book-to-market ratio, and dividend yield, and 17
dummy variables for industry,14

ri,t = at + bt ri,t−k + firm characteristics + ei,t .

(12)

By adding these controls the interpretation of bt changes to that of a marginal effect: how informative
is the lagged same-calendar-month return about month-t returns when holding, for example, industry
constant? The slope estimates from these augmented regressions yield a plot similar to that in Figure 1
except that the peaks are less pronounced if firm characteristics explain some of the seasonal variation
in expected returns.
13
Industries do not necessarily induce return seasonalities because they themselves are “common factors.” An alternative
interpretation for these results is that different industries are exposed to different risks. Industry portfolios then represent
combinations of common factors.
14
We again drop gross profitability and earnings-to-price from this analysis because the data are not available for the
entire sample period.

16

Because additional regressors can decrease the covariance between month-t and -t − k returns just
by reducing the variation in the dependent variable, we estimate the augmented regressions twice. The
first regression uses actual stock characteristics, while the second regression randomly reorders the rows
of the data matrix. We measure the explanatory power of characteristics by comparing the sum of
squared deviations (SSQ) of the actual model to that of the randomized model:

Explanatory power of characteristics = 1 −

SSQactual characteristics
,
SSQrandomized characteristics

(13)

in which the sums of squared deviations of the estimated regression coefficients from zero are computed
at lags k = 12, 24, . . . , 240. We bootstrap the Fama-MacBeth coefficient estimates to obtain standard
errors for the model’s overall explanatory power and the change in the explanatory power when adding
more characteristics. In each simulation we enter the characteristics into the model in random order
and record the incremental change in the sum of squared deviations.
Table 3 reports the estimates separately for the full sample period and for two subperiods. The fullsample estimate for industry, for example, is 9.7%, which indicates that the industry controls account
for approximately one-tenth of the seasonalities in individual stock returns. This estimate is marginally
significant; it is associated with a (bootstrapped) standard error of 5.8%.
Size, value, dividend-to-price, market beta, and industry explain a total of 68% (S.E. = 13%) of the
seasonalities in individual stock returns in the full sample. Firm size and dividend-to-price stand out
for their statistical significance, although the remaining characteristics are jointly significant as well.
Given that our regressions control only for salient variables correlated with common seasonalities, 68%
is a conservative estimate of the fraction of seasonalities explained by common factors.
Our estimates also suggest that the sources of seasonalities may change over time. A comparison

17

of the first- and second-half estimates shows that the roles of size and dividend-to-price ratio have
decreased, that of industries has increased, and the overall explanatory power of the five variables has
decreased from 69% to 59%. That is, although seasonalities are strong in both halves of the data, the
factors from which they emanate may have changed. This analysis, however, is only suggestive as the
estimated contributions are measured with considerable noise.
Figure 4 plots the average Fama-MacBeth coefficients from regressions of month-t returns against
month-t − k returns from regressions that include (thick line) or do not include (thin line) the characteristics controls. The estimates show that observable characteristics explain the majority of the seasonal
pattern: the residual coefficients are much smaller than the baseline coefficients at annual lags. The
figure also shows that the characteristics explain the seasonal patterns better at long lags than at short
lags. This suggests that the characteristics used in our decomposition analysis are more stable than any
seasonality-generating characteristics omitted from our regressions.
The estimates in Tables 2 and 3 suggest that most of the common seasonalities in individual stock
returns can be traced to characteristics such as size and industry. A simple modification to the test
in Section 4.3 suggests that the combined effect of other common factors to returns is nevertheless
substantial. We first run cross-sectional regressions against industry, book-to-market, size, dividend-toprice, and market beta dummies and collect the residuals. We then construct the seasonality strategy by
sorting stocks into portfolios based on average same-month residuals. This strategy is profitable, earning
an average monthly return of 0.86% (t-value = 5.49). It also continues to be exposed to systematic
risk: its variance is 2.96 times that of the randomized strategy. Comparing this number to the five-fold
estimate in Section 4.3 suggests that controlling for industry and size eliminates about one half of the
systematic risk associated with the seasonality strategy—leaving the remaining half to all other sources
of systematic risk.

18

4.5

Seasonalities in the cross section of anomaly returns

Return seasonalities are not only confined to individual stocks and well-diversified portfolios but are also
strongly present in anomaly strategies. We establish the playing field in Table 4 Panel A by reporting the
average returns for the market and 15 anomaly strategies. These anomalies are among those analyzed
in Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012), Novy-Marx (2013), and Lewellen (2014). Except for momentum,
we form deciles at the end of June and hold the value-weighted portfolios for the following year; we
rebalance momentum monthly. Similar to Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012), we change the sort order
from ascending to descending as needed so that the “high” portfolio is always the better-performing
extreme decile as reported by previous studies. The anomaly strategies are long the top and short the
bottom decile.
The first two columns in Panel A report the average monthly returns for the market and the anomalies and the t-values associated with these averages. The momentum strategy, for example, is the most
profitable anomaly (before either CAPM or multifactor-model adjustments), earning 1.92% per month
(t-value = 5.38). The p-value in the next column is from the test that the average returns are the same
in every calendar month. In the case of the market portfolio, for example, the seasonalities are not
strong enough to stand out in month-by-month comparisons; the p-value from the test of equality of
monthly returns is 0.41.
Many anomalies show considerable seasonal variation in their profitability. The results for asset
growth illustrate the nature of these seasonalities. We reject the null of constant expected returns
with a p-value < 0.001 when we use all months of the year. At the same time, asset growth performs
particularly well in January. Indeed, the “Excluding January” estimates in Table 4 show that the average
return on asset growth is lower, and the evidence of seasonalities less compelling (p-value = 0.05), in
the non-January data. Return seasonalities are highly significant in joint tests of the 14 anomalies of
19

Table 4. These tests reject the no-seasonality null hypothesis in both the full and non-January data
with p-values < 0.001.15
Some anomaly strategies display significant seasonalities even though their unconditional average
returns are not statistically different from zero. A strategy that trades on Ohlson’s O-score, for example,
earns a statistically insignificant return of 0.21% per month, yet we reject the null hypothesis of constant
average returns with a p-value < 0.001. The size anomaly is the most prominent example in this class
of anomalies. Anomalies such as these earn relatively high returns in some months and low returns in
other months, so that over the calendar year the abnormal returns almost perfectly offset each other.
Panel A’s evidence on time-series variation in anomaly returns does not imply that there must be
cross-sectional seasonalities in expected anomaly returns. If all anomalies perform well or poorly at the
same time, the cross section of expected returns will be devoid of seasonalities—this case corresponds
to having σβ = 0 in Section 2’s model. If, by contrast, some anomalies do well in some months while
others do well in other months, an investor can profit by buying each month the ones with the highest
expected returns and selling the ones with the lowest expected returns. Panel B of Table 4 examines
the profitability of such meta-strategies. We compute average same-month returns for each anomaly
over the prior 20-year period and form a strategy that is long the top-three and short the bottom-three
anomalies. If, for example, in month t the momentum anomaly ranks the highest and the accruals
anomaly the lowest based on the prior 20 years of data, the meta-strategy would in part be long the
momentum strategy and short the accruals strategy.
The return estimates in Panel B reveal significant cross-sectional seasonalities in anomaly returns.
A strategy that buys the three best- and sells the three worst-performing same-month anomalies based
15

We do not include Distress anomaly into this test because its returns start in 1974. We estimate seemingly unrelated
regressions of returns on 11 calendar-month dummy variables for each of the 14 anomalies and then test the restriction
that the slope estimates on the 14 × 11 dummy variables are jointly zero. The test statistics for the full and non-January
data are F (154, 7980) = 2.38 and F (140, 7322) = 1.63.

20

on historical data earns a monthly return of 1.88% (t-value = 6.43). Remarkably, a strategy based
on historical other -month returns earns a slightly negative average return. That is, rotating through
anomalies based on their historical returns is profitable in the domain of same-calendar-month returns;
but knowing how well a given anomaly has done in other months is uninformative about how well it
will perform in this month in the cross section of anomalies. Our estimates thus do not emerge because
historical same-calendar-month returns rank anomalies from the best to worst, and because the metastrategy then buys the best anomalies (that remain the best) and sells the worst anomalies (that remain
the worst).
The seasonalities in anomaly returns are not limited to the month of January. The meta-strategy
based on same-calendar-month returns earns an average return of 1.26% (t-value of 4.73) in the nonJanuary data. Our results are also not specific to small stocks. Columns labeled “All-but-microcaps”
reconstruct the anomalies without including stocks that lie below the 20th percentile of the NYSE
market capitalization distribution (Fama and French 2008a). Because NYSE stocks are typically larger
than Nasdaq and Amex stocks, this data restriction excludes over 50% of the stocks in the average month
but only 3% of the total market capitalization. The estimates are quite similar for all-but-microcaps
and for the market as a whole. For example, the meta-strategy based on same-calendar-month returns
for all-but-microcaps earns an average return of 1.03% (t-value of 5.74) in the non-January data.

21

5

Seasonalities everywhere: risk exposures, prevalence, and investability

5.1

Macroeconomic risks and time-varying expected returns

Chordia and Shivakumar (2002) find that a set of lagged macroeconomic variables explain profits to
momentum strategies and that these profits disappear after adjusting returns for this predictability.
Columns labeled “Momentum” in Table 5 replicate three key results of the Chordia and Shivakumar
paper using our 1963 through 2011 sample.
The first analysis shows that momentum profits are statistically significantly different from zero
only when the economy is expanding. The second analysis decomposes total holding-period returns into
predicted and unexplained components in two steps. The first step estimates stock-by-stock regressions
of month-t returns on month-t−1 market dividend yield, default spread, term spread, and yield on threemonth T-bills using the prior 60 months of returns. The second step obtains month-t+1 predicted return
by combining the first-stage estimates with the realizations of month-t macroeconomic variables. Similar
to Chordia and Shivakumar (Table III), we find that the average return on the momentum strategy
is statistically insignificant after adjusting momentum payoffs for the predicted-return components.
The third analysis uses the Chordia and Shivakumar methodology to examine the payoffs earned by a
momentum strategy that trades industry momentum (Moskowitz and Grinblatt 1999). Consistent with
Chordia and Shivakumar (Table VIII), the “unpredicted” payoff on the industry momentum strategy
is statistically insignificant.
Table 5 indicates that the macroeconomic variables used by Chordia and Shivakumar are unable to
explain the returns on the seasonality strategy. First, the seasonality strategy, unlike the momentum
strategy, earns higher returns during recessions, and the data cannot reject the null hypothesis that

22

the average payoffs are the same under different macroeconomic conditions. Second, this strategy’s
average unexplained payoff greatly exceeds its predicted payoff. When the seasonality strategy is based
on the returns on individual stocks (17 industries), the average unexplained payoff is 1.15% (2.33%)
per month. The average predicted payoffs, by contrast, are 0.04% and −1.62% per month. As in the
analysis of momentum payoffs, the decomposition induces so much noise into the two payoff components
that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the averages are the same or that each component is
zero. Table 5 thus reveals no evidence of a connection between this set of macroeconomic variables and
return seasonalities.

5.2

Momentum and seasonality profits and macroeconomic risk

Liu and Zhang (2008) examine the relation between momentum and the five macroeconomic variables
of Chen, Roll, and Ross (CRR, 1986): industrial production growth, unexpected inflation, change in
expected inflation, term premium, and default premium. Like Chordia and Shivakumar (2002), Liu and
Zhang compare realized momentum profits with predicted profits. They first estimate risk premiums on
the CRR variables using the two-stage Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions with 10 size, value, and
momentum portfolios as the test assets. They then calculate momentum strategy’s loadings against the
CRR variables and, by combining the risk premium estimates with the estimated factor loadings, find
predicted momentum profits to be close to the realized momentum profits.
Table 6 Panel A replicates the key findings of the Liu and Zhang study. The risk premium estimates
and the loadings of the winner-minus-loser momentum strategy against the CRR variables are comparable to those reported in Liu and Zhang. The realized momentum profits are 1.38%, the predicted profits
are 0.86%, and their difference of 0.52% is statistically insignificant with a t-value of 1.72. The CRR
variables thus seem to explain 63% of the momentum profits in our sample. The seasonality strategy

23

does not fare as well in this test. The difference between the realized (1.19%) and predicted (0.35%)
seasonality profits is associated with a t-value of 4.45. At the same time, the CRR variables appear to
account for just 29% of the seasonalities in stock returns.
One of the innovations in Liu and Zhang (2008, p. 2432) is to augment the set of test assets with ten
momentum portfolios: “[o]ur economic question is what drives momentum profits, so it is only natural
to include momentum portfolios as a part of the testing assets!” We apply this argument in Panel B,
where we estimate the risk premiums and predicted momentum and seasonality profits by augmenting
the set of test assets with seasonality portfolios instead of momentum portfolios. While the model’s
ability to explain momentum evaporates as a result of this change, its ability to explain seasonality
profits increases to 69%. The difference between the realized and predicted profits has a t-value of just
1.92.
The above analysis, however, is problematic. Columns labeled “Randomized” show that the LiuZhang specification has limited power to reject the null hypothesis that realized profits equal expected
profits. We repeat their procedure 10,000 times with the following exception: instead of using the actual
realizations of the CRR macroeconomic variables, we randomize these data by drawing months without
replacement. The bootstrapped 95% confidence interval for the fraction of seasonality explained is
[41%, 82%] when the testing assets contain the ten seasonality portfolios. The estimated fraction of
69% is thus well within an interval obtained from data in which macroeconomic variables are replaced
with “noise.” Momentum behaves the same way. The observed-minus-predicted difference of 0.52 lies
close to median of the bootstrapped difference, 0.55, and well inside the 90% confidence interval. The
bootstrapping results imply that almost half of the randomly generated sets of macroeconomic variables
explain the momentum profits better than the CRR variables!
The Liu-Zhang specification suffers from a variant of the problem examined in detail in Lewellen,

24

Nagel, and Shanken (2010), worsened by the fact that the test assets contain the same return information
that the methodology seeks to explain. A set of test assets consisting of ten size, value, and momentum
portfolios has a rigid factor structure—its covariance matrix could be reconstructed from just four
statistical factors. This makes it relatively easy to find a five-factor model (in this case, the CRR
model) in which linear combinations of the estimated betas span the average returns of the underlying
portfolios. It suffices that the CRR variables correlate even weakly with the statistical factors (Lewellen,
Nagel, and Shanken 2010, Proposition 1); moreover, in finite samples even the sampling noise alone
typically induces sufficient correlations between random variables and these factors. The bootstrapped
distributions in Table 6 show that the Liu-Zhang methodology can indeed “easily” match the data, that
is, it can recover such factor loadings for the test assets that the estimated risk premiums align with
the average returns on the test assets.16
Table 6 shows that when the momentum strategy is evaluated without the momentum portfolios in
the set of test assets, or when the seasonality strategy is evaluated without the seasonality portfolios, the
evidence on the connection between momentum and macroeconomic risks—and that between seasonality
and these risks—is very weak.17 For example, Panel A’s result that the difference between observed and
predicted seasonality profits is 0.85% lies well within the bootstrapped 90% confidence interval for this
difference. Table 6 thus reveals no evidence of a connection between the CRR macroeconomic variables
and return seasonalities.
16

As Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken (2010) point out, their critique is not specific to any one paper. Kramer (1994) and
Priestley (1997) are two papers that relate to ours in that they investigate seasonal patterns in the cross section. Kramer
(1994) explains the size effect in January using a model with January-specific prices of macroeconomic risks and Priestley
(1997) finds that the estimated prices of risks on their macroeconomic variables vary over the calendar year. These studies
follow methodologies that are subject to the Lewellen-Nagel-Shanken criticism.
17
The inability of the CRR variables to explain momentum is consistent with Griffin, Ji, and Martin (2003), whose
analysis of momentum otherwise follows a path very similar to that in Liu and Zhang. The main difference is that Griffin
et al. estimate the risk premiums using the 25 size and book-to-market sorted portfolios as the test assets.

25

5.3

Investor sentiment and anomalies

Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012) study differences in payoffs to 11 anomaly strategies following periods
of high and low investor sentiment. They find each anomaly to be more profitable following periods
of high sentiment, a result driven by the increased profitability of each anomaly’s short leg. The
authors interpret this result as supporting a behavioral (mispricing) story where short-sales constraints
induce asymmetric misvaluation. Under this story, short-sales constraints make it difficult for rational
investors to counteract overpricing induced by irrational investors during high-sentiment periods. These
constraints are not binding during low-sentiment periods, when irrational investors try to push the prices
too low.
Table 7 replicates Stambaugh et al.’s analysis for their combination anomaly, five representative
anomalies, and for strategies that trade seasonalities in individual stocks and portfolios. We follow
the original study and classify as high-sentiment months those in which the value of the Baker and
Wurgler (2006) market-wide sentiment index for the previous month is above the index’s median value
for the sample period. The low-sentiment months are those that follow below-median index values. Our
estimates for the Stambaugh et al. anomalies support their findings: each anomaly is more profitable
following periods of high sentiment, and the payoffs are higher in each anomaly’s short leg. Only the
size effect, which Stambaugh et al. exclude because it is not an anomaly with respect to the three-factor
model, breaks this pattern.
None of the seasonality strategies in Panel B follow this pattern. The seasonality in individual stock
returns is stronger following periods of low sentiment, and the average difference between high and
low sentiment is statistically indistinguishable from zero for all portfolio-seasonality strategies. The
seasonality strategies differ from Panel A’s anomalies also in that their payoffs originate predominantly
from each strategy’s long leg. Panel B’s result on seasonality are inconsistent with the asymmetric
26

mispricing mechanism posited by Stambaugh et al. To be clear, our results do not prove that the
seasonalities in stock returns are unrelated to mispricing. Rather, they show that seasonalities stand
out as rare exceptions in a sea of anomalies.

5.4

Pervasiveness of anomalies

Fama and French (2008b) study how pervasive various anomalies are among stocks of different size.
Whereas accruals, momentum, and net-issuance anomalies exist among all size groups, asset growth and
profitability anomalies are less robust. Understanding how pervasive an anomaly is can be important
for three reasons. First, if the anomaly is found only among small and illiquid stocks, it affects only
a small portion of the market wealth (Fama and French 2008b, p. 1655). Second, the more pervasive
an anomaly is, the less likely it is merely an outcome of data snooping. Third, if an anomaly exists in
many corners of the market or in different asset classes, cross-correlations can be used to measure the
extent to which it emanates from the same source, be it risk or mispricing.

5.4.1

Seasonalities in different partitions of the U.S. stock market

Table 8 Panel A examines the pervasiveness of return seasonalities in different corners of the U.S. equity market. We sort stocks into groups based on firm size, book-to-market, dividend-to-price, and
credit rating18 and then, within each group, compute returns on quintile portfolios formed by historical
same-calendar-month returns. For reference we also report returns for three prominent anomalies—
momentum, net issuances, and asset growth—studied in Fama and French (2008b).
Seasonalities permeate the entire cross section of U.S. stock returns. They can be found among
both microcaps and large-cap stocks; value and growth stocks; stocks that do not pay dividends or pay
18

We use the Avramov, Chordia, Jostova, and Philipov (2007) methodology that assigns firms into 30/40/30 categories
based on S&P Long-Term Domestic Issuer Credit Ratings. The credit-rating sample starts in January 1986 and is restricted
to firms with credit ratings.

27

high dividends; and companies with high and low credit ratings. The patterns for the other anomalies
are less robust. Momentum, for example, is weaker among value stocks and stocks that pay dividends,
and it is wholly absent for firms with medium or high credit ratings (Avramov, Chordia, Jostova, and
Philipov 2007). Likewise, net issuances are weaker among both value and growth stocks relative to
“neutral” stocks. Finally, the asset-growth anomaly is absent among large stocks, growth stocks, and
high-dividend-yield stocks.

5.4.2

Seasonalities over time

Table 8 Panel B reports average returns for various anomalies and seasonality strategies for different
subperiods. Most anomalies flicker in and out of existence. In post-1963 returns the size effect is
marginally significant for only the 1973–1982 subperiod; the value premium is significant only in that
same subperiod but not before or since; and although momentum is in the data from the beginning, it
disappears in the most recent period.
Seasonality strategies resemble momentum in their perseverance. Most of the seasonality strategies
earn positive and statistically significant returns in all subperiods except the most recent one. The tvalues associated with the composite strategy are above 3.5 in each pre-2003 subperiod. In the 2003–11
subperiod the composite strategy is marginally significant with a t-value of 1.75, which is a respectable
result given that the best-performing non-seasonal anomaly (net issuances) has a t-value of 1.31.

5.4.3

Seasonalities in other asset classes

Seasonalities are not confined to U.S. equities. Table 8 Panel C adds to the evidence on the pervasiveness
of seasonalities by examining seasonalities in commodity returns and country indexes. Our commodityreturn data consist of 24 commodity futures assembled from a variety of sources and markets and cover

28

the period January 1970 through July 2011.19 We use MSCI return data for the following 15 country
indexes: Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, and the USA. These data run from January 1970 through December
2011. We form the high and low portfolios for commodities and country indexes based on historical
same- or other-month returns. Each month we include assets that have at least five years of historical
return data.
Table 8 Panel C shows that the average return on a long-short strategy that trades on seasonalities
in commodity returns is 0.93% per month (t-value = 1.93). The average return is −0.22% (t-value
= −0.58) when the long-short strategy instead chooses commodities based on their historical othercalendar-month returns. The difference between the two strategies is economically large (1.15%) and
marginally significant (t-value = 1.97). Seasonalities in country indexes are economically smaller but
statistically stronger. The same-calendar-month strategy earns 0.48% per month (t-value = 2.20), the
other-calendar-month strategy earns −0.36% per month (t-value = −1.66), and the difference between
the returns on the two strategies has a t-value of 2.76. Panel C shows that seasonalities in both
commodity returns and country indexes exist also in non-January data.

5.4.4

Seasonalities at different frequencies

Regressions and portfolio sorts can uncover seasonalities in average returns at any frequency. Figure 5
plots the average coefficients from daily Fama-MacBeth regressions of day-t returns against day-t − k
returns. We study daily returns because of the evidence of significant cross-sectional differences in
average returns for different weekdays. Keim and Stambaugh (1983) show that Friday returns are
19

These futures contracts are on Aluminium, Copper, Nickel, Lead, Zinc, Brent, Gas Oil, Crude Oil, Gasoline, Heating
Oil, Natural Gas, Cotton, Coffee, Cocoa, Sugar, Soybean, Kansas Wheat, Corn, Wheat, Lean Hogs, Feeder Cattle, Live
Cattle, Gold, and Silver. We thank Ralph Koijen, Toby Moskowitz, Lasse Pedersen, and Evert Vrugt for providing these
data. See Koijen, Moskowitz, Pedersen, and Vrugt (2013) for a description of these data.

29

particularly high for small stocks. Chan, Leung, and Wang (2004) find that stock portfolios with high
institutional holdings tend to have higher returns on Mondays than those with low institutional holdings.
The coefficient pattern in Figure 5 is strikingly similar to that in monthly regressions, except that
the coefficients spike at weekly instead of annual lags: the regressions pick up seasonal variation in dayof-the-week returns. The estimates are negative for the first four weeks (except for the same-weekday
spikes at lags 15 and 20) because of short-term reversals in stock returns.20 The statistical significance
of the coefficients is comparable to that in the monthly regressions. The coefficients for all 48 lags
are positive from three weeks (k = 15) up to the one-year mark, and 31 of these 48 coefficients have
t-values greater than 2. Historical same-weekday returns generate significant differences in average
returns also in portfolio sorts. A value-weighted long-short strategy based on historical same-weekday
returns over the past 20 years generates an average daily return of 0.11% (t-value = 13.30), while a
corresponding other-weekday strategy—for example, sort stocks on Monday based on their historical
Tuesday-through-Friday returns—generates an average return of −0.05% (t-value = −4.42).21

5.5

Return correlations between seasonality strategies

Even though return seasonalities are pervasive, they appear to stem from different sources. Table 9
reports return correlations for strategies that trade seasonalities within different subsets of U.S. equities,
commodities, and country portfolios. Panel A shows that return correlations are low even for strategies
that trade seasonalities within U.S. equity markets.22 Consider, for example, the strategies that trade
seasonalities within small-cap stocks and high-dividend-yield stocks. The estimates in Table 8 indicate
that both strategies are highly profitable: their average monthly returns are 0.73% (t = 6.88) and 1.23%
20

See, for example, Lehmann (1990), Jegadeesh (1990), and Gutierrez and Kelley (2008).
The Internet Appendix reports the t-values associated with Figure 5’s regression coefficients, along with average returns
for various strategies that trade day-of-the-week seasonalities.
22
We do not include the credit-rating subsamples in this analysis because these data do not start until 1986.
21

30

(t = 6.42). Yet the correlation between these two strategies is just 0.17. To gain perspective on these
correlations, Panel B reports corresponding correlations for momentum strategies. The momentum
strategies in these same corners are profitable as well—their average returns are 1.35% (t = 5.19) and
0.83% (t = 2.39)—but their correlation is much higher, 0.65. In fact, the lowest correlation between
any two momentum strategies is as high as 0.56.
The low correlations between the seasonality strategies within U.S. equities imply that even though
each strategy is exposed to systematic risks, in each case the seasonalities appear to spring from somewhat different risk factors. An investor can thus obtain diversification benefits by viewing seasonalities
within different subsets of assets as distinct trading strategies. A 50-50 combination of the small-cap
and high-dividend-yield seasonality strategies, for example, generates a Sharpe ratio of 1.24, which is
substantially higher than the Sharpe ratios of 0.9 and 1.0 earned by these strategies on their own. The
total amount of diversification benefits within U.S. equities is substantial because seasonality strategies
are so profitable in every corner of the market and because their correlations are so low. The bestperforming standalone strategy is the one that trades seasonalities within value stocks; its Sharpe ratio
is 0.95. The maximum ex-post Sharpe ratio for a strategy that combines all nine seasonality strategies
in Table 9 Panel A is 1.52.
Panel C shows that return correlations drop close to zero for strategies that trade seasonalities in
different asset classes or that capture seasonalities at different frequencies. The correlation between the
U.S.-stock and country-index strategies, for example, is 0.02, and that between the country-index strategy and the commodity strategy is −0.09. The correlation between the monthly and daily seasonalities
(cumulated to monthly returns) in U.S. equities is just 0.05. These low estimates, along with those
reported in Panel A, suggest that the risks from which the seasonalities stem must vary considerably
not only from one asset class to another, but even between different corners of an asset class.

31

5.6

Investment perspective

Table 9 Panel D reports how the maximum ex-post Sharpe ratio changes if an investor adds different
seasonality strategies to the investment opportunity set. We construct the monthly and daily seasonality
strategies in this table using the same rules that Fama and French (1993) use for constructing the HML
factor. The Sharpe ratio on the market is 0.46, and an investor who also trades the size, value, and
momentum factors attains a Sharpe ratio of 1.04. This Sharpe ratio increases to 1.67 after adding the
U.S. monthly equity seasonality factor, and further to 1.69 after adding the commodity and countryindex strategies. The optimal weight on the monthly-seasonality factor is as high as 46%, and it cuts
the weight on momentum from 23% to 12% and that on the market to just 8%. The last row shows
that daily seasonality crowds out not only other seasonality strategies—the optimal weight on monthly
seasonalities decreases from 41% to 21%—but also further weakens momentum: an investor would now
invest only 4% in the momentum strategy. Although the daily seasonality strategy is infeasible from
an investment perspective due to its high trading costs, these estimates suggest that seasonalities play
a remarkably large role in the cross section of returns.
The monthly seasonality strategies are potentially feasible investment strategies, and it is instructive
to compare them to short-term reversals as both strategies require almost 100% monthly turnover
(Heston and Sadka 2008). Frazzini, Israel, and Moskowitz (2012) use trading data from a large hedge
fund to suggest that the total amount of money that could be invested at a given point of time in
short-term reversals in U.S. equities while retaining some alpha is $9 billion. The total capacity of
monthly seasonalities is probably substantially higher than this figure because the seasonality strategy
is more profitable and because it also applies to large stocks. Moreover, even if investors do not trade
seasonalities as separate strategies, they are substantial enough to influence investors’ decisions to enter
and exit positions. An investor can, for example, lower turnover and enhance returns by delaying a
32

trade whenever the trading strategy calls for selling a stock whose seasonal pattern predicts a high
expected return next month.23

6

Discussion and Conclusions

Return seasonalities are remarkably pervasive. They permeate all partitions of the U.S. equity markets,
reside at different frequencies, and are also present in the cross sections of commodity and country index
returns. At the same time, different return seasonalities are only weakly correlated with each other.
These low correlations suggest that the return seasonalities in various corners of the asset markets stem
from different sources. Our results are consistent with security returns aggregating seasonalities stemming from multiple risks. If U.S. equities, for example, are exposed to different risks than commodities,
it comes as no surprise that the seasonalities found within these two asset classes are unrelated to each
other. We also find that the factors generating seasonalities are largely the same as those generating
differences in average returns. This suggests that seasonalities are not an isolated or distinct class of
anomalies and that there may not be a need for a separate explanation for the risks associated with
them.
Return seasonalities are economically significant. A strategy that takes long and short positions
in 15 anomalies based on historical same-calendar month returns earns an average monthly return of
1.88% (t-value = 6.43). For all anomalies but momentum, the amount of seasonal variation is so large
that it completely masks any unconditional differences in average returns. We show that historical
other -calendar month returns are uninformative about how well a particular anomaly will do in the
cross section of anomalies in the future.
The economic significance of seasonalities can be characterized by studying how much they matter
23

Novy-Marx and Velikov (2014) analyze cost-mitigation techniques that trade one strategy “on the margin” of another
strategy, and find that such techniques lower turnover and enhance net returns.

33

in asset allocation. Adding a seasonality factor to an investment opportunity set that includes the
market, size, value, and momentum, increases the Sharpe ratio from 1.04 to 1.67. This is a substantial
increase—about as large as the one obtained from adding size, value, and momentum to an investment
opportunity set consisting of the market factor alone. Adding the seasonality factor also significantly
tilts the composition of the optimal portfolio away from the traditional factors. For example, a meanvariance optimizing investor would invest under 10% of the assets in the market portfolio—and almost
50% in the seasonality factor. These computations buttress the conclusion that seasonal variation in
expected returns is strikingly large relative to unconditional differences in expected returns.
Our results have implications for research in asset pricing. First, our results suggest that one can
identify additional factors by searching not only for variables that explain variation in average returns,
but also for those associated with return seasonalities. Both methods can be just as powerful if risk
premiums exhibit seasonal variation. Second, our results inform theory. A theory that aims to model
variation in expected returns should also be able to account for the seasonalities in risk premiums.

34

REFERENCES
Avramov, D., T. Chordia, G. Jostova, and A. Philipov (2007). Momentum and credit rating. Journal
of Finance 62 (5), 2503–2520.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2006). Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns. Journal
of Finance 61 (4), 1645–1680.
Barber, B. M., E. T. De George, R. Lehavy, and B. Trueman (2013). The earnings announcement
premium around the globe. Journal of Financial Economics 108 (1), 118–138.
Chan, S. H., W.-K. Leung, and K. Wang (2004). The impact of institutional investors on the Monday
seasonal. Journal of Business 77 (4), 967–986.
Chen, N., R. Roll, and S. Ross (1986). Economic forces and the stock market. Journal of Business 59 (3), 383–403.
Choi, C.-Y., N. C. Mark, and D. Sul (2010). Bias reduction in dynamic panel data models by common
recursive mean adjustment. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 72 (5), 567–599.
Chordia, T. and L. Shivakumar (2002). Momentum, business cycle, and time-varying expected returns. Journal of Finance 57 (2), 985–1019.
Davis, J. L., E. F. Fama, and K. R. French (2000). Characteristics, covariances, and average returns:
1929 to 1997. Journal of Finance 55 (1), 389–406.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns of stocks and bonds. Journal
of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3–56.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2008a). Average returns, B/M, and share issues. Journal of Finance 63 (6), 2971–2995.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2008b). Dissecting anomalies. Journal of Finance 63 (4), 1653–1678.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2012). Size, value, and momentum in international stock returns.
Journal of Financial Economics 105 (3), 457–472.
Fama, E. F. and J. D. MacBeth (1973). Risk, return and equilibrium: Empirical tests. Journal of
Political Economy 71 (3), 607–636.
Frazzini, A., R. Israel, and T. J. Moskowitz (2012). Trading costs of asset pricing anomalies. AQR
Capital Management working paper.
Frazzini, A. and O. A. Lamont (2007). The earnings announcement premium and trading volume.
AQR Capital Management working paper.
Garrett, I., M. J. Kamstra, and L. A. Kramer (2005). Winter blues and time variation in the price
of risk. Journal of Empirical Finance 12, 291–316.
Griffin, J. M. (2002). Are the Fama and French factors global or country specific? Review of Financial
Studies 15 (3), 783–803.
Griffin, J. M., X. Ji, and J. S. Martin (2003). Momentum investing and business cycle risk: Evidence
from pole to pole. Journal of Finance 58 (6), 2515–2547.
Grinblatt, M. S. and T. J. Moskowitz (2004). Predicting stock price movements from past returns:
The role of consistency and tax-loss selling. Journal of Financial Economics 71 (3), 541–579.

35

Gutierrez, Jr, R. C. and E. K. Kelley (2008). The long-lasting momentum in weekly returns. Journal
of Finance 63 (1), 415–447.
Hartzmark, S. M. and D. H. Solomon (2013). The dividend month premium. Journal of Financial
Economics 109 (3), 640–660.
Heston, S. L. and R. Sadka (2008). Seasonality in the cross-section of stock returns. Journal of
Financial Economics 87 (2), 418–445.
Heston, S. L. and R. Sadka (2010). Seasonality in the cross-section of stock returns: The international
evidence. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45 (5), 1133–1160.
Hou, K., G. A. Karolyi, and B.-C. Kho (2011). What factors drive global stock returns? Review of
Financial Studies 24 (8), 2527–2574.
Jegadeesh, N. (1990). Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns. Journal of Finance 45 (3),
881–898.
Kamstra, M. J., L. A. Kramer, and M. D. Levi (2003). Winter blues: A SAD stock market cycle.
American Economic Review 93 (1), 324–343.
Kamstra, M. J., L. A. Kramer, and M. D. Levi (2014). Seasonal variation in treasury returns. Critical
Finance Review . Forthcoming.
Kang, J., T. Pekkala, C. Polk, and R. M. Ribeiro (2011). Stock prices under pressure: How tax and
interest rates drive returns at the turn of the tax year. Harvard University working paper.
Keim, D. B. and R. F. Stambaugh (1983). A further investigation of the weekend effect in stock
returns. Journal of Finance 39 (3), 819–835.
Koijen, R. S. J., T. J. Moskowitz, L. H. Pedersen, and E. B. Vrugt (2013). Carry. NBER Working
Paper No. 19325.
Kramer, C. (1994). Macroeconomic seasonality and the January effect. Journal of Finance 49 (5),
1883–1891.
Lehmann, B. N. (1990). Fads, martingales, and market efficiency. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (1), 1–28.
Lewellen, J. (2002). Momentum and autocorrelation in stock returns. Review of Financial Studies 15 (2), 533–563.
Lewellen, J. (2014). The cross section of expected stock returns. Critical Finance Review . Forthcoming.
Lewellen, J., S. Nagel, and J. Shanken (2010). A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing tests. Journal of
Financial Economics 96 (2), 175–194.
Liu, L. X. and L. Zhang (2008). Momentum profits, factor pricing, and macroeconomic risk. Review
of Financial Studies 21 (6), 2417–2448.
Moskowitz, T. J. and M. Grinblatt (1999). Do industries explain momentum?
nance 54 (4), 1249–1290.

Journal of Fi-

Nickell, S. (1981). Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects. Econometrica 49 (6), 1417–1426.
Novy-Marx, R. (2013). The other side of value: The gross profitability premium. Journal of Financial
Economics 108 (1), 1–28.

36

Novy-Marx, R. and M. Velikov (2014). A taxonomy of anomalies and their trading costs. NBER
Working Paper No. 20721.
Priestley, R. (1997). Stock returns and the macroeconomy. Economic Journal 107 (6), 1742–1750.
Reinganum, M. R. (1983). The anomalous stock market behavior of small firms in January: Empirical
tests for tax-loss selling effects. Journal of Financial Economics 12 (1), 89–104.
Shanken, J. (1992). On the estimation of beta pricing models. Review of Financial Studies 5, 1–34.
Shumway, T. (1997). The delisting bias in CRSP data. Journal of Finance 52 (1), 327–340.
Shumway, T. and V. A. Warther (1999). The delisting bias in CRSP’s Nasdaq data and its implications
for the size effect. Journal of Finance 54 (6), 2361–2379.
So, B. S. and D. W. Shin (1999). Recursive mean adjustment in time-series inferences. Statistics and
Probability Letters 43 (1), 65–73.
Stambaugh, R. F., J. Yu, and Y. Yuan (2012). The short of it: Investor sentiment and anomalies.
Journal of Financial Economics 104 (2), 288–320.
Wachtel, S. B. (1942). Certain observations on seasonal movements in stock prices. Journal of Business 15 (2), 184–193.

37

0.02

b̂t

0.01

0.00

-0.01
12

24

36

48

60

72

84

96

108 120 132 144 156 168 180 192 204 216 228 240
Lag, months

Figure 2: Seasonalities in individual stock returns when controlling for stocks’ historical
average same-calendar-month returns. The thin line uses data from January 1963 through December 2011 for NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq stocks to estimate univariate Fama-MacBeth regressions
of month-t returns against month-t − k returns, ri,t = at + bt ri,t−k + ei,t , with k ranging from one to
240 months. The thick line adds to this regression each stock’s average same-calendar-month return
from the prior 20-year period, ri,t = at + bt ri,t−k + ct µ̂i,t + ei,t . The circles and squares denote annual
coefficient estimates.

38

0.10

b̂t

0.05

0.00

-0.05

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

96

108 120 132 144 156 168 180 192 204 216 228 240
Lag, months

Figure 3: Seasonalities in portfolio returns. This figure uses data from January 1963 through
December 2011 for NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq stocks to estimate univariate Fama-MacBeth regressions
of month-t returns against month-t −k returns, rp,t = at +bt rp,t−k +ep,t , with k ranging from one to 240
months. The data are returns on 58 size, value, momentum, dividend-to-price, and industry portfolios.
The circles denote estimates at annual lags.

39

0.020
0.015
0.010

b̂t

0.005
0.000
-0.005
-0.010
-0.015

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

96

108 120 132 144 156 168 180 192 204 216 228 240
Lag, months

Figure 4: Seasonality in monthly returns with controls for stock characteristics. The thin line
shows the average Fama-MacBeth coefficients from regressions of month-t returns on month-t−k returns,
where k ranges from 1 to 240. The thick line plots coefficients from returns-on-returns regressions that
include decile dummy variables for book-to-market, firm size, dividend-to-price, and market beta as
well as dummy variables for the 17 Fama-French industries. The circles and squares denote annual
coefficient estimates.

40

0.004
0.003
0.002

b̂t

0.001
0.000
-0.001
-0.002
-0.003

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125
Lag, days

Figure 5: Day-of-the-week seasonalities in stock returns. This figure uses data on NYSE, Amex,
and Nasdaq stocks from January 1963 through December 2011 to estimate Fama-MacBeth regressions
of day-t returns against day-t − k returns, where k ranges from 1 to 125. These regressions also include
the average daily stock return from month t − 12 to t − 2 to control for one-year return momentum.
The circles denote weekly lags.

41

Table 1: Seasonalities in individual-stock and portfolio returns
We form 10 portfolios by sorting on size, book-to-market, momentum, and gross profitability; 11 portfolios by sorting on dividend-to-price and earnings-to-price with zero-dividend and negative-earnings
stocks in their own portfolios; and 17 portfolios for Fama-French industries. Momentum is the prior
one-year return skipping a month (rt−12,t−2 ) and gross profitability is revenue minus cost of goods sold
to total assets. Except for momentum, we rebalance the portfolios every June and then compute valueweighted returns from July of year t to June of year t + 1; momentum portfolios are rebalanced monthly.
Row “Composite” combines the 58 size, value, momentum, dividend-to-price, and industry portfolios.
The same-month portfolio sorts rank individual stocks and portfolios by their average return in the
same calendar month over the prior 20 years. The other-month portfolio sorts rank stocks or portfolios
based on the average return in all other months over the same period, skipping months t − 11 through
t − 1. The long-short strategy based on individual stocks trade the top and bottom deciles; those based
on size, value, momentum, profitability, dividend-to-price, and earnings-to-price trade the top and bottom portfolios; that based on the industry portfolios trade the top two and bottom two portfolios; and
the composite strategy trades the top six and bottom six portfolios. FF3 α is the Fama and French
(1993) three-factor model alpha for the difference between the same- and other-month strategies. We
use monthly data from January 1963 through December 2011 except for the gross profitability and
earnings-to-price portfolios for which the data begin in January 1973.
Sample
All months

Set of
assets
Individual stocks
Portfolios sorted by:
Size
Value
Momentum
Gross profitability
Dividend-to-price
Earnings-to-price
Industry
Composite

Sort
Samemonth
return
1.19
(6.27)

by:
Othermonth
return
−0.96
(−4.12)

1.35
(6.64)
0.47
(2.76)
1.83
(5.77)
0.20
(1.21)
0.48
(3.12)
0.57
(2.93)
0.70
(3.79)
1.30
(8.65)

−0.94
(−3.94)
0.23
(1.27)
1.89
(5.39)
0.33
(1.91)
−0.50
(−3.08)
0.12
(0.50)
−0.81
(−4.32)
0.01
(0.06)

Difference
Avg
FF3 α
2.16
1.63
(7.94)
(7.42)
2.29
(6.53)
0.24
(1.05)
−0.07
(−0.20)
−0.13
(−0.64)
0.99
(3.97)
0.45
(1.35)
1.51
(5.40)
1.29
(6.31)

2.29
(6.78)
0.44
(2.31)
−0.34
(−1.21)
−0.33
(−1.53)
1.07
(4.41)
0.55
(1.98)
1.35
(4.71)
1.18
(5.92)

42

Sort
Samemonth
return
0.99
(5.45)

Excluding January
by:
Othermonth
Difference
return
Avg
FF3 α
−0.56
1.56
1.35
(−2.51)
(6.28)
(6.54)

0.73
(3.88)
0.23
(1.55)
1.82
(6.08)
0.21
(1.31)
0.34
(2.09)
0.30
(1.73)
0.59
(3.11)
0.90
(6.95)

−0.55
(−2.15)
0.16
(0.85)
2.30
(5.81)
0.36
(2.03)
−0.31
(−1.88)
0.18
(0.68)
−0.69
(−3.66)
0.28
(1.81)

1.28
(3.61)
0.07
(0.33)
−0.48
(−1.77)
−0.15
(−0.74)
0.65
(2.60)
0.12
(0.33)
1.28
(4.74)
0.62
(3.68)

1.45
(4.48)
0.36
(1.84)
−0.63
(−3.07)
−0.30
(−1.37)
0.86
(3.62)
0.32
(1.13)
1.27
(4.49)
0.69
(4.30)

Table 2: Regressions of individual stock return seasonalities on portfolio return seasonalities
This table reports estimates from regressions in which the dependent variable is the return on the longshort strategy that trades on seasonalities in individual stock returns and the explanatory variables are
returns on long-short strategies that buy and sell portfolios based on portfolios’ average same-calendarmonth returns. The average returns for the individual-stock and portfolio strategies are reported in
Table 1. The intercept measures the extent to which the seasonalities in individual-stock returns are
explained by the seasonality-mimicking factors.
Explanatory
variable
Intercept

Seasonality strategy
Size

(1)
1.19
(6.27)

(2)
0.97
(5.37)

(3)
1.11
(5.57)

Regression
(4)
(5)
1.12
1.04
(6.03)
(5.85)

(6)
0.94
(5.52)

(7)
0.74
(4.49)

0.36
6.56

0.11
1.57
0.07
(1.07)
−0.03
−0.45
0.22
(3.21)
0.30
(6.14)

0.17
(2.11)

Value

0.18
(2.22)

Momentum

0.04
(0.58)

Dividend-to-price

0.32
5.03

Industry
Composite

Adjusted R2

(8)
0.60
(3.66)

0.46
(6.27)
3.0%

1.8%

43

0.0%

8.0%

11.4%

17.3%

12.6%

Table 3: Decomposing monthly seasonalities by stock characteristics
This table reports estimates of the extent to which various firm characteristics explain seasonalities
in monthly stock returns. We estimate regressions of month-t returns on month-t − k returns for the
first 20 annual lags. These regressions include as controls 17 dummy variables for industry; 10 dummy
variables each for book-to-market and market beta; and 11 dummy variables for dividend-to-price with
zero-dividend firms kept separate. We compute the average coefficient on the lagged return from the
Fama-Macbeth regressions and record the sum of their squared deviations from zero. We measure
a model’s explanatory power by comparing the sum of squared deviations between the model that
uses actual characteristics to one that randomly reorders firm characteristics. We randomize the order
in which the characteristics enter the model and repeat these computations 100,000 times to obtain
bootstrapped standard errors. This table reports the average change in the explanatory power for each
firm characteristic.

Industry

Book-tomarket

Characteristic
Firm
size

Dividendto-price

Market
beta

Total

0.044
0.058

0.678
0.131

0.036
0.075

0.689
0.166

0.053
0.080

0.592
0.177

Full sample, 1963–2011
Contribution
S.E.

0.097
0.058

0.028
0.059

0.346
0.061

0.162
0.062

First half, 1963–1986
Contribution
S.E.

0.088
0.075

0.043
0.076

0.347
0.075

0.176
0.077

Second half, 1987–2011
Contribution
S.E.

0.126
0.079

0.011
0.082

0.269
0.082

44

0.135
0.080

Table 4: Seasonalities in the cross section of anomaly returns
Panel A reports average monthly returns for the market over the one-month T-bill and 15 anomalies.
Except for momentum, we sort stocks into deciles at the end of June and hold the value-weighted
portfolios for the following year; momentum is rebalanced monthly. The “high” portfolio is the higherperforming extreme decile as reported by previous studies. Anomaly strategies are long the high decile
and short the bottom decile. Column “r̄Jan = · · · = r̄Dec , p-value” reports the p-value from the test
that the average return is the same in every calendar month; the last row reports p-values from joint
tests that the anomalies on rows 2 through 15 show no seasonalities in their average returns. Panel B
forms meta-long-short strategies that take long and short positions in 3+3 anomaly strategies. We form
these strategies by sorting on either the same- or other-calendar-month returns over the prior 20-year
period. The sample period is from July 1963 through December 2011 for all anomalies except Distress,
for which the data begin in July 1974.
Panel A: Seasonal variation in expected anomaly returns
All months
r̄Jan = r̄Feb
· · · = r̄Dec ,
#
Strategy
Mean t-value
p-value
1
Market
0.439
2.19
0.411
2
Size
0.354
1.17
0.000
3
Value
0.508
2.17
0.000
4
Momentum
1.916
5.38
0.003
5
Gross profitability
0.451
2.69
0.080
6
Dividend to price
0.026
0.11
0.077
7
Earnings to price
0.559
2.61
0.003
8
Investment to assets
0.462
3.25
0.032
9
Return on assets
0.396
1.27
0.000
10
Asset growth
0.454
2.62
0.000
11
Net operating assets
0.672
4.85
0.566
12
Accruals
0.498
2.78
0.974
13
Composite equity issuance 0.628
3.53
0.524
14
Net issuances
0.845
5.70
0.547
15
Ohlson’s O-score
0.205
0.66
0.000
16
Distress
0.663
1.58
0.000
2–15 Joint seasonality test
0.000

45

Excluding January
r̄Feb = r̄Mar
· · · = r̄Dec ,
Mean t-value
p-value
0.384
1.91
0.381
−0.363
−1.24
0.000
0.224
0.95
0.007
2.327
5.79
0.186
0.567
3.31
0.266
−0.023
−0.10
0.034
0.370
1.59
0.043
0.353
2.42
0.152
0.798
2.50
0.576
0.236
1.23
0.050
0.695
5.09
0.496
0.479
2.73
0.954
0.679
3.78
0.519
0.874
5.63
0.474
0.655
2.05
0.062
1.599
3.86
0.058
0.000

Panel B: Profitability of long-short meta-strategies that rotate anomalies
Sample
All stocks
All
Excluding
Meta-strategy
months
January
Sort strategies by estimated
1.88
1.26
same-calendar-month premiums
(6.43)
(4.73)
Sort strategies by estimated
other-calendar-month premiums
Difference

All-but-microcaps
All
Excluding
months
January
1.38
1.03
(6.78)
(5.74)

−0.36
(−1.49)

0.10
(0.38)

−0.05
(−0.23)

0.22
(0.89)

2.24
(6.06)

1.16
(3.76)

1.43
(5.24)

0.81
(3.18)

46

Table 5: Macroeconomic risks and time-varying expected returns
This table uses the methods of Chordia and Shivakumar (2002, Tables II, III, and VIII) to study the
connection between macroeconomic risks and the returns on the seasonality strategy. Panel A partitions
the 588-month sample period from 1963 through 2011 into recessions and expansionary periods using the
NBER classification and reports the average returns on momentum and seasonality strategies. Panel B
decomposes each stock’s return into predicted and unexpected components (see text). We report the
average returns and the averages of the predicted and unexpected return components for the momentum
and seasonality strategies. The momentum strategy is the 6/0/6 strategy of Chordia and Shivakumar,
which sorts stocks into portfolios by month-t − 6 to t − 1 returns and holds the portfolios for six months.
The seasonality strategy sorts stocks by their average same-calendar-month returns over the prior 20
years. We construct the momentum and seasonality strategies using both individual stocks and 17
Fama-French industries. The industry strategies buy the top-two and sell the bottom-two industries.
The sample contains all stocks traded on NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq. All portfolios are value-weighted.
Panel A: Returns conditional on business cycle
Individual stocks
Period
Momentum
Seasonality
Expansions
1.17
1.14
(N = 498)
(4.70)
(6.26)

17 Industries
Momentum
Seasonality
0.44
0.76
(2.54)
(4.14)

Recessions
(N = 90)

0.34
(0.31)

1.47
(2.09)

−0.17
(−0.31)

0.41
(0.54)

Difference

0.83
(0.74)

−0.33
(−0.46)

0.62
(1.08)

0.34
(0.43)

Panel B: Return decomposition based on macroeconomic variables
Return
Individual stocks
component
Momentum
Seasonality
Total
1.06
1.19
(3.81)
(6.39)
Predicted
Unexpected

17 Industries
Momentum
Seasonality
0.36
0.71
(2.05)
(3.84)

1.14
(0.41)

0.04
(0.04)

1.49
(1.20)

−1.62
(−2.34)

−0.08
(−0.03)

1.15
(1.32)

−1.14
(−0.90)

2.33
(3.24)

47

Table 6: Momentum and seasonality profits and macroeconomic risk
This table explains returns to momentum and seasonality strategies by combining these strategies’ estimated loadings against macroeconomic risks with estimates of risk premiums associated with these risks.
The macroeconomic variables are industrial production growth (MP), unexpected inflation (UI), change
of expected inflation (DEI), term premium (UTS), and default premium (UPR). Panel A follows the Liu
and Zhang (2008) methodology and uses ten value-weighted size, value, and momentum portfolios as
testing assets for computing the risk premiums using Fama and MacBeth’s (1973) two-stage procedure.
All portfolios are value-weighted. Panel B replaces momentum portfolios with seasonality portfolios in
the set of test assets. t-values associated with the risk premium estimates are Shanken (1992)-corrected.
Factor loadings are estimated using full-sample time-series regressions. “Observed vs. predicted returns”
reports the realized and predicted returns, the difference between the two, and the t-value associated
with this difference. The “fraction explained” is 1 − Predicted/Observed. “Bootstrapped observed −
predicted distributions” repeats the estimation procedure 10,000 times using randomized CRR data
matrixes and reports the percentiles of the observed-minus-predicted difference.
Panel A: Size, value, and momentum portfolios as test assets
Intercept
MP
UI
Risk
premium
0.23
0.73
−0.09
estimates
(0.53)
(1.97)
(−1.03)

Factor
loadings

Observed −
predicted
returns
Bootstrapped
observed −
predicted
distributions

Strategy
Momentum

DEI
−0.01
(−0.28)

UTS
0.76
(0.61)

UPR
−0.57
(−2.37)

MP
0.34
(0.90)
−0.12
(−0.36)

UI
−1.39
(−0.67)
0.65
(0.66)

DEI
6.78
(1.59)
−3.49
(−1.14)

UTS
−0.29
(−1.41)
0.12
(1.00)

UPR
−1.37
(−1.14)
−0.63
(−1.75)

Strategy
Momentum
Seasonality

Observed
1.38
1.19

Predicted
0.86
0.35

diff
0.52
0.85

t(diff)
1.72
4.45

Fraction
explained
62.6%
29.0%

Strategy
Momentum
Seasonality

5th
0.24
0.67

25th
0.41
1.05

Percentile
50th
0.55
1.31

75th
0.73
1.56

95th
1.01
1.95

Seasonality

48

Panel B: Size, value, and seasonality portfolios as test assets
Intercept
MP
UI
Risk
premium
0.34
−0.22
0.12
estimates
(0.57)
(−0.32)
(0.78)

Factor
loadings

Observed −
predicted
returns
Bootstrapped
observed −
predicted
distributions

Strategy
Momentum

DEI
−0.08
(−1.20)

UTS
2.42
(1.84)

UPR
−0.24
(−0.62)

MP
0.34
(0.90)
−0.12
(−0.36)

UI
−1.39
(−0.67)
0.65
(0.66)

DEI
6.78
(1.59)
−3.49
(−1.14)

UTS
−0.29
(−1.41)
0.12
(1.00)

UPR
−1.37
(−1.14)
−0.63
(−1.75)

Strategy
Momentum
Seasonality

Observed
1.38
1.19

Predicted
−1.19
0.83

diff
2.57
0.37

t(diff)
8.54
1.92

Fraction
explained
.
69.4%

Strategy
Momentum
Seasonality

5th
0.43
0.15

25th
1.11
0.38

Percentile
50th
1.55
0.58

75th
1.99
0.79

95th
2.71
1.07

Seasonality

49

Table 7: Investor sentiment, seasonality, and anomalies
This table measures the profitability of various anomalies conditional on investor sentiment. The highsentiment (low-sentiment) months are those in which the value of the Baker and Wurgler (2006) marketwide sentiment index for the previous month is above (below) the index’s median value in the sample
period. Panel A reports average returns for the five anomalies studied in Table 2 of Stambaugh et al.
(2012, SYY), as well as for the 11-anomaly “combination” strategy of that study. Panel B reports average returns for strategies that trade seasonalities in individual stocks as well as in portfolios constructed
by sorts on size, value, momentum, gross profitability, dividend-to-price, earnings-to-price, and industry; “Composite” is a seasonality strategy based on 58 portfolios (see Table 1). The average returns for
the long and short legs are in excess of the one-month Treasury bill rate. The sample period is from
August 1965 through January 2011 except for gross profitability and earnings-to-price, for which the
data start in January 1973.
Panel A: Average anomaly returns conditional on sentiment
Sentiment
High
Low
Leg
Leg
Anomaly
Long Short
Diff.
t
Long Short
Diff.
t
Net issuances
0.78 −0.39
1.17
4.72
0.92
0.42
0.50
2.69
Ohlson’s O-score
0.27 −0.69
0.96
1.86
0.60
1.10 −0.50 −1.21
Momentum
0.73 −1.75
2.48
5.83
1.62
0.21
1.41
2.31
Gross profitability 0.54 −0.16
0.70
2.99
0.77
0.67
0.09
0.39
Asset growth
0.36 −0.38
0.74
2.98
1.05
0.71
0.34
1.42
SYY combination
0.44 −0.62
1.06
6.00
0.94
0.68
0.27
1.44
Size
Value

0.07
0.27 −0.21 −0.51
0.65 −0.03
0.68
1.98

1.57
1.12

0.52
0.66

1.05
0.46

2.35
1.41

Diff. in
long − short
Avg
t
0.67
2.13
1.46
2.18
1.07
1.40
0.61
1.85
0.39
1.11
0.79
3.06
−1.26
0.21

−2.04
0.47

Panel B: Average returns on seasonality strategies conditional on sentiment
Sentiment
High
Low
Leg
Leg
Assets
Long Short Diff.
t
Long Short Diff.
Individual stocks
0.61 −0.23 0.84 2.81
1.70
0.06 1.64

t
5.84

Diff. in
long − short
Avg
t
−0.80 −2.11

Portfolios
Size
Value
Momentum
Gross profitability
Dividend-to-price
Earnings-to-price
Industry
Composite

4.58
2.01
4.24
1.77
1.76
2.65
3.44
6.59

−0.06
0.03
0.42
−0.30
0.11
−0.33
−0.23
−0.17

0.91
0.73
0.84
0.28
0.60
0.47
0.60
0.86

−0.41
0.17
−1.30
0.24
0.05
0.08
−0.02
−0.40

1.32
0.56
2.15
0.05
0.54
0.39
0.63
1.26

4.29
2.45
3.99
0.19
2.41
1.37
2.07
5.35

50

1.73
1.10
1.64
0.86
1.16
1.11
1.02
1.58

0.34
0.57
−0.08
0.52
0.72
0.39
0.16
0.15

1.39
0.52
1.72
0.35
0.44
0.72
0.86
1.42

−0.14
0.09
0.63
−0.95
0.30
−0.83
−0.61
−0.50

51

Asset growth
Q5 − Q1

Net issuances
Q5 − Q1

Momentum
Q5 − Q1

0.62
(4.20)

0.76
(4.82)

1.69
(6.81)

0.44
(3.54)

0.52
(3.83)

1.35
(5.19)

0.25
(1.66)

0.52
(3.95)

0.94
(3.10)

0.11
(0.68)

0.47
(2.97)

1.34
(5.10)

0.25
(1.81)

0.59
(5.23)

0.85
(2.66)

0.32
(2.22)

0.40
(2.45)

0.71
(2.36)

0.37
(2.06)

0.88
(4.64)

1.60
(6.13)

0.39
(2.79)

0.48
(3.66)

1.05
(3.34)

0.10
(0.76)

0.37
(3.47)

0.83
(2.39)

Panel A: Seasonality and other return anomalies within U.S. equity subsamples
Book-to-market
Dividend-to-price
Firm size
Micro Small Large
Growth Neutral Value
=0
Low
High
Anomaly
Seasonality
Q1
0.86
0.78
0.34
0.30
0.52
0.87
0.45
0.31
0.48
Q5
1.48
1.51
1.30
1.35
1.52
1.74
1.57
1.45
1.71
Q5 − Q1
0.62
0.73
0.96
1.05
1.00
0.87
1.11
1.14
1.23
(6.44) (6.88) (5.66)
(6.07)
(6.00) (4.51)
(6.61) (5.21) (6.42)

1.03
(2.33)

1.01
(2.60)

1.69
(3.19)

0.56
1.26
0.70
(2.76)

0.34
(1.81)

0.56
(2.44)

0.65
(1.45)

0.52
1.37
0.85
(4.63)

0.26
(1.33)

0.54
(2.88)

0.24
(0.54)

−0.02
1.73
1.74
(4.23)

Credit rating
Low Medium
High

Panel A measures the performance of value-weighted seasonality, momentum, net issuance, and asset growth strategies by partitioning the universe of U.S. equities based on firm size, book-to-market, dividend-to-price, and credit rating. Microcaps are stocks
with market capitalizations below the 20th percentile of the NYSE distribution; small firms are firms above this percentile and
below the median; and large firms are firms above the median. The book-to-market subsamples assign stocks using the 30- and
70-percentile breakpoints. The dividend-to-price subsamples separate stocks that do not pay dividends and breaks dividend-paying
stocks using the median. The credit-rating subsamples use the Avramov et al. (2007) methodology and assign firms into categories
using the 30- and 70-percentile breakpoints of S&P Long-Term Domestic Issuer Credit Ratings. The sample period in Panel A is
from July 1963 through December 2011 except for the credit-rating sample which starts January 1986 and is restricted to firms
with credit ratings. We assign stocks into subsamples at the end of June except for credit rating for which we use the Avramov
et al. (2007) procedure. Seasonality and momentum strategies are rebalanced monthly; net-issuance and asset-growth strategies
are rebalanced at the end of June. Panel B reports average returns for anomalies examined in Table 7 by subperiod. Panel C
reports average returns for strategies that trade seasonalities in commodities and country indexes. Portfolios are constructed each
month based on average same- or other-calendar-month returns. The number of commodities in the high and low portfolios is two
until December 1993 and three after this point as the number of commodities with sufficient historical return data increases to 15.
The country-index strategy has three countries in the long and short legs throughout the sample. We begin forming commodity
and country-index portfolios at the end of December 1974. The sample period ends in January 2011. t-values are reported in
parentheses.

Table 8: Pervasiveness of anomalies

Panel B: Seasonality and other return anomalies by subperiod
Period
1963
1973
1983
Strategy
–1972
–1982
–1992
Net issuances
0.90
0.66
0.84
(2.58)
(2.36)
(3.01)
Ohlson’s O-score
−0.07
−0.44
1.48
(−0.12)
(−0.77)
(2.74)
Momentum
2.08
2.05
2.35
(4.38)
(3.37)
(4.09)
Gross profitability
0.63
−0.28
0.52
(2.19)
(−0.83)
(1.50)
Asset growth
−0.05
1.10
−0.06
(−0.15)
(3.78)
(−0.18)
SYY combination
0.55
0.36
0.98
(2.80)
(1.55)
(4.15)
Size
1.08
0.95
−0.54
(1.34)
(1.88)
(−0.89)
Value
0.13
1.35
0.52
(0.33)
(2.67)
(0.89)

1993
–2002
1.30
(4.20)
0.09
(0.09)
2.98
(3.03)
0.86
(2.22)
1.34
(3.15)
1.10
(3.47)
0.16
(0.25)
0.27
(0.48)

2003
–2011
0.50
(1.31)
0.04
(0.06)
0.10
(0.09)
0.62
(1.30)
−0.14
(−0.38)
0.29
(0.90)
0.15
(0.25)
0.23
(0.57)

Seasonality strategies
Individual stocks
Portfolios
Size
Value
Momentum

1.13
(3.32)

0.83
(1.93)

1.89
(5.29)

1.65
(2.87)

0.40
(1.35)

0.94
(1.78)
0.13
(0.40)
1.54
(4.06)

1.33
(2.49)
1.45
(3.85)
1.62
(3.02)
0.14
(0.41)
0.23
(0.63)
1.53
(3.72)
0.69
(1.88)
1.40
(3.79)

1.83
(4.30)
0.60
(1.42)
2.60
(5.53)
0.16
(0.73)
0.72
(2.90)
0.96
(3.67)
0.95
(2.36)
1.68
(4.90)

1.78
(3.08)
0.17
(0.50)
2.98
(2.83)
0.28
(0.93)
0.66
(1.59)
−0.09
(−0.19)
1.57
(3.77)
1.77
(4.53)

0.77
(1.84)
−0.16
(−0.53)
0.30
(0.42)
0.23
(0.51)
0.52
(1.29)
−0.18
(−0.67)
−0.49
(−1.00)
0.58
(1.75)

Gross profitability
Dividend-to-price

0.29
(0.75)

Earnings-to-price
Industry
Composite

0.68
(2.66)
0.98
(3.76)

52

Panel C: Seasonalities in returns on commodities and country indexes
All months
Country
Commodities
indexes
Sort by
0.93
0.48
same-month return
(1.93)
(2.20)
Sort by
other-month return
Same − Other

Excluding January
Country
Commodities
indexes
0.96
0.50
(2.03)
(2.20)

−0.22
(−0.58)

−0.36
(−1.66)

−0.19
(−0.47)

−0.23
(−1.06)

1.15
(1.97)

0.84
(2.76)

1.15
(2.02)

0.73
(2.28)

53

Table 9: Correlations between seasonality strategies
Panels A and B reports correlations between seasonality and momentum strategies that trade stocks
within different subsamples of U.S. equities (see Table 8). Seasonality strategies select stocks based
on the average same-calendar-month return over the prior 20 years; momentum selects stocks based
on the prior one-year returns skipping a month. The time periods in Panels A and B are the same as
those in Table 8. Panel C reports correlations between strategies that trade monthly seasonalities in
U.S. equities, daily seasonalities in U.S. equities, and seasonalities in country indexes and commodities.
Panel D reports weights and ex-post maximum Sharpe ratios for optimal portfolios formed from market,
value, size, and momentum factors and different seasonality strategies. The U.S. equity seasonality
strategies in Panel D are HML-like factors that are constructed by sorting stocks into six portfolios
based on size and historical same-month (or same-day) return. Panels C and D use data from 1975
through 2011.
Panel A: Correlations between seasonality strategies within subsets of U.S. equities
Size
Book-to-market
Micro
Small
Large
Growth
Neutral
Value
Size
Micro
1
Small
0.50
1
Large
0.28
0.41
1
B/M
Growth
0.28
0.42
0.85
1
Neutral
0.34
0.46
0.69
0.48
1
Value
0.23
0.36
0.41
0.26
0.39
1
D/P
=0
0.35
0.42
0.59
0.63
0.41
0.26
Low
0.20
0.31
0.66
0.65
0.53
0.25
High
0.13
0.17
0.47
0.31
0.50
0.48
Panel B: Correlations between momentum strategies within subsets of U.S. equities
Size
Book-to-market
Micro
Small
Large
Growth
Neutral
Value
Size
Micro
1
Small
0.86
1
Large
0.72
0.82
1
B/M
Growth
0.72
0.81
0.92
1
Neutral
0.76
0.83
0.88
0.79
1
Value
0.68
0.72
0.72
0.61
0.70
1
D/P
=0
0.82
0.86
0.79
0.81
0.78
0.67
Low
0.64
0.74
0.86
0.84
0.80
0.62
High
0.56
0.65
0.76
0.65
0.76
0.65
Panel C: Correlations between seasonalities in different asset classes and frequencies
Monthly
Daily
stocks
stocks
Countries
Monthly stocks
1
Daily stocks
0.05
1
Countries
0.02
0.00
1
Commodities
0.11
0.01
−0.09

54

Dividend-to-price
=0
Low
High

1
0.33
0.17

1
0.27

1

Dividend-to-price
=0
Low
High

1
0.69
0.58

1
0.64

1

Commodities

1

Panel D: Portfolio weights and maximum ex-post Sharpe ratios
Seasonalities
#
1
2
3
4
5
6

Market
100%
22%
8%
8%
7%
3%

Size

Value

Momentum

Monthly
U.S. equity

15%
10%
10%
9%
2%

40%
24%
24%
23%
23%

23%
12%
12%
11%
4%

46%
44%
41%
21%

55

Commodities

Countries

Daily
U.S. equity

2%
2%
1%

7%
4%

41%

Sharpe
ratio
0.46
1.04
1.67
1.69
1.74
2.75

