                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CAN HEALTH INSURANCE COMPETITION WORK? EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE
                           ADVANTAGE

                                             Vilsa Curto
                                             Liran Einav
                                           Jonathan Levin
                                          Jay Bhattacharya

                                        Working Paper 20818
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20818


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




We thank Amy Finkelstein, Eugenio Miravete, and many seminar participants for useful comments.
Bhattacharya would like to thank the National Institute on Aging (grants R37AG036791 and R21AG041112)
for funding his work on this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20818.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Vilsa Curto, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Health Insurance Competition Work? Evidence from Medicare Advantage
Vilsa Curto, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya
NBER Working Paper No. 20818
December 2014
JEL No. D43,I11,I13,L13,L33,L51

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the economic surplus created by Medicare Advantage under its reformed competitive
bidding rules. We use data on the universe of Medicare beneficiaries, and develop a model of plan
bidding that accounts for both market power and risk selection. We find that private plans have costs
around 12% below fee-for-service costs, and generate around $50 dollars in surplus on average per
enrollee-month, after accounting for the disutility due to enrollees having more limited choice of providers.
Taxpayers provide a large additional subsidy, and insurers capture most of the private gains. We use
the model to evaluate possible program changes.


Vilsa Curto                                           Jonathan Levin
Stanford University                                   Stanford University
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall                                        Stanford, CA 94305-6072
Stanford, CA 94305                                    and NBER
vcurto@stanford.edu                                   jdlevin@stanford.edu

Liran Einav                                           Jay Bhattacharya
Stanford University                                   117 Encina Commons
Department of Economics                               CHP/PCOR
579 Serra Mall                                        Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                               Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER                                              and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu                                   jay@stanford.edu




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20818
1    Introduction

Introducing managed competition into healthcare has been an alluring idea to economists and
policy-makers. Proponents argue that e¤ectively designed market mechanisms can avoid the inef-
…ciencies of an administrative price system. Yet there is little consensus on this claim. One reason
for this is that many competitive systems do not look much like proposed ideals. Another, perhaps
equally important, is that there often is no clear way to draw comparisons between alternative
insurance systems.
    The recent experience of the US Medicare Advantage program provides a potential opportunity.
The program allows seniors to opt out of public Medicare insurance and enroll in a private insurance
plan. The federal government pays plans a monthly amount for each enrollee. Historically the
payments were set administratively and the program su¤ered from problems of limited uptake and
cream-skimming (McGuire, Newhouse, and Sinaiko, 2011). In the last decade, however, Medicare
introduced two new ingredients touted by advocates of managed competition (Enthoven, 1993):
competitive bidding to encourage plans to accept payments below a maximum benchmark rate,
and risk adjustment that makes payments a function of enrollee health status. The program has
expanded since these reforms to cover almost thirty percent of US seniors (Figure 1).
    In this paper we provide a model of insurer competition under the Medicare Advantage (MA)
bidding rules, and present estimates that benchmark the program’s welfare e¤ects against tra-
ditional fee-for-service Medicare. The model we propose allows us to measure the competitive
incentives facing insurers, obtain estimates of private insurer costs and the surplus that accrues
to private plan enrollees, and analyze how these might change under alternative program designs.
We also adjust for non-risk-adjusted health di¤erences between private insurance and traditional
Medicare enrollees. Some elements of our model — the determinants of plan bids, enrollee choice,
and risk selection into private plans — have been analyzed in prior and concurrent work. In this
sense, we view our main contribution as having an empirical framework that ties these pieces
together in a way that facilitates econometric measurement and analysis of program design.
    A practical motivation for our analysis is the ongoing debate over the taxpayer costs of Medicare
Advantage. In 2012, the federal government spent $136 billion on payments to private insurers.
The MedPac advisory group has pointed out repeatedly that taxpayers pay less per bene…ciary
under fee-for-service Medicare (MedPac, 2013). An open question is whether the extra expenditure
is due to ine¢ ciencies in the way private plans operate, or results from a failure of competition,



                                                  1
or instead re‡ects extra bene…ts for private plan enrollees. Any plausible answer needs to account
for imperfect competition — as we discuss below, local insurance markets are highly concentrated
— and provide a way to estimate insurer costs and enrollee bene…ts. It also needs to account for
the fact that private plans tend to enroll relatively healthy bene…ciaries (MedPac, 2013). We try
to do this using a relatively standard imperfect competition model, which we adapt to the speci…c
bidding rules, and to allow for di¤erential risk selection.
   We develop our analysis in several steps. The …rst is to estimate what it would cost to cover
private plan enrollees under fee-for-service (FFS) Medicare. There are several complicating factors
in this exercise. Private plan enrollment tends to be higher in urban areas with high fee-for-service
costs. But within a geographic area, private plan enrollees have lower risk scores, are healthier
conditional on risk score, and have risk scores that increase faster due to more thorough disease
coding. We construct initial estimates of FFS costs for private plan enrollees by adjusting for
geography and risk score. We then use post-enrollment mortality to adjust for residual di¤erences
in the populations. We estimate that within a typical market, private plan enrollees are about seven
percent less costly than FFS enrollees. However, across the entire country, the average private plan
enrollee is slightly more expensive than the average FFS enrollee because MA enrollees tend to be
located in expensive urban markets.
   Our second step is to provide a model of insurer competition that is suitable for welfare mea-
surement. The model we propose captures the particular structure of the MA program, in which
plans submit bids to cover representative bene…ciaries in a local market, and the bids translate into
plan payments and enrollee premiums or bene…ts. We start with a baseline model in which risk
adjustment successfully modi…es private plan payments to re‡ect enrollee health. We then explain
how to account for imperfect risk adjustment (e.g., for risk selection on unobserved characteris-
tics), which can distort the incentives for plan pricing. We argue that in practice the problem of
risk selection can be simpli…ed so long as plan bids, on the margin, do not have a large e¤ect on
enrollee risk composition. Then risk selection primarily a¤ects plan costs and not marginal bidding
incentives.
   The key parameters of our model are the price sensitivity of Medicare bene…ciaries, the dif-
ferentiation among private plans, the disutility enrollees incur from having a limited network of
providers, and the costs incurred by private insurers. We estimate the sensitivity of bene…ciaries
to plan premiums using a di¤erence-in-di¤erences strategy that relies on varying changes over time
in the bids of plans that share identical physician networks. We …nd that enrollee demand is only


                                                   2
moderately price-sensitive: a 10 dollar reduction in the monthly premium, or 10 dollar increase in
the actuarial value of insurance bene…ts, increases a plan’s enrollment by around 10 percent. Our
demand model also generates estimates of enrollee surplus. On average, enrollees receive about
76 dollars per month of actuarial insurance bene…ts beyond standard Medicare, but this must be
weighed against limits on provider access. Netting these out, we estimate that enrollee surplus
averages around 49 dollars a month.
   Our model also highlights the important competitive role played by fee-for-service Medicare,
and the “benchmark” subsidy that the government provides for private plan enrollments. We
estimate that, holding …xed a plan’s bid, a 20 dollar decrease in the monthly Medicare subsidy has
approximately the same e¤ect on a plan’s enrollment as a 20 dollar decrease in the bids of every
other plan in the market. We also provide direct estimates of how changes in the benchmark rate
are passed through into plan bids. Our …ndings coincide with those of Song, Landrum and Chernew
(2012, 2013) and Cabral, Geruso and Mahoney (2014). We estimate that a 20 dollar decrease in
the monthly benchmark rate leads plans to reduce their bids by around 10 dollars.
   The most di¢ cult numbers to estimate, due to data limitations, are private plan costs. We
obtain estimates indirectly by calculating the optimal bid markups for insurers and making an
assumption that plans set their bids optimally given competition. Using this approach, we calculate
that the optimal bid mark-up is on the order of $55-140 per enrollee-month. The implied cost
estimates indicate that private plans have a cost advantage over fee-for-service Medicare in around
half the country. Private plan enrollment is signi…cantly higher in these markets. As a result,
in the typical MA enrollment, we estimate that the plan can provide the same insurance bene…ts
as fee-for-service Medicare, albeit with access to a limited set of providers, for around $77 (or 12
percent) less per month. Our estimates are also consistent with a …nding of Macurdy et al. (2013)
and Landon et al. (2012) that private plan costs are not highly correlated with fee-for-service
Medicare costs across local markets, suggesting that private and public insurance have di¤erent
cost structures.
   The …nal part of the paper combines our estimates to calculate welfare e¤ects from Medicare
Advantage. A useful way to think about this is in terms of the total (dollar) surplus created by
a private plan enrollment, and then its division among the plan, the enrollee and taxpayers. As
mentioned, MA plans achieved cost savings of 77 dollars in providing the standard FFS insurance
bene…t. Taxpayers captured none of this. Instead, they provided an additional subsidy of around 94
dollars per month relative to government costs under fee-for-service Medicare. The bene…ciaries of


                                                 3
these 171 dollars (cost savings of 77 plus subsidy of 94) were insurers and consumers. We estimate
that insurers captured 95 dollars per enrollee-month (not accounting for any …xed administrative
costs). MA enrollees gained the rest, but also incurred a disutility of 27 dollars from having a
limited network of providers, so their net surplus was lower, 50 dollars (per enrollee-month). In
short, we estimate fairly substantial e¢ ciency bene…ts, but an even larger net cost to taxpayers.
    The empirical framework is also useful for thinking about changes in program design. The most
obvious levers are the local benchmark rates against which plans compete, and the rebate formula
that speci…es how bid savings below the benchmark are divided between taxpayers and enrollees.
Currently when a plan bids below its benchmark rate, the government retains 25% of the di¤erence
and mandates that the other 75% is passed to enrollees. One way to limit taxpayer costs would be
to increase the government’s share. In theory, this should be e¤ective if demand were highly elastic.
Given our estimates, it is not. Instead, benchmark reductions are a more e¤ective instrument for
reducing program costs. We estimate that a 50 dollar benchmark reduction would save taxpayers
around $8 billion a year without major reductions in plan enrollment. However, similar calculations
highlight the di¢ culty of achieving budget neutrality for taxpayers without severely curtailing
enrollment; we suggest that this trade-o¤ could be improved with a more targeted approach to
setting benchmark rates.
    Our analysis contributes to an emerging literature assessing di¤erent elements of the reformed
Medicare Advantage program. As mentioned above, Song, Landrum, and Chernew (2012, 2013)
and Cabral, Geruso and Mahoney (2014) estimate the e¤ect of local Medicare benchmark rates on
plan bids, …nding similar pass-through rates as we do, around 50%.1 Duggan, Starc, and Vabson
(2014) also estimate pass-through rates, using a di¤erent identi…cation strategy, and …nd that plan
bids are almost dollar-for-dollar responsive to the benchmark rate, so that higher benchmarks lead
to little consumer bene…t. Song, Cutler, and Chernew (2012) observe that the lowest plan bids
are well below fee-for-service costs, and discuss whether the program bidding rules are responsible
for high taxpayer costs. There is also a debate about whether Medicare’s risk adjustment policy
has managed to mitigate risk selection (Brown et al., 2014; Morrissey et al., 2013; Newhouse et
al., 2012 and 2014), which is tangentially related to some of the results reported in the paper.
Finally, the paper that is conceptually closest to ours is probably by Town and Liu (2003), who
study the welfare impact of Medicare HMOs in the earlier and smaller incarnation of Medicare
   1
     Cabral, Geruso and Mahoney (2014) also investigate whether the incomplete pass-through they …nd can be
explained by competitive pricing under imperfect risk adjustment, but argue that market power on the part of plans
provides a better explanation.



                                                        4
Advantage. Despite major changes in the program over the last decade, which we describe in the
next section, their conclusion that the program generates net surplus but of smaller magnitude
than plan pro…ts foreshadows ours.2 Miller (2014) is also a more recent paper that estimates a
model of plan competition. He focuses on the potential for switching costs to lock enrollees into
MA plans, leading to higher plan markups. We discuss this point in more detail in our conclusion.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides institutional background on the Medicare
Advantage program and the structure of private plans. Section 3 explains how we estimate FFS
costs for private plan enrollees. Section 4 describes the theoretical model that we use to analyze
plan competition. Sections 5 and 6 present evidence on plan bids and pass-through rates, and then
on enrollment choices and plan demand. Section 7 examines enrollee surplus, plan costs and pro…ts
and the program’s overall welfare e¤ects. Section 8 discusses alternative ways to promote plan
competition. Section 9 concludes. We provide a variety of additional information and analyses in
the Appendix.


2    The Medicare Advantage Program

Background Medicare Advantage (MA) allows Medicare bene…ciaries to opt out of traditional
fee-for-service Medicare and enroll in a private insurance plan. The program was established in
the early 1980s with two goals: to expand the choices available to bene…ciaries and to capture cost
savings from managed care. Our analysis will focus on the portion of the program targeted at
individual Medicare bene…ciaries. There is also a portion of the program that allows employers to
sponsor plans for Medicare-eligible employees or retirees.
    Private plans receive a capitated monthly payment from CMS.3 Historically, these payment
rates were set administratively. The result was an ongoing tension between the two program goals
of expanding access and limiting costs (McGuire, Newhouse, and Sinaiko, 2011). Insurers tended
to participate more in periods with higher payments, and to o¤er plans selectively in areas with
higher payment rates. Plans also enrolled relatively healthy bene…ciaries, complicating the problem
of setting appropriate capitation rates.4
   2
     Aside from the introduction of competitive bidding and risk adjustment, another major change was the introduc-
tion of Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage. In Town and Liu’s study prescription drug coverage by Medicare
HMOs accounts for around half of the estimated consumer surplus. There are a number of other related studies of
the earlier MA program. For instance, Dowd, Feldman and Coulam (2003) estimate enrollment price sensitivities
using data from 1999, and Pizer and Frakt (2002) is a pass-through study that examines the e¤ect of CMS payment
rates on plan bene…ts.
   3
     The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is the federal agency that manages the Medicare program.
   4
     Concerns about risk selection date to the very origins of the program (Eggers and Prihoda, 1982), and are


                                                        5
    Several reforms in the last decade aimed to address these problems.5 Between 2003 and 2006,
CMS phased in a risk scoring system to adjust plan payments based on enrollee health.6 In 2006,
competitive bidding replaced the …xed reimbursement rate. These changes, combined with an
increase in maximum capitation rates set by CMS, have coincided with the expansion of plan
o¤erings and enrollment seen in Figure 1.


Medicare Private Plans Medicare private plans must provide at least the same insurance
bene…ts as standard Medicare (Parts A and B). Plans typically provide additional bene…ts as well,
mainly in the form of more generous cost sharing or supplemental coverage (e.g. of dental, vision or
prescription drugs). An important feature of the program is that these bene…ts must be “funded”:
either through a supplemental premium paid by the insuree, or through a rebate that is paid by
CMS. Plan rebates, as well as enrollee premiums, are determined through the bidding process.
    The bidding process begins with CMS setting a benchmark capitation rate for each county.
Each plan’s bid is assessed against its local benchmark.7 If a plan’s bid b is above its benchmark
rate B, an enrollee must pay the plan a premium of b                 B. This premium is in addition to the
standard Medicare Part B premium, and any supplemental premium the plan charges for additional
bene…ts.8 If a plan’s bid b is below its benchmark rate B, there is no extra plan premium, and
CMS makes a rebate payment to the plan of 0:75(B                  b). The plan must use the rebate to fund
additional bene…ts. The plan itself is paid its bid b (times the enrollee risk score) to fund standard
insurance coverage.
    The vast majority of plans submit bids below their benchmark rate, and rebates often are 50
dollars a month or more (see Section 5 below). The most common use of rebates is to provide
extra cost-sharing or premium reductions for prescription drug coverage.9 The result is that plans
discussed in McGuire, Newhouse, and Sinaiko (2011). An illustration of selective participation is that in 2005, only
around 67 percent of Medicare bene…ciaries had access to an HMO or local PPO plan (MedPAC, 2009).
   5
     The reforms originate in the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (risk scoring) and the Medicare Modernization Act of
2003 (competitive bidding and more detailed risk scoring).
   6
     The risk scores are based on a formula that gives weights to chronic disease diagnoses. At the same time, CMS
also reformed the enrollment process, so that bene…ciaries must enroll in MA plans during a …xed period, rather than
being able to switch in and out of private plans on a monthly basis. There is some debate about whether and how
much risk adjustment has altered plan incentives (Newhouse et al., 2012, 2014; Brown et al., 2014).
   7
     Each plan has a “service area”that may span multiple counties. In this case, the plan’s benchmark is the average
of the service area benchmarks, weighted by projected plan enrollment. Subsequently, CMS payments are adjusted
to the individual level by multiplying them by the individual county benchmark divided by the plan benchmark.
   8
     All Medicare bene…ciaries pay CMS a standard premium regardless of whether they are enrolled in traditional
Medicare or MA. In 2014, the Part B monthly premium was $104.90 per month for married couples with incomes
up to $170,000; wealthier couples or individuals pay slightly more. Plans may charge a supplemental premium for
additional services, but not to reduce cost sharing, which they can do only with the rebate.
   9
     Appendix Table A9 provides a breakdown of how plans use their rebates. In principle, rebates can be passed



                                                         6
generally o¤er more insurance than traditional Medicare. Traditional Medicare enrollees can pur-
chase Medigap policies that cover some or all of their out-of-pocket health costs, but these policies
often cost a few thousand dollars a year.10 In contrast, Medicare private plans bundle additional
insurance, and features such as dental, vision, or prescription drug coverage, at relatively favorable
premiums.11
    The trade-o¤ is that private plans typically restrict access to healthcare providers. Around 85
percent of MA enrollees are in HMO or PPO plans with limited provider networks. There is also
a class of plans known as “private fee-for-service” (PFFS). Roughly speaking, these plans mimic
traditional Medicare in terms of provider access and how they reimburse non-network providers.
This type of plans proliferated in the mid-2000s when benchmark rates were very favorable, and
in 2008 reached a 23 percent share of MA enrollees. However, their share dropped to 7 percent
by 2011, and they are now relatively unimportant. Appendix Table A1 provides more detail on
insurance options and how they compare to FFS Medicare.


Market Structure of Private Plans Private insurers o¤er Medicare Advantage plans by enter-
ing into contracts with CMS. Insurers may o¤er several plans as part of the same contract, with the
same provider network but di¤erent bene…ts and bids. Larger insurers enter into multiple contracts
in order to o¤er plans with di¤erent provider networks, for instance in di¤erent geographic areas.
Individual markets tend to feature a large number of plans, but they are mostly small PFFS plans.
Between 2006 and 2011, Medicare bene…ciaries on average had access to three HMO plans and one
PPO plan, in addition to fourteen PFFS plans.
    The result is that local markets are highly concentrated despite the large total number of plans
(see Table A2). In the majority of US counties, the three largest local insurers have more than 90
percent of MA enrollees. In three-quarters of US counties, the two largest insurers have more than
a 75 percent market share. Concentration is somewhat lower in urban markets and in markets with
high benchmark rates (Pizer, Frakt, and Feldman, 2012). For example, the mean insurer HHI in
our study period was 0.477 for urban areas and 0.547 for rural areas.
directly to enrollees in cash through reductions in their Medicare Part B premium, but this is relatively uncommon.
See also Stockley et al. (2014).
  10
     In 2010, approximately 23 percent of bene…ciaries were enrolled in Medigap insurance, paying monthly premiums
that averaged $183 per month (Huang et al., 2013).
  11
     One particular form of bundling is that a signi…cant share of MA plans also include Medicare Part D prescription
drug coverage, charging a supplemental fee for this coverage. An analysis of prescription drug insurance is outside
the scope of this paper, but we account for this later by allowing consumers to value the convenience of the bundled
package in our empirical speci…cation of private plan demand.




                                                         7
         There is less concentration at the national level. The two largest insurers, United Health Group
and Humana, have 19 and 16 percent of national MA enrollees, respectively (see Table A3). These
insurers operate in over 80 percent of local markets, but most insurers (there were around 130 in
total in the 2006-2011 period) operate in far fewer. The market structure also looks di¤erent if
one accounts for traditional Medicare. Around 35 percent of new enrollees in a given plan were
enrolled the prior year in traditional Medicare (we exclude new Medicare bene…ciaries from this
calculation), and around 13 percent of bene…ciaries who exit a plan move into traditional Medicare.
The asymmetry re‡ects the expansion of private plans. In 2006-2011, around 2 percent of Medicare
bene…ciaries switched into MA each year, while only 0.6 percent switched in the other direction.
Appendix Table A4 provides more detail on bene…ciary transitions.


3         Constructing Cost Benchmarks under Risk Selection

We begin our analysis by constructing fee-for-service (FFS) cost estimates for the population of MA
enrollees. As we have noted, this requires some care. Private plan enrollment varies by market and
tends to be higher in areas with high fee-for-service costs. Private plan enrollees are also healthier
in terms of measured risk scores, and potentially conditional on risk score. Finally, risk scores for
continuing MA enrollees are not necessarily equivalent to those in traditional Medicare because of
di¤erences in disease coding. Our estimate of FFS costs attempts to adjust for each of these factors:
geographic di¤erences, risk score di¤erences, unscored di¤erences in health status, and variation in
disease coding.
         All of the analysis in this section, and the following sections, relies on Medicare administrative
records. The data include risk score information, demographics and plan enrollment for all Medicare
bene…ciaries from 2006-2011, all MA plan payments from 2006-2011, and all Medicare fee-for-service
claims from 2006-2010.12 We restrict attention to aged Medicare bene…ciaries who are not disabled,
not dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, and not enrolled in employer-sponsored plans. We
also drop a small number of individuals for whom we are missing data …elds such as risk score
or private plan payment information. The resulting dataset contains 153,858,811 individual-year
observations on 35,504,869 unique individuals. We construct a parallel dataset on private plans:
including all the private plans open to these bene…ciaries, while excluding plans for dual eligibles
and employer-sponsored plans. The plan dataset contains 12,311 observations at the plan-year level
    12
    We have very limited information on healthcare utilization within private plans, as CMS began to collect detailed
information on encounters only in 2013.


                                                         8
on 4,930 unique MA plans. Exact details of the data construction are reported in Appendix A and
Appendix Table A5.


Di¤erences between MA and FFS Enrollees Table 1 presents summary statistics on MA
and FFS enrollees for the 2006 to 2011 period. MA enrollment over this period averaged around 20
percent.13 Private plan enrollees are more concentrated in urban areas. They also have lower risk
scores: the average risk score of a private plan enrollee was 0.93, compared to 0.97 for FFS. Risk
scores are constructed so that an individual with a score of 2 has twice the expected health cost of
an individual with a score of 1. So based on risk score, a private plan enrollee had expected costs
that were about 96 percent (that is, 0.93 divided by 0.97) those of a FFS bene…ciary.14 Figure 2
provides more detail by plotting private plan enrollment as a function of risk score. Private plan
enrollment declines with risk score, and is especially low at very high scores.15
       The Medicare risk scores are based on a statistical model that translates disease codes into
predicted fee-for-service costs. It is well-understood that the scores may not fully correct for health
di¤erences. An individual’s codes may be incomplete and in any event are imperfect proxies for
health status. In the case of MA enrollees, a variety of evidence suggests that they are somewhat
healthier than FFS enrollees conditional on risk score. For instance, if one compares new MA
enrollees to FFS bene…ciaries with the same risk score, the “switchers”into MA have lower medical
claims in the prior year than FFS bene…ciaries with the same risk score. Among the FFS “stayers,”
prior year claims are signi…cant predictors of current year claims conditional on risk score, suggesting
that new MA enrollees are healthier than FFS enrollees with identical risk scores.16
       Disease coding is another reason that MA enrollees may be healthier conditional on risk score.
Private plans, which are compensated based on risk scores, tend to code more intensively (CMS,
2013, Chapter 7; GAO, 2013; Geruso and Layton, 2014). An indication of this is that for many
chronic conditions, which are unlikely to go away from one year to the next, MA coding is noticeably
  13
     In our …nal analysis sample, MA penetration is 18.2 percent. However, as part of our sample construction we
drop some MA enrollees for whom we do not drop the corresponding TM enrollees due to data limitations, as we
explain in Appendix A. If we were to include those MA enrollees, then MA penetration would be approximately 19.9
percent.
  14
     The risk score is calibrated to have a mean of 1 on a subsample of several million TM enrollees. We have dropped
two high-risk groups – Medicaid recipients and individuals with Disability insurance – so risk scores in our sample
are slightly lower than in the entire population.
  15
     There are probably multiple factors that help to explain this pattern. One interpretation is that chronically ill
individuals are less likely to search for a suitable MA plan, or prefer to have a wide choice of providers. Another
interpretation is that MA plans try to avoid high-cost enrollees through plan design.
  16
     In our sample, the lagged claims of “switchers”into MA were about 2.3 percent lower than those of TM “stayers”
conditional on risk score. The correlation of lagged TM costs and current year TM costs conditional on risk score is
0.19. The lagged claims relationship underlies the analysis of risk selection in, e.g., Brown et al. (2013).


                                                          9
more persistent.17 In 2010, CMS attempted to correct for di¤erential coding, and de‡ated all
MA risk scores by 3.41 percent. It applied the same adjustment in 2011, but there was no such
adjustment in the years prior to 2010.
       Our strategy to correct for unscored health di¤erences is to use an ex post health measure.
We focus on di¤erences in population mortality, which (absent data on encounters) is the most
reliable health outcome we observe for MA enrollees. Figure 3 plots the one-year mortality rate for
MA and FFS enrollees as a function of risk score. New private plan enrollees have lower mortality
conditional on risk score, consistent with self-selection. Mortality rates among all MA enrollees
also are lower than for FFS enrollees, with the di¤erence being more pronounced in the 2006-2009
period. Of course some of this di¤erence might be explained by private plans o¤ering superior
care. However, we think this is a relatively unlikely explanation for the di¤erential mortality. MA
enrollment increased during our study period, but there is no evidence that county mortality rates
fell in areas where MA enrollment increased most rapidly, which one would expect if private plan
coverage reduced mortality. We present the full details of this analysis in Appendix Table A6.18


Measuring Local FFS Costs We build our cost benchmarks from measures of local FFS costs
for each US county in each year. Our construction of these measures is somewhat di¤erent from
the one used by CMS for public reporting (MedPac, 2012), in order to account for mortality and
mid-year enrollment, and the fact that the average risk score of FFS enrollees in our sample is not
identically equal to 1. Appendix B provides more detail on the di¤erences between our measures
and the ones reported by MedPac.
       Let k index county-years, and let F F Sk denote the set of individuals enrolled in FFS in county-
year k. For a given individual i, let mi denote the number of months that i was enrolled in FFS
during the year, and xi denote i’s average monthly FFS claims during those months. We de…ne
  17
      To illustrate, we compute the probability of a given disease coding in a given year conditional on having this
disease coded for the same bene…ciary in the previous year. This probability is generally higher for MA enrollees. For
example, for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease the probability is 71% in MA vs. 66% in traditional Medicare.
It is 58% vs. 45% for Polyneuropathy, and 49% vs. 33% for Angina Pectoris/Old Myocardial Infarction.
   18
      Gowrisankaran, Town and Barrette (2011) do …nd some evidence that enrollment in private plans without pre-
scription drug coverage increased mortality relative to traditional Medicare. Their study looks at data from 1993
to 2000, when Medicare Advantage was smaller and operated under di¤erent years, and Medicare Part D did not
exist, so the di¤erences between their result and those in Table A6 may not be very surprising. Note that other ex
post measures of health might be more sensitive to di¤erences in insurance status. For example, Table 1 shows that
inpatient days are (much) lower among MA enrollees. This could be due to di¤erences in population health, but also
to di¤erences in the way private plans handle admissions and hospital stays. In the case of inpatient stays, there are
also reporting issues that bias down the private plan average in Table 1 (see Landon et al., 2012).




                                                         10
two measures of local FFS spending in county-year k:
                                     P                                            P
                                          i2F F Sk   xi mi                      i2F F Sk       xi mi
                              k   = P                         and         ak = P                        :                     (1)
                                           i2F F Sk   mi                               i2F F Sk ri mi


The …rst measure is the local FFS cost per enrollee-month. The second is the local FFS cost per
                                                     P               .P
enrollee risk-month. Note that k = ak rk , where rk = i2F F Sk ri mi   i2F F Sk mi is the (month-

weighted) average enrollee risk in county-year k. In our sample, rk is generally lower than 1, so that
costs per enrollee-month are somewhat lower than costs per enrollee risk-month.


Estimating FFS Costs for MA Enrollees Next we construct estimates of FFS costs for MA
enrollees. We do this in two steps, …rst imputing FFS costs based on each enrollee’s location and
risk score, and then adjusting for health di¤erences conditional on risk score. For the …rst step,
we assign each individual i in county-year k an expected monthly FFS cost of ak ri , where ri is the
individual’s risk score and ak is the local FFS cost per enrollee risk-month.19 For the second step,
we rescale MA risk scores in a way that aligns conditional FFS and MA mortality rates.
       Our risk score rescaling can be motivated as follows. Let                   F F S (r)   and      M A (r)   denote the one-
year mortality rates of FFS and MA enrollees. Assuming both rates are strictly increasing in r, we
can de…ne       (r) to be an increasing function such that                      FFS(    (r)) =     M A (r).    The idea is that
an MA enrollee with observed risk score r should be compared to a FFS enrollee with risk score
     (r). For the purposes of cost benchmarking, we can assign FFS costs to each MA enrollee with
risk score r by adjusting his or her risk score to                 (r).
       To make this operational, we assume that there is a single scaling factor                            that applies in each
year, so that in year t,          t (r)   =   t r.   To estimate each      t,   we construct a geographically balanced
sample of MA and FFS enrollees for year t by randomly dropping FFS enrollees in each county until
their number equals the number of MA enrollees (or the reverse if MA enrollees are the majority in
a county, which is not common). We use the balanced sample to obtain nonparametric estimates
of the one-year mortality rates: bF F S (r) and bM A (r). Then, for each MA enrollee i, we compute

 i   to satisfy bF F S ( i ri ) = bM A (ri ). Finally, we average over MA enrollees in that year to obtain
an estimate of        20
                    t.
  19
     This construction is motivated by an underlying model of monthly FFS costs in which individual i in county-
year k has stochastic costs equal to Ak ri "i , where Ak is the expected monthly cost of a risk score 1 individual in
county-year k, and "i is a stochastic term with E["i jri ; k] = 1. In this case, our sample statistic ak will be a consistent
estimator of Ak .
  20
     In these calculations we trim a small number of observations (about 3,000 out of 55 million) with risk scores
below 0.25 or above 10 because our estimates of mortality are very noisy at the extremes of the risk score distribution.



                                                              11
   For the period 2006-2011, we estimate annual scaling factors of 1.032, 0.985, 0.976, 0.942, 0.995,
and 0.990. The average for the overall period is 0.984. We adjust the predicted FFS costs of each
MA enrollee in our sample by the relevant scaling factor. So an MA enrollee in year t and county-
year k, with risk score ri , has predicted FFS costs of xi =     t ak ri .   Note that in principle, the
rescaled prediction should account both for self-selection of healthier individuals into MA, and
for di¤erences in disease coding. Of course, how well it does this depends on how well mortality
di¤erences proxy for di¤erences in health status (and in particular expected medical claims). The
adjustment is almost surely imperfect, but our view is that it is a reasonable approach and certainly
preferable to making no adjustment.


Comparing Taxpayer Costs for FFS and MA                 Table 2 summarizes our estimates of FFS
monthly costs for the traditional Medicare and private plan enrollees. The …rst column reports
expected monthly FFS costs per enrollee. The second column reports expected monthly FFS costs
per risk unit. The third and fourth columns split the sample into urban and non-urban regions,
and the …nal columns separate the data by time period. Costs are increasing over time, and they
are signi…cantly higher in urban areas. As noted earlier, MA enrollment is higher in urban areas,
and in later years. These compositional di¤erences make the MA population about eleven percent
more expensive in the …rst column. At the same time, MA enrollees within a given county-year
have expected costs that are about …ve percent lower. These compositional di¤erences are re‡ected
in the …rst two columns of the table.
   Our benchmark cost numbers allow a …rst pass at cost accounting for the MA program. The
second panel of Table 2 shows that during our sample period, private plan enrollees had average
expected monthly FFS costs of $675. Plan bids were slightly below this ($670), indicating that
on average plans were willing to provide coverage for around what it would have cost to cover
enrollees under traditional Medicare. Rebate payments, however, averaged $76 per enrollee, so
that on average CMS paid out $746 per enrollee-month, about 11 percent more than we estimate
CMS would have paid in FFS claims. The di¤erence is larger in urban areas (13 percent). Total
MA payments actually were almost identical to predicted FFS costs in rural areas. The taxpayer
“subsidy” also was shrinking over time, from over 17 percent in 2006-07 to just under 3 percent in
2010.
   These taxpayer accounting numbers, however, provide very partial information about the e¢ -
cacy of the program. In particular, they provide no information as to whether rebate payments


                                                 12
should be viewed as a bene…cial transfer to Medicare bene…ciaries, or as necessary compensation to
o¤set having a limited provider network. They also provide no information as to whether plan bids
closely re‡ect plan costs, or whether insurers are making substantial pro…ts. Put another way, the
numbers are consistent with an optimistic view that the program generates considerable surplus for
plans and enrollees, and a skeptical view that the program could not exist without a large taxpayer
subsidy.
    To say more, we require several pieces of information. We need an estimate of enrollment choices
and the surplus realized by private plan enrollees. We also need an estimate of private plan costs
and how they compare to bids. Finally, we would like to know how program changes might a¤ect
bids and enrollment, so that we can understand how policy decisions a¤ect consumer, insurer and
taxpayer surplus. The remainder of the paper pursues these goals, starting with a theoretical model
of bene…ciary and plan decisions.


4     Bidding Competition

This section presents our model of insurer competition under the Medicare Advantage bidding
rules. We begin by describing the rules. We then present a baseline model, and explain how we
will connect the theory to the data.


The Bidding Rules As described earlier, plans are reimbursed based on their bids and the local
benchmark rates set by CMS. The benchmark rates are set each year at the county level. We
therefore will think of each county-year as a separate market.21 Insurers submit their plan bids
after the benchmarks are published. The payment rules depend on whether a plan bid is above or
below the benchmark rate, and work as follows.
    First consider a plan that submits a bid b greater than the benchmark rate B. In this case, each
enrollee must pay the plan a premium b             B in addition to paying the standard Medicare Part B
premium. CMS pays the plan rb             (b    B), where r is the enrollee’s risk score. In total, the plan
receives rb. Now consider a plan that submits a bid b below the benchmark rate. In this case, the
enrollee pays no plan premium.22 For an enrollee with risk r, CMS pays the plan rb. It also gives
  21
     A complication that we noted earlier is that insurers often make a given plan available in several counties, and
submit a single plan bid that is adjusted to the county level based on how the county benchmark compares to the
average benchmark rate in the plan’s service area. Despite this, we will think of competition as occurring at the
county level because insurers have the option of de…ning more granular plans and …ne-tuning their bids to the county
level.
  22
     This is not always right. As mentioned earlier, plans sometimes charge an additional supplemental premium to


                                                         13
the plan a rebate of 0:75 (B        b), which the plan must use to provide extra bene…ts.
   Combining the two cases, we see that the plan receives rb to provide basic coverage, and the
enrollee either pays a premium b           B if b > B, or receives bene…ts of actuarial value 0:75(B         b)
if b < B. So despite the rather complicated details, plans face a familiar trade-o¤: a lower bid
reduces revenue per enrollee, but makes a plan more attractive to bene…ciaries. The next section
expands on this to model bidding incentives.


A Baseline Model         We consider a single market with bene…ciaries who vary in their risk type
r. There are J plans, indexed by j = 1; :::; J. Plan j has cost rcj of covering an individual with
risk r. There is also traditional Medicare. Bidding competition follows the rules described above.
Let B denote the benchmark rate, and bj the bid of plan j. We are interested in how plan bids
translate into enrollment decisions, and how plans optimally set their bids in market equilibrium.

   Plan demand. Bene…ciaries choose among plans taking into account a plan’s …xed characteristics
(its provider network, brand name, etc.), and the premium or extra rebate bene…ts that result from
the plan’s bid, or more precisely the plan’s excess bid pj = bj                B. We write the demand for plan
j among bene…ciaries with risk type r as Djr (p1 ; :::; pJ ). A natural assumption is that Djr will be
decreasing in a plan’s own excess bid, and increasing in the excess bids of rival plans.
   We de…ne a plan’s risk-weighted enrollment as

                                                      Z
                               Qj (p1 ; :::; pJ ) =       rDjr (p1 ; :::; pJ ) dG (r) :                     (2)

                                                          R
The total number of enrollees in plan j is Dj =               Djr dG (r). In practice, the risk-weighted demand
tends to be somewhat smaller as the average enrollee risk in most plans, rj = Qj =Dj , is less than
one.

   Plan pro…ts. Next we consider plan pro…ts. A plan receives rbj for enrolling an individual with
risk r, and incurs cost rcj . Therefore plan j’s pro…t given a set of plan bids p1 ; :::; pJ is


                               j   (p1 ; :::; pJ ) = Qj (p1 ; :::; pJ ) (pj + B     cj ):                   (3)

   The plan’s risk composition matters only insofar as it a¤ects risk-weighted enrollment. This is
because the e¤ects of risk composition on costs are perfectly compensated by the risk-adjustment
fund additional bene…ts. This is not common, and when it happens the amounts of these supplemental premiums
are relatively low.


                                                           14
formula. We discuss below how plan incentives might be skewed if risk adjustment is imperfect.

       Equilibrium bids. We assume that bids are generated in a complete information Nash Equi-
librium. A bidding equilibrium is given by a vector of bids p1 ; :::; pJ , such that each insurer is
maximizing pro…ts given rival bids.23 For an insurer that o¤ers a set of plans J , the optimal bid
for plan j 2 J satis…es

                                    X                          @Ql
                               0=         (pl + B     cl )         + Qj (p1 ; :::; pJ ) ;                          (4)
                                                              @pj
                                    l2J


where the insurer accounts for the fact that raising the bid for plan j may a¤ect enrollment in the
insurer’s other plans.
       In the case where an insurer o¤ers a single plan j, we can write the formula for the optimal
excess bid as
                                                                               1
                                                                  @ ln Qj
                                       pj = cj       B+                            :                               (5)
                                                                   @pj

Adding B to both sides reveals that an optimal bid bj equals the plan’s marginal cost cj plus a
mark-up term that depends on the semi-elasticity of the risk-weighted plan demand.


Connecting the Model to Evidence We now consider how the model can be connected to
evidence on bidding and enrollment decisions.

       Price sensitivity and competition. Bidding incentives depend on the price sensitivity of plan
demand. Substituting pj = bj           B, and observing that                @Qj =@pj =      @Qj =@bj , we can re-write
                                               1
condition (5) as bj = cj + (@ ln Qj =@bj )         . So an optimal mark-up will be high when plan demand
is not very price sensitive, and low if it is sensitive. We provide estimates of enrollment sensitivity
in Section 6.
       Plan enrollment and bidding incentives also depend on both competing plan bids and the
benchmark rate, which determines the relative price for traditional Medicare. A key empirical
question is whether competition comes primarily from other private plans — so that for instance,
additional entry may reduce bids — or from FFS traditional Medicare. A rough way to quantify
this is to imagine that all competing plans bid bk =              and ask how changes in          and B, respectively,
a¤ect ln Qj and @ ln Qj =@bj . We address this empirically below.
  23
    Complete information is of course a simpli…cation, as actual bids are made without complete knowledge of rivals’
bids, but it avoids the complication of modeling an incomplete information bidding game. Conditions under which
such a perfect information bidding equilibrium will exist are laid out in Caplin and Nalebu¤ (1991).


                                                             15
   E¤ ect of the benchmark rates. The benchmark rate plays a key role in that it largely determines
the program cost to taxpayers. In turn, the “pass-through” rate of benchmark increases into plan
bids determines whether marginal taxpayer dollars go to insurers or enrollees. This pass-through
rate can be related to standard cost pass-through. To see this, suppose plan costs are given by
cj = c +   j,   where c is common to all plans in a market. Then the equilibrium excess bids p1 ; :::; pJ
will be a function of B          c, and if p = b             B is a representative equilibrium bid, we will have
dp=dB = dp=d( c). Therefore,

                                      db     dp                     dp        db
                                         =1+    =1                     =1        :                               (6)
                                      dB     dB                     dc        dc

   We highlight two points. First, if the equilibrium theory is correct, and we have an accurate
measure of common costs, the pass-through rate of benchmark increases should be one minus the
pass-through rate of uniform cost increases. We return to this in the next section. Second, in a
perfectly competitive market where b = c, changes in the benchmark would have no e¤ect on plan
bids. This is why Song et al. (2012) interpret their …nding of positive benchmark pass-through
as evidence of market power. Unfortunately, pass-through rates alone are not necessarily very
informative about the degree of competition (Bulow and P‡eiderer, 1983), which is one reason why
we will move from estimating bid regressions in the next section to estimating enrollment demand
in Section 6.

   Incentives for risk selection. The baseline model assumes that variation in a plan’s risk com-
position is fully compensated. However, we have seen that MA plans enroll individuals who are
relatively healthy, even conditional on risk score. We can incorporate this by assuming that indi-
viduals with risk score r who enroll in plan j have “actual” risk                     j   (r; pj ; p   j)   r.
   The simplest case arises if         j   (r; pj ; p   j)   = r < r. Then MA plans have favorable selection
conditional on observed risk score, but the e¤ect on bidding incentives is straightforward. It is “as
if” the cost of MA plan j per enrollee risk unit is cj . So equation (5) becomes

                                                                              1
                                                                    @ ln Qj
                                       p j = cj              B+                   :                              (7)
                                                                     @pj

   Things get more complicated if              j(   ) depends on pj — either because pj a¤ects observed risk
composition and       j   ( ) is not proportional to r so for instance unobserved selection is more impor-
tant for high or low risk enrollees, or because pj a¤ects risk composition conditional on r. In this


                                                               16
case, equation (5) becomes

                                                                             1
                                                                  @ ln Qj            @ j
                                       pj =   j cj   B+                          1       cj ;                        (8)
                                                                   @pj               @pj
                 R                                       R
where    j   =       j   (r; pj ; p   j ) Djr dG (r) =       rDjr dG (r) is the (average) risk scaling factor for plan j.
The last term appears because changes in pj may a¤ect the cost advantage plan j has relative to
measured risk scores. For example, if an increase in pj shifts the plan’s enrollment toward lower r’s
and plan j is relatively over-compensated for low-risk enrollees, there will be an extra incentive to
bid high. Below, we will argue that empirically, changes in plan bids do not have much e¤ect on a
plan’s risk composition, so that the …nal term in equation (8) is close to zero, and the former case
is an appropriate description of plan incentives.


5    Determinants of Plan Bids

In this section we study the empirical determinants of plan bids. To provide some context, Figure
5 plots the distribution of plan bids relative to plan benchmarks. Over 90 percent of plan bids
are below the relevant benchmark, and result in rebates and additional enrollee bene…ts. Here
we consider how closely plan bids track benchmark changes, and how they relate to local FFS
costs. As we just noted, these types of pass-through estimates can provide evidence for imperfect
competition, although some care is needed in interpreting them. We turn in the following sections
to our estimates of plan demand, consumer surplus and plan costs.


Plan Bids, Benchmarks and FFS Costs Our model implies that the bid of a given plan j
in county-year k will depend on the plan’s cost, its benchmark rate, and the characteristics of the
plan’s residual demand. Letting xjk denote a vector of residual demand characteristics, we can
write:
                                                     bjk = f (cjk ; Bk ; xjk ) :                                     (9)

    We do not have a direct measure of private plan costs, but we have described a way to construct
predicted FFS costs for each private plan enrollee. Let cFjkF S denote the predicted FFS costs of
plan j’s enrollees in county-year k. We also observe the benchmark rate Bk for each county-year
k. However, this leads to the following institutional wrinkle. While benchmarks are set at the
county-year level, plans are de…ned to cover a service area that may encompass several counties. A



                                                                    17
plan submits a single bid for its service area. If the service area encompasses several counties, CMS
adjusts the plan payment to re‡ect not just enrollee risk scores, but the FFS costs of the enrollee’s
county relative to the service area average.
      We consider two ways of dealing with the geographic mismatch. The …rst is to de…ne a bench-
mark for each plan, where we weight each county benchmark by its share of plan enrollees (this
is the approach in Figure 5). We then compute predicted FFS costs across all plan enrollees, and
estimate equation (9) at the plan-year level. The second is to de…ne a separate plan bid for each
county in the plan’s service area. We do this by scaling the plan bid to the county level using the
CMS Intra-Service Area Rate (ISAR) adjustment (CMS, 2013). We then compute predicted FFS
costs and estimate equation (9) at the plan-county-year level. As it turns out, the empirical results
are similar across the two approaches.
      We consider the following econometric speci…cation, written here at the plan-county-year level:

                                              FFS
                           bjk =   0   +   1 cjk    +   2 Bk   +   year(k)   +       county(k)   + "jk :              (10)


The speci…cation is similar to the one reported in Song, Landrum, and Chernew (2012, 2013).
Including county characteristics rather than …xed e¤ects, as they do, or adding measures of private
plan market structure, has little e¤ect on our estimates of                      1   and    2,   which de…ne how predicted
FFS costs and benchmark rates a¤ect plan bids. The plan-year speci…cation is the same, but
includes …xed e¤ects for each year and each insurer contract.


Identifying the Pass-Through Rate of Benchmark Changes The benchmark rate is a key
parameter because it de…nes the subsidy paid by taxpayers when a bene…ciary enrolls in a private
plan.24 If the benchmark increases but bids remain constant, enrollee bene…ts expand. If bids
increase one-for-one with the benchmark, insurers absorb the higher subsidy level. This makes the
pass-through of the benchmark rate quite important. Here we describe how benchmarks are set,
and the resulting variation we use to identify the e¤ect on plan bids.
      The current benchmark rates have evolved from the historical capitation rates paid to plans.
Originally these were targeted to be 95 percent of the amount it would cost to cover a standard ben-
e…ciary in a given county. In the late 1990s, Congress introduced a payment ‡oor and subsequently
a separate and higher ‡oor for urban counties (those that belong to an MSA with a population
of 250,000 or more). Benchmarks were raised further in the early 2000s to encourage more plan
 24
      More speci…cally, taxpayer costs are rb for bids above B, and rb + 0:75(B            b) for bids below B.


                                                           18
o¤erings.
   During our study period of 2006-2011 a statutory formula governed annual benchmark updates.
Each year, all county benchmarks were adjusted upward by the greater of 2% and the average
national increase in FFS costs. In addition, CMS “rebases” each county benchmark at least once
every three years. In a rebasing year, CMS calculates per-capita FFS spending in the county based
on a …ve-year moving average. If the FFS average exceeds the benchmark rate that would be set
otherwise, it becomes the new benchmark. The years 2005, 2007, and 2009 are the relevant rebasing
years for our sample. In 2006, 2008, and 2010, the benchmark rates were updated based on the
national growth in FFS costs. In 2011, after the passage of the A¤ordable Care Act, benchmarks
were frozen at their 2010 levels. Figure 4 presents the distribution of county benchmarks in the
…rst and last years of our data (2006 and 2011). A large share of the benchmark rates are at one
of the two ‡oors: 46.6 percent and 44.5 percent of the rural counties have rates at the rural ‡oor
in 2006 and 2011, while 19.8 percent and 20.7 percent of the urban counties have rates that are at
the urban ‡oor.
   Our empirical speci…cation (10) includes county and year …xed e¤ects, so we identify the e¤ect
of benchmark rates on bids using three sources of residual variation. The …rst is that over time,
some county benchmark rates move in and out of their respective ‡oors. A second source is the
variance of historical county-speci…c FFS costs from current county-speci…c FFS costs. The former
are used in rebasing years to set county benchmarks, whereas the latter enter our speci…cation in
our construction of plan FFS costs. Finally, a third source of variation arises from the fact that
benchmark rates are updated in percentage terms so that high-benchmark counties have higher
dollar increases in their benchmarks. Our year …xed e¤ects only control for average dollar increases.
Our underlying assumption is that these three types of variation in benchmarks are not associated
with residual variation in individual plan costs or demand. We view this as quite plausible due to
the formulaic nature of the benchmark setting. The last source of variation is somewhat mechanical,
so to check that it is not crucial for our results, we also report log-log speci…cations in Table A8.


Estimates of Plan Bid Regressions We report our main regressions in Table 3. For each
speci…cation, we also report results with a more limited set of …xed e¤ects, so that it is possible to
compare our primary speci…cation with estimates that also make use of cross-sectional variation in
benchmarks and FFS costs. The estimates are very similar across all speci…cations, and also very
similar in the log-log speci…cation of Table A8.


                                                   19
   We …rst consider the relationship between benchmark rates and plan bids. Our estimates imply
a pass-through rate in the range of 40-60 percent. This …nding is consistent not just across our
speci…cations, but also with the estimates in Song, Landrum and Chernew (2012, 2013) and Cabral,
Geruso and Mahoney (2014), who consider similar although not quite identical speci…cations. The
results do di¤er notably from those of Duggan, Starc, and Vabson (2014), who estimate extremely
high pass-through rates, almost 100 percent. This last paper uses a di¤erent identi…cation strategy,
focusing on a small set of counties with populations that are right around the urban ‡oor threshold.
   What is the implication of this sort of pass-through rate? First it implies that changes in the
benchmark rates, such as those mandated under the A¤ordable Care Act, will have roughly equal
e¤ects on plan pro…ts and enrollee surplus, holding enrollment patterns …xed. Of course, enrollment
patterns are not …xed, and we will use our demand estimates in the next section to provide further
evidence on the consequences of benchmark changes. The pass-through estimates also provide
fairly clear evidence that plans do not base bids solely on their costs, as emphasized by Song,
Landrum and Chernew (2012, 2013). As noted above, however, one needs stronger assumptions
about demand — which we will add in the next section — to connect pass-through rates to market
power under the assumption of imperfect competition.
   Table 3 also contains a second and perhaps more surprising result. The estimated coe¢ cient
on fee-for-service costs is very small, in fact nearly zero in most speci…cations. One way to think
about this is in terms of the model of Section 4. If FFS costs are a good proxy for MA costs that
are common across plans, a zero pass-through rate is somewhat surprising, and clearly at odds
with the theoretical prediction that (common) cost pass-through should be equal to one minus the
benchmark pass-through.
   What can explain this? One possibility is that realized fee-for-service costs in a plan’s service
area are an accurate but very noisy measure of the expected costs that plans use in forming their
bids. To explore this hypothesis, we consider additional speci…cations that attempt to reduce
measurement error — focusing on larger counties where idiosyncratic cost shocks are more likely
to average out, or averaging fee-for-service costs over multiple years. However, our basic …nding
remains stable: fee-for-service costs bear little relationship to plan bids conditional on benchmark
rates.
   This leads us toward an alternative hypothesis that the cost structure of MA plans is in fact
quite di¤erent from that of fee-for-service Medicare. Private plans that are HMOs or PPOs must
negotiate prices with providers, so their unit costs need not be identical to those of CMS, and they


                                                20
may apply more rigorous utilization management than fee-for-service Medicare. Indeed, several
recent papers (Aizcorbe et al., 2012; Baker, Bundorf, and Kessler, 2010; MaCurdy et al., 2013)
have noted that Medicare FFS costs and the costs of employer-provided private health insurance
are not strongly correlated across regions. The structure of Medicare private plans is probably
more similar to that of employer-sponsored health plans for non-seniors than it is to that of FFS
Medicare.
         To explore this hypothesis, Table 4 replicates the last column of Table 3, only with separate
estimates for the three types of MA plans: HMO plans, local PPO plans, and private FFS plans.
As noted earlier, the private FFS plans provide similar insurance to traditional Medicare, and pay
the FFS rates to providers. The results for these plans are strikingly di¤erent. While the coe¢ cient
on FFS costs is essentially zero for HMO plans, the estimates for private FFS plans are closer to 0.5
and match up with the prediction of the theoretical model that db=dB should be equal to 1                  db=dc.
The estimates for local PPO plans are in between the HMO and PFFS estimates.
         In light of this, we conclude that Medicare FFS costs are not an ideal proxy for the costs of most
private plans, with the exception of private FFS plans. For this reason, we will rely on estimates of
plan demand, coupled with an assumption of equilibrium bidding, to back out alternative estimates
of MA plan costs.


6         Estimates of Plan Demand

We next propose an empirical speci…cation of the demand for private plans. We then use the
demand speci…cation to estimate the price sensitivity of private plan enrollees, which in turn allows
us to obtain estimates of enrollee surplus and plan costs and pro…tability. We start this section with
the demand model, then discuss the variation in plan bids that we use to identify price sensitivity
and …nally present the estimates.


Demand Speci…cation We adopt a nested logit speci…cation for plan demand, adapted slightly
to capture the fact that plan revenue and costs depend on risk-weighted demand. We consider
each county-year as a separate market, indexed by k. We divide the plans into two exhaustive and
mutually exclusive categories indexed by g: the outside good (traditional Medicare) is the only
member of group g = 0, and all MA plans belong to the other group g = 1.25
    25
    Our model somewhat simpli…es the actual choices available because a bene…ciary who chooses traditional Medicare
also can choose to purchase a supplemental Medigap policy (which is not allowed for MA enrollees). In addition,



                                                        21
      The utility of bene…ciary i from plan j in market k is given by


                                          uijk =           jk    +   ig   + (1      )   ijk                                       (11)


where

                                   jk   = x0jk              (p+
                                                              jk + 0:75pjk ) +           k    +     jk :                          (12)

      We use xjk to denote an M -dimensional vector of observable plan characteristics. These include
indicators for each possible plan quality rating (e.g., 3.5 stars or 5 stars), an indicator for whether
the plan is bundled with supplemental bene…ts (such as vision or dental coverage), and an indicator
for whether the plan is bundled with Part D bene…ts. We use pjk to denote the excess bid. We also
make the assumption (which we test and do not reject; see Appendix Table A10) that bene…ciaries
respond to dollar changes in MA premiums in the same way that they respond to dollar changes
in the value of the plan’s bene…ts package. Speci…cally, let p+
                                                              jk = bjk                                     Bk when bjk    Bk and zero
otherwise and let pjk = bjk        Bk when bjk < Bk and zero otherwise. That is, we assume that once
one accounts for CMS claiming 25 percent of under-bids, the e¤ect of a bid change on demand is
the same, whether bids are above or below the benchmark.
      To complete our speci…cation, let            j   denote the mean value of the unobserved (by the econo-
metrician) plan characteristics, and let                   jk    denote a market-speci…c deviation from this mean (so

 jk   =   j   +   jk ).   We use   k    to denote the mean utility for MA plans in market k relative to
the outside good. In order to derive an expression for the implied market shares, we add nested
logit distributional assumptions on the stochastic terms                           ig   and       ijk .    We assume that the   ijk   are
distributed i.i.d. with a Type I extreme-value distribution and that                                 ig    is drawn from a distribution
(with parameter ) so that          ig   + (1           )   ijk   follows a generalized extreme value distribution. As
shown in Berry (1994), this yields the nested logit speci…cation


                                        ln(sjk )           ln(s0k ) =      jk    + ln(sjk )                                       (13)

where sjk is the market share of plan j as a fraction of the overall share of MA in market k.
      To estimate this model, we measure enrollment by risk-months rather than the number of
bene…ciaries who choose a given plan. That is, instead of assigning a weight of one to each plan
FFS bene…ciaries can choose to enroll in a stand-alone Part D plan. We lump these possibilities together as the
“outside good.” Note that in our speci…cations with county and year …xed e¤ects, the mean utility of MA relative to
the outside good may vary across markets.



                                                                     22
enrollee, we assign a weight that is proportional to the product of the enrollee’s risk score times the
number of months (within the year) over which he was covered by the plan. We do this because,
as described earlier, plan revenues and pro…ts are proportional to the risk-weighted enrollment, so
this measure of enrollment is the one that should enter the …rm’s bidding decision. We convert this
measure of enrollment to market shares so that sjk is the risk-month-weighted share of each plan.26
We let     jk   be a function of year and contract (or contract-county) …xed e¤ects, as well as the full
set of plan quality rating dummy variables, and the excess bid.
       A standard issue in estimating equation (13) is that sjk is endogenous because unobserved
changes in plan demand a¤ect both its market share and its market share among MA plans. We
use three alternative instruments for sjk : the …rst is the number of MA plans o¤ered in the market;
the second is the number of MA contracts o¤ered in the market; the third is a set of dummies for
which other contracts are o¤ered in the same market. None of these is perfect, but the results across
choices of instruments are very stable, and the price e¤ects are quite consistent over an even wider
set of speci…cations, so we use the contract dummy IV regression as our preferred speci…cation.


Identifying Bene…ciary Price Sensitivity                  In estimating how plan enrollment changes with
plan bids, we face a common identi…cation challenge. Di¤erences in plan bids may re‡ect di¤erences
in plan structure or quality that in turn directly a¤ect demand for the plan. In particular, although
we control for CMS quality scores, there may be considerable variation in plan quality. Arguably
the most important component of plan quality is the network of providers that the plan covers.
Even if we could perfectly observe the network, encoding it in a usable set of control variables
would be challenging and imperfect. Our solution therefore is to rely on the panel structure of the
data. We use a di¤erence-in-di¤erences strategy that relies on variation within an insurer contract,
either over time or across counties, or both. This approach has some limitations, one bene…t is
that it utilizes the structure of the program under which plans within a contract share the same
provider network, and also lets us take advantage of the large number of plan-years for which we
have data.
       Consider the empirical speci…cation described above, writing the risk-month-weighted market
  26
    Note that this is a bit of a shortcut and does not follow immediately from the utility speci…cation. If we modeled
the enrollment share of each risk type r as nested logit, then added up over risk types, the left hand side would be
the risk-month-weighted average of the log shares, rather than the log of the risk-month-weighted share.




                                                         23
share of plan j in county-year k as:


     ln(sjk )   ln(s0k ) = x0jk   (p+
                                    jk + 0:75pjk ) + ln(sjk ) +   year(k)   +   contract(j)   +   jk ;   (14)


where xjk includes the plan’s CMS quality score, as well as characteristics such as whether the plan
includes a prescription drug o¤ering.
   Our speci…cation therefore makes use of two sources of variation in plan bids. First, within
a given year, a contract between an insurer and CMS may include several plans that have the
same provider network but vary in the exact bene…ts, i.e. the monthly premium, whether the plan
includes Part D bene…ts. Controlling for bene…ts that are funded with supplemental fees (such as a
bundled Part D o¤ering), we use variation across plans within a contract in the amount of bene…ts
generated by di¤erent rebates to identify price sensitivity. Second, plan bids change from year-to-
year, and we use the idiosyncratic variation in bid changes relative to national changes to identify
price sensitivity. We also report results for a variant of the demand model with contract-county
…xed e¤ects, rather than contract …xed e¤ects. The idea is that while plans within the contract have
the same provider network, the value of the network might vary across counties within a service
area. The estimates are not very di¤erent, however.


Demand Estimates We …rst report results from standard logit speci…cations in Panel A of Table
5, and then from the nested logit speci…cations in Panel B. We use the estimates in Panel B, column
3 in subsequent calculations.
   The main coe¢ cients to emphasize capture the e¤ect of the changes in the plan bid on plan
enrollment. Recall that the vast majority of plans bid below the benchmark. In this range, the
most tightly speci…ed logit speci…cation (column (5)), which uses bid variation within a contract-
county for identi…cation, implies that a bid increase of $10 decreases the plan’s risk-month-weighted
market share by around 9 percent. Our preferred speci…cation is in column (4), which uses contract
…xed e¤ects to control for variation in provider networks, but captures variation in the coverage
across plans within contracts using variables that describe the bene…ts associated with each plan.
Using this variation, the e¤ect is about 50% greater. A (below the benchmark) bid increase of $10
decreases the plan’s risk-month-weighted market share by around 14 percent.
   Using this speci…cation, Panel B of Table 5 reports nested logit estimates using several choices
of instruments (for the within-MA market share). The results are extremely similar across columns,
giving rise to similar demand elasticities with respect to the excess price. We also estimate the

                                                 24
nested logit parameter         to be signi…cant, around 0.32, consistent with our expectation that MA
private plans are closer substitutes to one another than they are to traditional Medicare. The
implication is that for a given plan, the other competing MA plans in its market (which have
around 20% market share) exert just about the same competitive e¤ect as FFS Medicare (with
80% market share). That is, an increase in the plan bid causes enrollees to substitute away in
roughly equal shares to other MA plans and FFS Medicare. Similarly, a given plan attracts about
the same number of enrollees from a uniform increase in competing MA plan bids as it does from
the same increase in the benchmark rate, holding …xed all plan bids.
      The remaining results are generally as expected. We …nd that consumers place considerable
value on plans that o¤er bundled Part D bene…ts. The table does not display the e¤ects of the plan
quality ratings, but they are clearly predictive of enrollment. Most ratings are from three to four
stars, and all else equal we estimate that a four-star plan attracts around 3 percent more enrollees
than a three-star plan, equivalent to a bid di¤erence of about 3 dollars per month.


Incentives for Risk Selection Prior to the introduction of risk scoring, insurers had a clear
incentive to enroll healthier bene…ciaries and there is considerable evidence that they did.27 We
observed in Section 3 that MA enrollees today continue to have lower risk scores and lower mortality
conditional on risk score. Of course if bidding is su¢ ciently competitive, cost savings from favorable
risk selection will translate to lower bids and be competed away. From the perspective of bidding
competition, a crucial issue is whether bidding incentives on the margin are a¤ected by risk selection,
in particular whether …rms might avoid low bids to maintain more favorable enrollee characteristics.
In the context of our empirical approach, we also propose to infer each plan’s costs from observed
bids. If a higher bid leads to signi…cantly healthier enrollees, we would need to account for this in
our estimation.
      We therefore want to assess whether plans have an incentive to adjust their bids in order to
change the risk composition of their enrollees. To do this, we consider the following regression:


                                rjm = x0jk + (p+
                                               jk + 0:75pjk ) +         j   +   k   + "jk              (15)


where rjm is the average enrollee risk for plan j in county-year k, and pjk is the plan’s excess bid,
as before. In Panel A of Appendix Table A11 we use the same set of speci…cations as in Panel A of
Table 5, and Panel B of Appendix Table A11 repeats the exercise, but replacing plan average risk
 27
      There is evidence on this dating back at least to Eggers (1980) and Eggers and Prihoda (1982).


                                                         25
with plan mortality rate as the dependent variable, and adding plan average risk as a regressor.
This allows us to look separately at selection on observables and selection on unobservables.
         The results suggest that higher plan bids have a very small e¤ect on the average risk score of
a plan’s enrollees. A $10 decrease in bid is associated, in most speci…cations, with a decrease in
the average enrollee risk score that generally is less than 0.5%.28 The second panel of Appendix
Table A11 provides analogous results for the relationship between plan bids and plan mortality
conditional on the plan’s average risk score. Again, a lower plan bid is associated with somewhat
healthier enrollees in the sense of lower mortality. The e¤ect is slightly bigger; a $10 bid decrease
is associated with decreased mortality rate of 0.0005 per risk unit. We will not account for this in
our subsequent estimates of plan costs; taking it into account would lead to somewhat higher cost
estimates following the logic of Section 3.


7         Welfare E¤ects of Medicare Advantage

In this section we use our demand estimates to estimate enrollee surplus from private plans, and
to back out implied costs of each MA plan. We then compare these costs with the predicted FFS
costs associated with the same bene…ciaries, and provide estimates of the overall “gains from trade”
from having MA plans, and how this surplus is divided among taxpayers, plans and bene…ciaries.
The following section considers how these calculations might change under various reforms of the
bidding rules. We focus our exposition on the main …ndings, leaving some details of the calculations
to Appendix C.


Estimates of Enrollee Surplus We …rst consider the surplus that accrues to private plan
enrollees. The nested logit formula for the consumer surplus associated with the MA plans o¤ered
in county-year k is

                                1                                X Jk               jk
                        CSk =       log 1 + exp (1       ) log            exp                 :                 (16)
                                                                    j=1         1

The parameter          is the marginal utility of income, so that consumer surplus is measured in dollar
terms. We compute this for every county-year. The estimates range from 15 to 80 dollars per
Medicare enrolllee-month. Of course, this surplus is concentrated among bene…ciaries who actually
    28
    Note that the direction is contrary to the usual adverse selection e¤ect. Plans that o¤er more generous insurance
have more favorable risk selection.




                                                         26
enroll in MA plans. Attributing it to this narrower group implies an enrollee surplus of 103 dollars
per MA enrollee-month.
   This calculation su¤ers from some well-known limitations of the logit model, because under
its assumptions there are always consumers who place very high value on any alternative (due to
the idiosyncratic   ijk ),   even alternatives with very small market shares. To avoid attributing gains
simply from giving consumers more options, it seems appropriate to focus attention only on the
surplus that is generated through the rebate and di¤erence out surplus that the model says would
be created if private plans o¤ered identical …nancial bene…ts to FFS Medicare.
   To do this, we recompute the consumer surplus for each market, setting the component of utility
that comes from the rebate equal to zero by replacing the variable (p+                    +
                                                                     jm + 0:75pjm ) with pjm . We

then subtract this non-rebate surplus from our …rst estimate to obtain the surplus bene…t due to
the rebate payment. When we do this, we estimate that enrollees receive on average 49 dollars per
month in rebate surplus from their private plans. This is about two-thirds of the average actuarial
value of the rebate, which is 76 dollars per enrollee-month, implying a disutility of 27 dollars a
month from other features of the private plan such as the limited provider network.


Estimates of Plan Costs and Pro…ts We next combine our demand estimates with an assump-
tion of equilibrium bidding to infer implied plan costs, a common approach in industry studies. We
start with the condition for optimal bidding in equation (5), and modify it to re‡ect the fact that
insurers may o¤er multiple plans in the same market. Speci…cally, consider a given county-year
with J private plans. Let Db Q be the estimated matrix of own- and cross-bid derivatives, and let
  denote an ownership matrix, such that its lmth entry is equal to one if plans l and m are owned
by the same insurer, and zero otherwise. With this (standard) notation, the plan costs are given
by the solution to the …rst-order conditions for optimal bidding:

                                                                 1
                                             c=b+(       Db Q)       Q:                             (17)


Here the multiplication operator refers to an element-by-element product, and c, b, and Q are
J-dimensional vectors of the implied costs, observed bids, and observed shares of each plan in the
market. We compute costs for each plan in each county-year. In each case, the estimate is the
cost of providing standard Medicare bene…ts to a standard Medicare Advantage enrollee, i.e. a
bene…ciary with risk score        t.   To compute plan costs on a per-enrollee basis, we simply multiply
by the average risk score of the plan’s enrollees.

                                                       27
   We are interested in how the estimated private plan costs compare to equivalent FFS costs.
We can make this comparison at the county-year level. For each county-year, we compute the
enrollment-weighted average of private plan costs. In Figure 6, we plot these costs against our
estimate of the FFS costs of covering the same set of MA enrollees in that particular county-year.
We compute the latter using the procedure described in Section 3. The result is that each point in
Figure 6 represents a county-year, with the horizontal axis representing the predicted average FFS
cost of MA enrollees in the market, and the vertical axis representing the average implied private
plan costs of the same MA enrollees. The dotted line in Figure 6 is the 45-degree line, so that
points above it represent markets in which MA cost is estimated to be more expensive than what it
would cost to cover the same individuals in FFS, while points below the line are where MA appears
to have the potential to generate cost savings.
   In Figure 6, MA costs are cheaper than FFS in 53% of the markets. These markets cover about
70 percent of the population of bene…ciaries who are enrolled in MA (and 61 percent of the overall
Medicare population). The di¤erence is natural; in markets where MA plans have a cost advantage,
their bids are lower and hence enrollment is higher. Note, however, that MA plans do not have an
obvious advantage in urban markets, where we already noted that enrollment is high. We return
to this point later. Overall, we estimate the average cost of MA enrollees to be 587 dollars per
enrollee-month, about 77 dollars (12 percent) less than our estimate of what it would cost to cover
the same enrollees by FFS. The di¤erence is substantial: with the current level of MA enrollment,
it implies about $13 billion a year in potential cost savings.
   We can also estimate a monthly dollar markup for each plan in each county-year, by subtracting
the estimated cost per standard enrollee from the plan’s bid and multiplying by the plan’s average
risk score to obtain an enrollee-weighted average pro…t. We then take the enrollment-weighted
average across plans for each county-year to obtain an average monthly plan pro…t for each market.
Figure 7 plots these market-by-market estimates of private plan pro…ts against risk-adjusted MA
benchmarks for the same markets. The estimated mark-ups are substantial. We estimate the
average pro…ts accrued by MA plans for every month of enrollment to be 95 dollars. On a percentage
basis, this suggests that plan margins are on the order of 16% above their (variable) costs of
coverage, on average over our sample.


Summarizing the Welfare E¤ects We summarize our estimates of program surplus and how it
is divided in the …rst row of Table 6. Over our study period, CMS paid an average of 756.2 dollars


                                                  28
for every enrollment month of an MA bene…ciary. We have estimated that the private plan cost
of providing baseline coverage to these bene…ciaries was only 585.6 dollars. The di¤erence, equal
to 171 dollars per enrollee-month, is split between the bene…ciary and the insurer. We estimate
average monthly plan pro…ts to be 95 dollars; the average rebate that went to enrollees was 76
dollars. However, we also estimate that the enrollee disutility from limited provider access was 27
dollars per month, so that the average enrollee surplus was 49 dollars per month, or about half of
plan pro…ts. Put another way, about two-thirds of the joint surplus to plans and enrollees accrued
to the plans.
    The comparison to FFS Medicare is also informative. We estimate that the average Medicare
Advantage enrollee over this period would have cost taxpayers 662 dollars per month under FFS
Medicare. Therefore, of the 95 + 49 = 144 dollars of net surplus that accrued to plans and enrollees,
only 50 dollars per month were true “gains from trade”. This amount represents the costs savings
minus the enrollee disutility from private plan restrictions. The remaining surplus to plans and
bene…ciaries comes from taxpayers who, relative to FFS Medicare, provided a subsidy of 94 dollars
per enrollee-month. The subsidy is higher than the average rebate, re‡ecting the fact that plan
payments have somewhat exceeded FFS costs for the same enrollees.
    Translating these monthly per-enrollee amounts into annual dollars, the potential surplus gains
from private plans are not trivial. At current enrollment levels of around 14 million Medicare
bene…ciaries in private plans, the surplus gains amount to about $8-9 billion a year. Taxpayers
provide an additional $15-16 billion subsidy. The result is that private plans receive around twice
the incremental surplus created, while enrollee gains are about half this amount, or $8 billion a year.
Of course, our calculations ignore all of the …xed costs of operating private plans, and may overstate
the potential gains to the extent that these are larger than the administrative costs associated with
FFS Medicare.


8    Promoting Private Plan Competition

Overall, our estimates suggest that there are two factors contributing to higher taxpayer spending
when Medicare bene…ciaries enroll in private plans. One factor is that MA plan costs appear to
exceed FFS costs in some markets, despite being lower on average. The second is that even when
MA plan costs are cheaper, the plans often enjoy considerable market power. This allows them to
mark up their bids and capture much of the cost savings as pro…ts rather than reduced taxpayer



                                                  29
spending.
   So while our general …nding is that the MA program has been bene…cial on average, it is
interesting to explore how further changes in the MA market design could a¤ect the program’s
costs and bene…ts, as well as the distribution of gains. We use our model and estimates to explore
such market design changes; Table 6 summarizes our results. It is important to keep in mind that
all our exercises in this section hold …xed the set of MA plans and their plan design, while in
practice one would expect that insurers would also respond to changes in market design by o¤ering
new plans, dropping plans, or adjusting plan details (see, e.g., Frakt et al., 2012). We therefore
interpret our main …ndings in this section as suggestive; the exact numbers should be interpreted
with some caution given the factors we hold …xed.
   We start with an attempt to provide an upper bound on the potential bene…ts of the current
MA program by assuming that plans have no market power at all, i.e. that MA plans bid their
costs. This is of course an extreme case, and may serve as a benchmark for the potential gains to
consumers within the current design of rebates and benchmarks. Because much of the reduction
in bids translates into increased rebates, this exercise results in only about $24 per enrollee-month
reduction in government spending. Mostly, the reduction in bids translates into greater rebates and
more generous coverage. In this scenario, the MA enrollment rate jumps more than 50 percent.
The marginal enrollees in private plans derive less surplus than the inframarginal enrollees, but on
average across enrollees, consumer surplus from the rebate still increases to around 88 dollars per
month.
   Therefore, one way to understand the exercise is that under the current bidding rules, and …xing
the benchmark rates, plan bids largely determine the surplus split between enrollees and insurers,
with taxpayer costs per enrollee near-constant. Our second exercise provides an alternative type of
bound. Here we assume that plans bid exactly the benchmark, so there are zero rebates. In this
case, MA enrollment drops sharply, almost in half, showing that more generous coverage through the
rebates is a key factor attracting bene…ciaries into private plans. At the same time in this scenario,
insurer pro…ts per enrollee increase by 65 percent and consumer surplus declines. Government
spending remains similar on a per-enrollee basis, at around $14 more per enrollee-month.
   We then report two exercises that reduce the benchmark rates. One applies a uniform reduction
in benchmark rates by 50 dollars per enrollee-month, while the other sets the benchmark rates,
which are often well above the FFS costs, to be equal to the FFS costs in each county. These
exercises, by design, signi…cantly reduce government spending per MA bene…ciary, but due to


                                                 30
lower rebates, also reduce the share of Medicare bene…ciaries who select Medicare Advantage. For
example, at benchmark rates that equal the county-level FFS costs, the MA share is about a third
lower than the observed levels, while a uniform $50 reduction of benchmark rates results in a lower
loss of MA share. As mentioned earlier, this calculation does not account for the potential exit of
MA plans, which might amplify decreased enrollment e¤ects.
   Our last set of exercises explores the e¤ect of changes in the rebate formula, by either allocating a
smaller fraction (50% instead of 75%) of the di¤erence between the bid and benchmark toward more
generous plan bene…ts, or by allocating the full di¤erence toward additional bene…ts. Changes in
the rebate have two o¤setting e¤ects. On one hand, a larger rebate increases government spending
and creates more generous coverage, leading to higher enrollee surplus. On the other hand, it
makes bene…ciaries more sensitive to changes in bids because on the margin they are a¤ected more
by bid changes. This leads to lower equilibrium markups. The results, reported at the bottom
of Table 6, suggest that the e¤ects are fairly strong. We estimate that a complete pass-through
of bid reductions to consumers would substantially increase MA enrollment, albeit at the cost of
signi…cantly higher government spending per enrollee, around $32 per enrollee-month. In contrast,
reducing the rebate rate to 50% leads to a sharp reduction in MA enrollment and lower consumer
surplus, without very noticeable taxpayer savings. The issue here is that with a smaller rebate
share, demand becomes less sensitive and plans have an incentive to raise markups. In terms of
strategies to reduce taxpayer costs, it seems that cutting the rebate rate is clearly dominated by
reducing benchmark rates (again, abstracting from potential exit or changes in plan design).
   To summarize, our general …nding is that changes in market design can have a large e¤ect on MA
enrollment, and on the distribution of surplus. Our …ndings here should be viewed as suggestive,
partly because we ignore the potential changes in the number and type of plans being o¤ered, and
partly because we have explored just a few of the possible reforms. For instance, one might wonder
if a combination of a higher rebate rate and lower benchmarks might reduce taxpayer costs without
greatly reducing enrollment. Our calculations suggest that this is in fact rather di¢ cult to achieve
if one focuses on uniform changes to benchmark rates, or changes that are tied to FFS costs (see
Appendix Table A12). Benchmark changes more closely tied to plan costs might go farther in this
regard, and it would be worth exploring mechanisms that could achieve this.




                                                  31
9    Conclusions

The reform and expansion of Medicare Advantage provides an opportunity to evaluate how private
health insurance competition can work, compared to a public insurance benchmark. We propose a
model of imperfect competition to think about this problem, while accounting for health di¤erences
between private plan enrollees and those enrolled in traditional Medicare. Our estimates suggest
that in many areas of the country private plans are able to obtain costs savings over FFS Medicare,
su¢ ciently large to generate net surplus even after accounting for consumer disutility from hav-
ing limited provider access. The division of the surplus largely bene…ts the plans, with enrollees
capturing about half as much surplus as plans and taxpayers providing a large additional subsidy
under the generous benchmark rates that prevailed in our data.
    In modeling any large and complex program, there is a trade-o¤ between capturing all of the
potentially interesting dynamics, and keeping the analysis transparent and tractable. It would be
interesting to expand on some of the aspects of plan competition that we simpli…ed. First, we
adopted a simple approach to rescale MA risk scores and assumed that this scaling was common
across plans and invariant to plan bids. Second, we focused on the response of enrollee demand
to plan bids, ignoring the fact that plans can di¤erentiate by allocating the rebate dollars toward
premium reductions or increased cost-sharing. Third, our model is static, whereas enrollees may
view their current plans (or traditional Medicare) as a sticky default choice, so that plans face
dynamic bidding incentives (as in Miller, 2014). Incorporating these complications would give a
more nuanced view of competition.
    Our treatment of potential market design interventions was also relatively brief. It focused
only on simple changes in the benchmark rates and the size of plan rebates, and did not address
the important issue of how program rules a¤ect entry and exit. In addition to looking at market
structure, one question is whether there are ways to improve plan incentives by making enrollee
demand more price-sensitive. Another is whether it might be possible to induce some competition
across, as well as within, local markets given that the national market has lower insurer concentra-
tion. Finally, a recent change of Medicare Advantage makes payments partly contingent on plan
quality. It would be useful to understand whether this is e¤ective, if enrollment decisions already
are sensitive to plan quality.




                                                32
References
Aizcorbe, Ana, Eli Liebman, Sarah Pack, David M. Cutler, Michael E. Chernew, and Allison B.
    Rosen. 2012. “Measuring health care costs of individuals with employer-sponsored health
    insurance in the U.S.: A comparison of survey and claims data.” Journal of the International
    Association for O¢ cial Statistics 28(1): 43-51.

Baker, Laurence C., M. Kate Bundorf, and Daniel P. Kessler. 2010. “HMO Coverage Reduces
    Variations in the Use of Health Care among Patients Under Age Sixty-Five.” Health A¤ airs
    29(11): 2068-2074.

Brown, Jason, Mark Duggan, Ilyana Kuziemko, and William Woolston. 2014. “How Does Risk
    Selection Respond to Risk adjustment? Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program.”
    American Economic Review 104(10): 3335-3364.

Bulow, Jeremy and Paul P‡eiderer. 1983. “A Note on the E¤ect of Cost Changes on Prices.”
    Journal of Political Economy 91(1): 182-185.

Cabral, Marika, Michael Geruso and Neale Mahoney. 2014. “Does Privatized Medicare Bene…t
    Patients or Producers? Evidence from the Bene…ts Improvement and Protection Act.”NBER
    Working Paper No. 20470.

Caplin, Andrew, and Barry Nalebu¤. 1991. “Aggregation and Imperfect Competition: On the
    Existence of Equilibrium.” Econometrica 59(1): 25-59.

CMS (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid). 2013. Medicare Managed Care Manual. Publication
   100-16. Available at http://www.cms.gov.

Dowd, Bryan E., Roger Feldman, and Robert Coulam. 2003. “The E¤ect of Plan Characteristics
   on Medicare + Choice Enrollment.” Health Services Research 38(1): 113-135.

Duggan, Mark, Amanda Starc, and Boris Vabson. 2014. “Who Bene…ts When the Government
   Pays More? Pass-Through in the Medicare Advantage Program.”NBER Working Paper No.
   19989.

Eggers, P. 1980. “Risk di¤erential between Medicare bene…ciaries enrolled and not enrolled in an
    HMO.” Health Care Financing Review 1(3): 91-9.

Eggers, P., and R. Prihoda. 1982. “Pre-enrollment reimbursement patterns of Medicare bene…-
    ciaries enrolled in ‘at-risk’HMOs.” Health Care Financing Review 4(1): 55-73.

Enthoven, Alain. 1993. “The History and Principles of Managed Competition.” Health A¤ airs
    12(supplement): 24-48.

Frakt, Austin B., Steven D. Pizer, and Roger Feldman. 2012. “The E¤ects of Market Structure
    and Payment Rate on the Entry of Private Health Plans in the Medicare Market.” Inquiry
    49(15): 15-36.

Geruso, Michael, and Timothy Layton, 2014. “Risk Selection, Risk adjustment, and Manipulable
    Medical Coding: Evidence from Medicare.” Mimeo, UT Austin.

                                              33
GAO (General Accounting O¢ ce). 2013. “Medicare Advantage: Substantial Excess Payments Un-
   derscore Need for CMS to Improve Accuracy of Risk Score adjustments.”Report to Congress,
   GAO-13-206.

Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Robert J. Town and Eric Barrette. 2011. “Managed Care, Drug Bene…ts
   and Mortality: An Analysis of the Elderly.” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy
   11(2).

Huang, Jennifer T., Gretchen A. Jacobson, Tricia Neuman, Katherine A. Desmond, and Thomas
   Rice. 2013. “Medigap: Spotlight on Enrollment, Premiums, and Recent Trends.” Kaiser
   Family Foundation Report.

Landon, Bruce E., Alan M. Zaslavsky, Robert C. Saunders, L. Gregory Pawlson, Joseph P. New-
    house, and John Z. Ayanian. 2012. “Analysis of Medicare Advantage HMOs Compared with
    Traditional Medicare Shows Lower Use of Many Services During 2003-09.” Health A¤ airs
    31(12): 2609-2617.

MaCurdy, Thomas, Jay Bhattacharya, Daniella Perlroth, Jason Shafrin, Anita Au-Yeung, Hani
   Bashour, Camille Chicklis, Kennan Cronen, Brandy Lipton, Shahin Saneinejad, Elen Shrestha,
   Sajid Zaidi. 2013. “Geographic Variation in Spending, Utilization and Quality: Medicare and
   Medicaid Bene…ciaries.”Report prepared by Acumen, LLC, commissioned by the IOM Com-
   mittee on Geographic Variation in Health Care Spending and Promotion of High-Value Care,
   Institute of Medicine, Washington, DC.

McGuire, Thomas G., Joseph P. Newhouse, and Anna D. Sinaiko. 2011. “An Economic History
   of Medicare Part C.” The Millbank Quarterly 89(2): 289-332.

MedPac (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission). 2007-2013. “A Data Book: Health Care
   Spending and the Medicare Program.” Chapter 9 on Medicare Advantage.

MedPac (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission). 2012. “Issues for Risk adjustment in Medicare
   Advantage.” Report to the Congress: Medicare and the Health Care Delivery System.

Miller, Keaton. 2014. “Do Private Medicare Firms have Lower Costs?” Mimeo, University of
     Minnesota.

Morrissey, Michael A., Meredith L. Kilgore, David J. Becker, Wilson Smith, and Elizabeth Delzell.
   2013. “Favorable Selection, Risk adjustment and the Medicare Advantage Program.” Health
   Services Research 48(3): 1039-1056.

Newhouse, Joseph P., Mary Price, Jie Huang, J. Michael McWilliams, and John Hsu. 2012. “Steps
   To Reduce Favorable Risk Selection In Medicare Advantage Largely Succeeded, Boding Well
   For Health Insurance Exchanges.” Health A¤ airs 31(12): 2618-2628.

Newhouse, Joseph P., Mary Price, J. Michael McWilliams, John Hsu and Thomas McGuire. 2014.
   “How Much Favorable Selection is Left in Medicare Advantage?” NBER Working Paper No.
   20021.



                                              34
Pizer, Steve D., and Austin Frakt. 2002. “Payment Policy and Competition in the Medicare +
    Choice Program.” Heath Care Financing Review 24(1): 83-94.

Pizer, Steven D., Austin Frakt and Roger Feldman. 2009. “Nothing for Something? Estimating
    Cost and Value for Bene…ciaries from Recent Increases on HMO Payments and Drug Bene…ts.”
    International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 9(1): 59-81.

Song, Zirui, David M. Cutler, Michael E. Chernew. 2012. “Potential Consequences of Reform-
    ing Medicare Into a Competitive Bidding System.” The Journal of the American Medical
    Association 308(5): 459-460.

Song, Zirui, Mary Beth Landrum, and Michael E. Chernew. 2012. “Competitive Bidding in
    Medicare: Who Bene…ts From Competition?”The American Journal of Managed Care 18(9):
    546-552.

Song, Zirui, Mary Beth Landrum, and Michael E. Chernew. 2013. “Competitive Bidding in
    Medicare Advantage: E¤ect of Benchmark Changes on Plan Bids.” Journal of Health Eco-
    nomics 32(6): 1301-1312.

Stockley, Karen, Thomas McGuire, Christopher Afendulis, Michael E. Chernew. 2014. “Premium
    Transparency in the Medicare Advantage Market: Implications for Premiums, Bene…ts, and
    E¢ ciency.” NBER Working Paper No. 20208.

Town, Robert and Su Liu. 2003. “The Welfare Impact of Medicare HMOs.” RAND Journal of
   Economics 34(4): 719-736.

Weyl, E. Glen and Michal Fabinger. 2013. “Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles of
   Incidence under Imperfect Competition.” Journal of Political Economy 121(3): 528-583.




                                            35
Figure 1: The Growth of Medicare Advantage
                                      700                                                                                                                        16

                                            Number of contracts
                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                      600
                                            Enrollment

                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                      500




                                                                                                                                                                       Enrollment (millions)
                Number of contracts




                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                      400

                                                                                                                                                                 8

                                      300
                                                                                                                                                                 6

                                      200

                                                                                          h
                                                                                                                                                                 4


                                      100
                                                                                                                                                                 2


                                       0                                                                                                                         0
                                            1985
                                            1986
                                            1987
                                            1988
                                            1989
                                            1990
                                            1991
                                            1992
                                            1993
                                            1994
                                            1995
                                            1996
                                            1997
                                            1998
                                            1999
                                            2000
                                            2001
                                            2002
                                            2003
                                            2004
                                            2005
                                            2006
                                            2007
                                            2008
                                            2009
                                            2010
                                            2011
                                            2012
                                            2013
                                            2014
Figure shows the number of MA contracts and the share of Medicare beneficiaries who enrolled in MA over the last three decades. As described in the text, an MA contract is the unit of
observation that represents the most important decision by an insurer to enter the MA market. A contract is typically mapped into multiple distinct plans that share common features, such
as provider networks, with each being offered in multiple counties. The period described experienced several important regulatory/legislative milestones, including the beginning of the
Part C program in 1985, authorized under the 1982 Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act; the 1997 Balanced Budget Act, which authorized PPOs and Private FFS plans and raised payment
rates; the 2003 Medicare Modernization Act, which instituted a competitive bidding system and a risk adjustment system based on past health diagnoses; and the 2010 Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act, which reduced payment rates and introduced bonus payments for high-quality plans. This figure is the authors’ adaptation of Figures 2 and 4 from McGuire,
Newhouse, and Sinaiko (2011). Contracts include HMOs, local PPOs, Private FFS plans, and regional PPOs. The data source is CMS's Medicare Managed Care Contract Plans Monthly
Summary Reports. All data are from December of the year indicated, except for 2014, which uses data from January.
Figure 2: MA share by risk score

                                         0.25                                                                                                                       25




                                          0.2                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                         Total Medicare Beneficiaries (Millions)
        Medicare Advantage Penetration




                                         0.15                                                                                                                       15




                                          0.1                                                                                                                       10



                                                                                            h
                                         0.05                                                                                                                       5




                                           0                                                                                                                        0
                                                0.0   1.0   2.0   3.0      4.0           5.0           6.0          7.0           8.0           9.0          10.0
                                                                                    Risk Score
Figure shows the share of Medicare beneficiaries who select an MA plan by the beneficiary’s risk score bin (pooled across years). Each bin is of 0.1 width, so that the first bin covers
beneficiaries with risk score between 0 and 0.1, the second covers 0.1-0.2, and so on. The figure illustrates that the MA share is significantly lower for beneficiaries with high risk
scores. The gray bars represent the underlying distribution of risk scores among Medicare beneficiaries (again, pooled across years) in order to emphasize that the range over which
MA share starts declining is associated with only a small fraction of Medicare beneficiaries.
Figure 3: Mortality rates in MA and FFS Medicare, by risk score

                                 0.4                                                                                                                              25

                                                            Traditional Medicare
                                0.35
                                                            Medicare Advantage 2006-09
                                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                        Total Medicare Beneficiaries (Millions)
                                                            New MA Beneficiaries Only 2006-09
                                 0.3
                                                            Medicare Advantage 2010-11
                                                            New MA Beneficiaries Only 2010-11
                                0.25
                                                                                                                                                                  15
               Mortality Rate




                                 0.2

                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                0.15


                                 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                  5

                                0.05


                                  0                                                                                                                               0
                                       0.25    1.05                  1.85               2.65                    3.45                 4.25                   ≥5
                                                                                     Risk Score


Figure shows the mortality rate (over the subsequent calendar year), by risk score bin (0-0.1, 0.1-0.2, and so on), for beneficiaries who are in FFS Medicare, and in MA plans.
Mortality for MA enrollees is plotted separately before and after 2010, when CMS deflated all the MA risk scores to adjust for differential coding. The Figure also shows mortality
specifically for new enrollees in MA, i.e. beneficiaries who were in FFS the previous year. The gray bars show the underlying distribution of risk scores among Medicare beneficiaries.
Figure 4: The distribution of county benchmarks
                                1600

                                                                                                                                                        2006
                                1400
                                                                                                                                                        2011
                                1200
           Number of Counties




                                1000


                                800


                                600




                                                                                          h
                                400


                                200


                                  0


                                                                                    Benchmark ($US)

Figure shows the distribution of county-specific benchmarks in 2006 (gray) and 2011 (black), the first and last years of our data. The figure illustrates that a large number of the
benchmarks (68% of the counties in 2006, 66% in 2011) are within $10 of the urban and (lower) rural floors, which were established by the Benefits Improvement and Protection Act
of 2000. The rest of the counties are associated with other benchmarks, which are distributed over a range of about $200 (per a standardized enrollee-month) above the floor.
Figure 5: Bid distribution (relative to benchmark)

                                            140


                                            120


                                            100
                Number of Year-Plan Pairs




                                            80


                                            60


                                            40


                                            20


                                             0

                                                                           Bid minus Benchmark ($US)
Figure shows a histogram of plan bids in the data (relative to the benchmark). Bids are for covering a standardized beneficiary over a month. Each observation is a year-plan, and we
plot the distribution of the difference between the plan-specific bid in a given year and the plan-specific benchmark in that year (benchmarks are the same for all plans offering MA
coverage in a given county, but plans are offered in service areas that cover multiple, often adjacent counties, and these service areas do not perfectly overlap across plans, making
the relevant benchmark a plan-specific weighted average of county benchmarks). 93% of the observations are negative, which correspond to cases of bids that are below the
benchmark. The average difference is -$83 (standard deviation $67), with the 5th , 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles being -$209, -$114, -$73, -$40, and +$5, respectively. The
difference has risen slightly in magnitude over time, with average values changing from -$77 in 2006 to -$82 in 2011.
Figure 6: Implied costs of MA plans

                                               1,400


                                               1,200
              Implied Monthly MA Costs ($US)



                                               1,000


                                                800


                                                600


                                                400

                                                                                                                                            Rural
                                                200                                                                                         Urban
                                                           45°
                                                  0
                                                       0   200      400          600               800              1,000             1,200             1,400
                                                           Predicted Monthly FFS Costs for MA Enrollees ($US)
Observations are at the market (county-year) level; there are 3,118 counties with benchmarks or 15,590 potential county-years from 2006-2010 but only the 15,211 of these with at
least one MA enrollee are included in the figure. For clarity, we lose a small fraction of the observations that are associated with predicted FFS costs or implied MA costs that are
greater than $1,400. Counties that qualified as "urban" according to the definition used to set the urban floor in 2004 are shown in light blue, while all other counties are shown in
darker red. Implied MA costs are derived from the insurer's first-order condition for optimal bidding (see text for details), using our preferred demand specification (Table 5(b),
column 3). The market-level implied cost is computed as an enrollment-weighted average over the implied cost of all plans bidding in the market. The predicted FFS costs for MA
enrollees is obtained using the method described in Section 3. Average implied MA cost is $587 (standard deviation of $81), and the average difference between implied MA cost
and the predicted FFS cost is -$47 (standard deviation of $93). 47% of the markets are above the 45-degree line, with an average difference of $40 and $84 above and below the line,
respectively.
Figure 7: Estimated MA markups
                                             200

                                             180

                                             160
               Estimated MA Mark-ups ($US)



                                             140

                                             120

                                             100

                                             80

                                             60

                                             40                                                                                            Rural
                                                                                                                                           Urban
                                             20

                                              0
                                                   0   200       400                 600                800               1,000               1,200              1,400
                                                                    Monthly MA Benchmarks ($US)
Observations are at the market (county-year) level; there are 3,118 counties with benchmarks or 15,590 potential county-years from 2006-2010 but only the 15,211 of these with at
least one MA enrollee are included in the figure. For clarity, we lose a small fraction of the observations that have benchmarks greater than $1,400 or estimated markups greater
than $200. Counties that qualified as "urban" according to the definition used to set the urban floor in 2004 are shown in light blue, while all other counties are shown in darker red.
Estimates are derived from the insurer's first-order condition for optimal bidding (see text for details), using our preferred demand specification (Table 5(b), column 3). Market-level
markups are enrollment-weighted and risk adjusted; they are computed by multiplying each plan’s estimated mark-up by total plan risk units, adding these up for all plans in the
market, and dividing by total MA enrollees in the market. The (weighted) average markup is $96 (standard deviation of $21). To make the benchmark comparable to the markups,
we also risk adjust it; it is computed by multiplying the administrative market-level benchmark by total MA risk-months in the market and dividing it by total MA enrollee-months in
the market. Statistics are weighted by market-level MA enrollee-months. The (risk-adjusted) average benchmark is $779 (standard deviation of $147).
Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                              Traditional Medicare (TM)                                                 Medicare Advantage (MA)
Variable                                           Mean           Std. Dev.        10th Pctile 90th Pctile                  Mean            Std. Dev.       10th Pctile 90th Pctile

No. of Obs. (beneficiary-years)                                         125,669,915                                                                28,188,896
Unique beneficiaries                                                    30,403,528                                                                  7,842,799
     a
Age                                                 76.5             25.6              67.4              87.2                76.1              24.2              67.6             86.2
Male                                               0.435                                                                    0.432
      b
Urban                                              0.649                                                                    0.839
New Medicare enrollee                              0.026                                                                    0.017
                                  c
Supplemental insurance                             0.727                                                                    0.061
Part D coverage                                    0.410                                                                    0.937

Inpatient days                                     1.49             19.32                0                 4                0.83              13.01                0                 2
Died during year                                   0.022                                                                    0.019
Risk score                                          0.97             2.81              0.35              1.95                0.93              2.69             0.34              1.87
Log(Risk score change)d                            0.05              1.75              -0.53             0.69               0.12               1.50             -0.29             0.67
                                      e
FFS monthly claims costs                           637.3           5,316.9              9.1           1,705.2
                             f
MA monthly total CMS payment                                                                                                746.8            1,988.8            303.0           1,422.6
MA monthly rebate paymentf                                                                                                   75.6             54.5              18.6             146.4

Statistics are based on full sample of beneficiaries from 2006-2011. The Traditional Medicare (TM) sample excludes beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid as well as
Disabled beneficiaries. The Medicare Advantage sample excludes Disabled beneficiaries as well as those enrolled in employer-sponsored plans or special needs plans. See the text for
exact sample restrictions. Statistics are weighted by total months of enrollment during the observation year. a Age as of December 31 of observation year. b Urban means county
with population greater than 250,000 in 2004 (when the urban floor was last set before the beginning of the sample period). c Supplemental insurance refers to Medigap or retiree
supplemental insurance (RSI). d The natural logarithm of the risk score change – log(risk score in following year) minus log(risk score in observation year) -- is defined over the sample
of beneficiaries who survive until the following year. e FFS monthly claims costs are computed by adding up total FFS claims for all TM enrollees, adding up total months of
enrollment for all TM enrollees, and dividing the former by the latter. Data is for 2006-2010. f Mean MA monthly plan payment and rebate payment are defined analogously to FFS
cost. Data is for 2006-2011. The 2006-2010 averages are almost the same (746.0 and 75.6 for total and rebate payments, respectively).
Table 2: Predicted TM cost for MA enrollees


                                                  All               Risk
                                                                                          Urban              Rural               2006-07            2008-09              2010
                                               Enrollees          Adjusted

 TM Enrollees
   FFS Cost (actual)                              637.3             656.6                  674.1             569.6                 597.9              653.7             686.2
   FFS Cost (predicted)                           637.3             656.6                  674.1             569.6                 597.9              653.7             686.2
   Risk Score                                     0.971             1.000                  0.996             0.924                 0.991              0.957             0.955
 MA Enrollees
   FFS Costs (predicted)                          675.0             721.1                  684.7             623.7                 619.1              691.7             721.4
   MA Plan Payments                               670.4             716.2                  691.3             560.0                 657.0              681.5             668.3
   MA Rebate Payments                              75.6              80.8                   80.4              50.5                  68.8               84.1              69.5
   MA Total CMS Payments                          746.0             796.9                  771.7             610.5                 725.8              765.6             737.8
                                                                                                                                                                              a
   Risk Score                                     0.936             1.000                  0.956             0.831                 0.954              0.943             0.898

All numbers in the table are in current dollars per enrollee-month. Statistics are based on the sample of beneficiaries from 2006-2010, the sample period for which FFS claims are
observed. Urban means county with population > 250,000 in 2004, when the urban floor was initially set. Per-enrollee-month FFS costs are computed by adding up all FFS costs for
TM enrollees, adding up all months enrolled for TM enrollees, and dividing the former by the latter. Risk-adjusted FFS costs are computed by adding up all FFS costs for TM enrollees,
adding up all risk-months (risk score multiplied by months enrolled) for TM enrollees, and dividing the former by the latter. All other columns report per-enrollee (not risk adjusted)
amounts. Predicted FFS cost for MA enrollees is computed using a market-by-market risk-adjusted measure. For each market, we add up FFS costs for TM enrollees in the market, we
add up risk-months enrolled for TM enrollees in the market, and we divide the former by the latter to obtain a market-level cost factor. For a given market, we multiply each MA
enrollee's risk score by the market-level cost factor to obtain his predicted FFS costs. See text (Section 3) for further details.
a In 2010, CMS deflated MA risk scores by 3.41% in order to calculate payments; the risk scores used in the table incorporate the deflation adjustment.
Table 3: The pass-through rate of TM cost and benchmarks to plan bids

                                                                        Unit of Observation: Plan-year, Dependent Variable: Plan bid
                          Sample                                         All plans                     All plans                      All plans
                                                                             (1)                           (2)                            (3)

                          Plan benchmark                               0.384 (0.048)***              0.370 (0.056)***               0.466 (0.039)***
                          Predicted plan FFS cost                      0.055 (0.073)                 0.083 (0.099)                  0.161 (0.073)**
                          Year FEs                                           N                              Y                             Y
                          Contract FEs                                       N                              N                             Y
                          Mean of dependent variable                      730.1                         730.1                          730.1
                          R-squared                                       0.279                         0.304                          0.750
                          Observations                                    10,305                        10,305                         10,305

                                                                   Unit of Observation: Plan-county-year, Dependent Variable: Plan bid
                          Sample                                         All plans                     All plans                      All plans
                                                                             (1)                           (2)                            (3)

                          Plan benchmark                               0.384 (0.083)***              0.370 (0.095)***               0.642 (0.044)***
                          Predicted plan FFS cost                      0.055 (0.058)                 0.083 (0.084)                 -0.009 (0.047)
                          Year FEs                                          N                              Y                             Y
                          County FEs                                        N                              N                             Y
                          Mean of dependent variable                      730.1                          730.1                         730.1
                          R-squared                                       0.279                          0.304                         0.675
                          Observations                                   181,868                        181,868                       181,868


Table presents regression results of plan bid on plan benchmark and predicted plan cost. The unit of observation is a plan-year in the top panel, and a plan-county-year in the bottom
panel. The sample in the top (bottom) panel consists of all plan-years (all plan-county-years) in our 2006-2010 data with at least one enrollee. In the top panel, the plan benchmark is
computed by multiplying the county-year-level administrative benchmark by plan risk-month enrollment in that county-year, adding this up across all counties in the plan's service
area for the given year, and dividing by total plan risk-month enrollment for the given year. The predicted plan FFS cost is computed in each panel using the method described in
Section 3. In the bottom panel, we weight observations by total risk-month enrollment for the given plan-county-year. Standard errors are clustered at the contract level in the top
panel, and at the county level in the bottom panel.. **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Table 4: The pass-through rate, by plan type

                                                                     Unit of Observation: Plan-year, Dependent Variable: Plan bid
              Sample                                                HMO plans                        Local PPO plans                     Private FFS plans
                                                                      (4)                                   (5)                                  (6)

              Plan benchmark                                       0.452 (0.044)***                     0.710 (0.048)***                     0.645 (0.079)***
              Plan cost                                            0.110 (0.079)                        0.287 (0.053)***                     0.516 (0.072)***
              Year FEs                                                    Y                                    Y                                    Y
              County FEs                                                  Y                                    Y                                    Y
              Mean of dependent variable                                731.6                                745.3                                715.1
              R-squared                                                 0.760                                0.867                                0.791
              Observations                                              5,962                                2,022                                2,321

                                                               Unit of Observation: Plan-county-year, Dependent Variable: Plan bid
              Sample                                                HMO plans                        Local PPO plans                     Private FFS plans
                                                                      (4)                                   (5)                                  (6)

              Plan benchmark                                       0.673 (0.063)***                     0.678 (0.055)***                     0.623 (0.024)***
              Plan cost                                           -0.034 (0.056)                        0.310 (0.059)***                     0.433 (0.020)***
              Year FEs                                                    Y                                    Y                                   Y
              County FEs                                                  Y                                    Y                                   Y
              Mean of dependent variable                                731.6                                745.3                               715.1
              R-squared                                                 0.723                                0.843                               0.724
              Observations                                             32,645                               17,011                              132,212


 Table presents regression results of plan bid on the plan benchmark and predicted plan cost. The regressions are the same as those reported in Table 3, column (3), with the only
 difference being that they are now estimated for each plan type -- HMO, PPO, and Private FFS plans – separately. See the notes to Table 3 for additional details about the units of
 observation, variable definitions, and the units on which we cluster the standard errors. **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Table 5: Demand estimates (all beneficiaries)
Panel A: Logit demand

                                              Dependent Variable: ln(plan risk-months market share) - ln(TM risk-months market share)
                                                                    Mean of Dep. Variable = -6.251; No. of Obs. = 206,110
                                             (1)                         (2)                         (3)                         (4)                         (5)

Plan price                           -0.005 (0.002)***           -0.007 (0.002)***           -0.004 (0.002)**            -0.014 (0.002)***           -0.009 (0.002)***
Supplemental benefits                                                                        -0.343 (0.176)*             -0.183 (0.146)               0.045 (0.135)
Part D benefits                                                                               0.585 (0.211)***            0.450 (0.257)*              0.487 (0.288)*
Plan quality rating FEs                       N                           N                         Y                           Y                           Y
Year FEs                                      N                           Y                           Y                           Y                           Y
Contract FEs                                  N                           N                           N                           Y                           Y
Contract x county FEs                         N                           N                           N                           N                           Y
Mean own-price elasticity                  -0.368                      -0.518                      -0.301                      -1.003                      -0.638

Panel B: Nested logit demand

       Dependent Variable: ln(plan risk-months market share) - ln(TM risk-months market share)
                           Mean of Dep. Variable = -6.251; No. of Obs. = 206,110
                                                    (1)                        (2)                      (3)

Plan price                                     -0.012 (0.002)***         -0.012 (0.002)***         -0.012 (0.002)***
ln(plan MA share)                               0.307 (0.029)***          0.299 (0.031)***          0.320 (0.023)***
Supplemental benefits                          -0.143 (0.112)            -0.144 (0.113)            -0.142 (0.110)
Part D benefits                                 0.317 (0.178)*            0.320 (0.183)*            0.311 (0.177)*
Plan quality rating FEs                             Y                         Y                         Y
Instrument for ln(plan MA share)            Number of plans         Number of contracts        Contract dummies
Year FEs                                             Y                         Y                          Y
Contract FEs                                         Y                         Y                          Y
Mean own-price elasticity                          -1.147                   -1.142                    -1.158

 Table presents demand regression results at the market-plan level. The unit of observation is a market-plan (a market is a county-year). Standard errors are clustered at the contract
 level. Letting b denote the plan's standardized bid and B denote the plan's benchmark, "plan price" is defined as p = 0.75 x (b - B) x I{b - B ≤ 0} + (b - B) x I{b - B > 0}. The mean of the
 own-price demand elasticities reported in the final row is weighted by enrollee risk-months (further details are provided in the appendix). *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Table 6: Summary of results and policy experiments

                                                                                                                                                                  Predicted
                                                                                      Consumer       Consumer
                                          Taxpayer      Implied MA       Insurer                                      Rebate       Beneficiary                    FFS Cost
                                                                                        Total         Rebate                                       MA Share
                                            Cost           Cost          Profits                                      Amount        Premium                        for MA
                                                                                       Surplus        Surplus
                                                                                                                                                                  Enrollees

                                                   a              b
Observed equilibrium                       756.2          585.6            95.4          102.6           48.8           75.6            0.4          18.2%          662.5c
Plans bid their cost                        732.6          581.8           0.0           119.1           87.9          150.8            0.0          31.4%          660.3
Plans bid the benchmark                     746.5          590.5          156.0          94.8            0.0            0.0             0.0          10.2%          654.7
Benchmark lowered by $50                    715.8          586.5           73.7           99.8           37.9           57.7            2.2          15.4%          663.0
Benchmark lowered to FFS cost               730.7          598.5           75.6          103.1           39.9           66.7           10.0          13.7%          677.7
Rebate passed through at 50%                743.7          590.0          132.2           96.1           16.7           22.3            0.8          12.2%          659.9
Rebate passed through at 100%               788.6          581.5          72.8           114.0           76.9          134.4            0.2          26.4%          663.7


All reported statistics are per MA enrollee-month, and use our preferred demand specification (Table 5, Panel B, Column 3). The taxpayer cost is total MA payments, including
rebate payments. Implied MA cost is computed using the insurer's first-order condition, and incorporates co-ownership of multiple plans by the same MA parent organization.
Insurer profits are computed by adding payments made directly to plans (excluding rebate payments) and enrollee premiums and subtracting implied MA cost. The consumer
surplus is computed using the nested logit formula given in the text. We divide this number by the MA share in the overall sample to obtain the consumer surplus per MA
enrollment. We then repeat the same exercise except that we set the rebate to zero when we compute the value of each plan. We subtract the result from the previously computed
consumer surplus to obtain the consumer rebate surplus. For the counterfactuals, the reported means are weighted using enrollment weights that are recalculated according to the
market shares implied by the counterfactual bids. a In Table 1, the mean taxpayer cost is reported as $746.8; however, here we report it as $756.2. The $756.2 number is calculated
using the realized enrollment weights and actual bids to impute MA payments and is reported here since it is more directly comparable to the costs reported for the counterfactuals.
b In Figure 6, we report the mean implied MA cost as $587, which differs from the $585.6 that we report here; this is because in Figure 6 we exclude the year 2011. c Based on 2006-

2010, since we do not have FFS cost data for 2011.
