                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE SKILL COMPLEMENTARITY OF BROADBAND INTERNET

                                          Anders Akerman
                                           Ingvil Gaarder
                                          Magne Mogstad

                                       Working Paper 20826
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20826


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




Thanks to Jerome Adda, Ingvild Almaas, Russell Cooper, David Green, Hyejin Ku, Morten Ravn,
three anonymous referees, and the editor for helpful suggestions. We are grateful to David Autor and
David Dorn for sharing their data on job task requirements and useful comments. Akerman thanks
the Swedish Research Council for generous support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Anders Akerman, Ingvil Gaarder, and Magne Mogstad. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Skill Complementarity of Broadband Internet
Anders Akerman, Ingvil Gaarder, and Magne Mogstad
NBER Working Paper No. 20826
January 2015
JEL No. J23,J24,J31,O33

                                             ABSTRACT

Does adoption of broadband internet in firms enhance labor productivity and increase wages? And
is this technological change skill biased or factor neutral? We exploit rich Norwegian data to answer
these questions. A public program with limited funding rolled out broadband access points, and provides
plausibly exogenous variation in the availability and adoption of broadband internet in firms. Our results
suggest that broadband internet improves (worsens) the labor outcomes and productivity of skilled
(unskilled) workers. We explore several possible explanations for the skill complementarity of broadband
internet. We find suggestive evidence that broadband adoption in firms complements skilled workers
in executing nonroutine abstract tasks, and substitutes for unskilled workers in performing routine
tasks. Taken together, our findings have important implications for the ongoing policy debate over
government investment in broadband infrastructure to encourage productivity and wage growth.


Anders Akerman                                      Magne Mogstad
Stockholm University                                Department of Economics
Department of Economics                             University of Chicago
anders.akerman@gmail.com                            1126 East 59th Street
                                                    Chicago, IL 60637
Ingvil Gaarder                                      and NBER
University of Chicago                               magne.mogstad@gmail.com
Department of Economics
ingvil.gaarder@gmail.com
1       Introduction

Economists and policymakers are keenly interested in understanding the productivity and
labor market effects of the advancements in information and communication technology
(ICT). Many have argued that these technological changes were behind the resurgence in
U.S. productivity growth since the late 1990s, and that investments in ICT are important in
explaining labor productivity patterns across multiple industries and countries.1 Recently,
policymakers have pointed to broadband internet as a key productivity enhancing factor,
calling for public funding to roll out broadband infrastructure. While government agencies
are projecting broadband penetration rates to be important for productivity and job
creation,2 there is little scientific evidence to substantiate these claims.3
    In this paper, we examine how broadband internet affects the labor outcomes and
productivity of different types of workers. Our context is the adoption of broadband
internet in Norwegian firms over the period 2001-2007. Norway is a small open economy
with segmented local labor markets. Our analysis employs several data sources that we
can link through unique firm and individual identifiers. This gives us information over
time and across areas on individuals’ wages and employment status as well as on firms’
use of input factors, adoption of broadband internet, and output.
    As a source of exogenous variation in broadband availability, we follow Bhuller, Havnes,
Leuven, and Mogstad (2013) in exploiting a public program aimed at ensuring broadband
access at a reasonable price to all households throughout the country.4 Because of
limited funding, access to broadband was progressively rolled out, so that the necessary
infrastructure (access points) was established in different municipalities at different times.
Conditional on year and municipality fixed effects, we argue the spatial and temporal
variation in the availability of broadband across municipalities is plausibly exogenous. Our
identification strategy is motivated by two features of the broadband program. First, most
of the supply and demand factors tend to vary little over time. Second, the timing of the
roll-out across areas is unlikely to co-vary with the key correlates of productivity and labor
outcomes. We demonstrate that the data is consistent with these program features, and
    1
     The evidence is reviewed in Draca, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2007), Oliner, Sichel, and Stiroh (2007),
Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2008), and Syverson (2011). See also Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2012).
   2
     In 2008, the U.S. Commissioner of Federal Communications Commission stated that “Affordable
broadband would quickly add $500 billion to the U.S. Economy and create 1.2 million jobs”. Projections
from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis suggest that for every $1 invested in broadband, the economy
benefits nearly $3.
   3
     A notable example of research on this topic is Czernich, Falck, Kretschmer, and Woessmann (2011),
who find positive association between broadband penetration and economic growth across OECD countries
over time. Another example is Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2012), showing that internet investments
correlate with wage and employment growth in some but not all U.S. counties. Atasoy (2013) shows the
correlation is stronger in counties where a larger share of the population has a college degree, pointing to
a skill complementarity of broadband internet.
   4
     Bhuller, Havnes, Leuven, and Mogstad (2013) use the roll-out of broadband internet to study how
internet use affects sex crimes.



                                                     1
further challenge our identification strategy in a number of ways, finding little cause for
worry.
    We begin by estimating the intention-to-treat effects of the increased availability of
broadband internet on the labor outcomes and productivity of different types of workers.
We find two pieces of evidence that suggest skill complementarity of broadband internet.
On the worker side, we find that wages and employment of (un)skilled individuals increases
(decreases) with broadband availability.5 On the firm side, we find that increased availability
of broadband internet is associated with a substantial increase (decrease) in the output
elasticity of (un)skilled labor. A comparison of the changes in output elasticities and labor
outcomes suggest that firms earn substantial rent from increased availability of broadband
internet, at least in the short run.
    Using the rich Norwegian data, we explore several possible channels through which
increased availability of broadband internet may affect labor outcomes and productivity.
We find evidence against the hypothesis that our findings reflect changes in the demand
for goods due to the expansion of broadband internet. Our data is also at odds with
broadband adoption coinciding with general technical upgrading in firms. Another possible
mechanism receiving little support in data is that our findings are driven by changes in
labor productivity and wages in firms directly affected by the expansion of broadband
access, such as telecom firms or IT consultancy companies.
    Instead, we find suggestive evidence that increased availability of broadband internet
affects labor outcomes and productivity primarily through broadband adoption in firms.
If that is the case, the plausibly exogenous variation in broadband availability may serve
as an instrument for broadband adoption in firms. This allows us to estimate production
functions where firms can change their technology by adopting broadband internet. We find
that broadband adoption in firms is a skill biased technological change, shifting how factor
inputs are transformed into output. In particular, this technological change increases the
marginal productivity of skilled workers, and lowers the marginal productivity of unskilled
workers.
    To better understand the skill complementarity of broadband internet, we pursue a
task based approach to skill biased technological change. Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003)
argue that ICT substitutes for workers in performing routine tasks – more amenable to
automatization – and complements workers in executing problem-solving, complex com-
munication, and information-intensive tasks (ofted called “nonroutine abstract tasks”).6 A
   5
     Throughout the paper, we follow the literature by referring to education and skills interchangeably;
thus skilled refers to highly educated and unskilled refers to those with lower levels of education.
   6
     See also Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006, 2008), Goos and Manning (2007), Black and Spitz-Oener
(2010), Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2011), Acemoglu and Autor (2011), Autor and Dorn (2013), and
Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenen (2014). A related literature argues that ICT changes workplace
organization and practices, by increasing skill requirements, worker autonomy and management’s ability
to monitor workers (see e.g. Caroli and Van Reenen, 2001; Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt, 2002;
Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003; Bloom, Garicano, Sadun, and Van Reenen, 2009).


                                                   2
necessary condition for a task based explanation of the skill complementarity of broadband
internet is that workers of different educational background actually cluster disproportion-
ately in occupations that require different tasks. In our data, we find that skilled workers
are over-represented in occupations that are pervasive at nonroutine abstract tasks, whereas
unskilled workers are often in occupations that involve routine tasks. Motivated by these
differences, we estimate wage regressions which include interactions between broadband
internet and the tasks performed in jobs in addition to the educational credentials of
workers performing those jobs. The estimates suggest an important channel behind the
skill bias of broadband internet is that it complements non-routine abstract tasks but
substitutes for routine tasks.
    Our paper builds and extends on a literature on the labor market effects of ICT. To date,
research has largely focused on the consequences of investments in computers and R&D.7
We complement this research by providing novel evidence on the skill bias of broadband
internet, a relatively recent technological change. Our findings are consistent with the
widespread view that ICT is complementary with human capital. Technological changes
that reduce quality-adjusted ICT prices – such as the arrival of broadband internet – should
therefore increase skill demand and returns to skill. Our study also shows an important
link between computerization and broadband adoption in firms. When broadband internet
becomes available, it is not randomly adopted; instead, it is more quickly adopted in firms
in which complementary factors are abundent, including computers and skilled workers.
These findings conform to the predictions of a model of endogenous technology adoption
where firms’ choices reflect principles of comparative advantage (see e.g. Beaudry and
Green, 2003, 2005; Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis, 2010)
    Our paper is also related to a literature on firm productivity and ICT. Estimating how
adoption of new technology, such as broadband internet, affects productivity has proven
difficult for several reasons. It is often difficult to access data on technology adoption
which can be linked with firm-level information on output and factor inputs.8 Another
key challenge is the likelihood that some determinants of production are unobserved to
the econometrician but observed by the firm; if adoption of new technology depends on
these determinants, then OLS estimates of production functions will be biased.9 On top of
   7
     See e.g. Krueger (1993), Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1994), DiNardo and Pischke (1997), Autor,
Katz, and Krueger (1998), Machin and Van Reenen (1998), Beaudry and Green (2003; 2005), Acemoglu
and Finkelstein (2008), Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis (2010), and Lewis (2011). Acemoglu (2003), Bond
and Van Reenen (2007) and Goldin and Katz (2007) provide recent reviews of the extensive literature on
technology-skill complementarity.
   8
     For instance, typical annual accounts data reports labor costs as average (or total) wages for all
workers, rather than wages by the skill level of the workers (Van Beveren, 2012). Moreover, statistical
agencies have only recently started to systematically collect ICT information at the firm level (Draca,
Sadun, and Van Reenen, 2007). In most cases, this information relates to broad measures of expenditure
or usage of ICT, rather than precise measures of specific technological changes.
   9
     Several studies illustrate the difficulty in drawing credible inferences absent an appropriate instrumental
variable. For example, DiNardo and Pischke (1997) suggest that computer users possess unobserved skills
which might have little to do with computers but which raise their productivity.


                                                       3
this, the use of inputs such as capital and labor could also be correlated with technology
adoption and unobserved productivity, and therefore create bias in OLS estimates. These
empirical challenges have meant that existing research has largely focused on demonstrating
positive associations of ICT with productivity. Draca, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2007),
in their Handbook of Information and Communication Technologies chapter, review the
literature carefully and conclude that “none of the literature has produced convincing
evidence of a causal impact of ICT on productivity, for example by analyzing a natural
experiment”.
    In contrast to previous research, we have firm-level information on value added, capital,
labor by skill level, and a precise measure of a specific technology adoption; as a source of
exogenous variation in technology adoption, we exploit that the necessary infrastructure
was established in different areas at different times; and following Levinsohn and Petrin
(2003), we use intermediate inputs to proxy for unobserved productivity in the production
function. This enables us to address the threats to identification and provide evidence on
how broadband adoption in firms shifts the production technology and changes output
for given inputs. By way of comparison, the estimated intention-to-treat effects allow
us to examine the implications for workers and firms of the program that increased the
availability of broadband internet, without invoking the full set of assumptions behind the
structural estimation of the production function.
    The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 describes our data, before Section 3 discusses
the expansion of broadband internet. Section 4 presents our identification strategy
and empirical models. Section 5 describes our main findings, discusses their economic
significance, and reports results from a number of robustness checks. Section 6 explores
whether the task based framework can help interpret the skill complementarity of broadband
internet. The final section offers some concluding remarks.


2     Data and descriptive statistics

Below we describe our data and sample selection, while details about the data sources and
each of the variables are given in Appendix Table A1.

2.1   Data sources

Our analysis uses several data sources, which we can link through unique identifiers for
each firm, employee, and municipality. The availability and reliability of Norwegian data
are rated as exceptional in international quality assessments (see e.g. Atkinson, Rainwater,
and Smeeding, 1995).

Firm and worker data. Our firm data come from administrative registers, which are
updated annually by Statistics Norway and verified by the Norwegian Tax Authority. The

                                             4
data comprise all non-financial joint-stock firms over the period 2000-2008.10 It contains
detailed information from the firm’s balance sheets on output (such as revenues) and inputs
(such as capital, labor, intermediates) as well as 4-digit industry codes and geographical
identifiers at the municipality level.
    We merge the firm data set with a linked employer-employee registry that contains
complete records of all firms and workers for the period 2000–2008. For every employee, we
know his or her length of education, and annual labor income. In our baseline specification,
we define an individual as skilled if he or she has a college or university degree, while
individuals with less schooling are defined as unskilled. In parts of our analysis, we refine
these often used proxies for skill levels: We divide unskilled individuals into medium skilled
(high school graduates) and low skilled (no high school diploma).

Internet data. For the period 2001–2007, we have (i) data on broadband subscription for
a stratified random sample of firms, and (ii) municipality-level information on availability
of broadband internet to households (independently of whether they take it up). As
explained in detail below, we will use the former to measure broadband adoption in firms,
while the latter will be used to measure broadband availability rates, our instrumental
variable. Throughout the paper, broadband internet is defined as internet connections
with download speeds that exceed 256 kbit/s.11
    Our data on broadband subscriptions of firms comes from the annual Community
Survey on ICT Usage of Firms, performed by Statistics Norway. This survey includes
information on the use of broadband internet in firms. In each year, the survey samples
from the universe of joint-stock firms. The survey design is a stratified random sampling
by industry and the number of employees.
    The data on broadband availability comes from the Norwegian Ministry of Government
Administration. The ministry monitors the supply of broadband internet to households,
and the suppliers of broadband to end-users are therefore required to file annual reports
about their availability rates to the Norwegian Telecommunications Authority. The
availability rates are based on information on the area signal range of the local access
points and detailed information on the place of residence of households. In each year
and for every municipality, this allows us to measure the fraction of households for which
broadband internet is available, independently of whether they take it up. In computing
these availability rates at the municipality level, it is taken into account that multiple
suppliers may offer broadband access to households living in the same area, so that double
counting is avoided.
  10
     These firms cover the vast majority of revenues and workers in the private sector. In 2001, for example,
they cover 81 % of revenues and 71 % of workers.
  11
     Before the expansion of broadband internet, all firms with a telephone connection would have dial-up
access to internet, but limited to a bitrate of less than 56 kbit/s. Broadband internet facilitated internet
use without excessive waiting times.



                                                     5
Socio-economic data. Most of our socio-economic data come from administrative registers
provided by Statistics Norway. Specifically, we use a rich longitudinal database which covers
every resident from 2000 to 2008. It contains individual demographic information (regarding
gender, age, marital status and number of children), socio-economic data (educational
attainment, income, employment status), and geographic identifiers for municipality of
residence. The information on educational attainment is based on annual reports from
Norwegian educational establishments, whereas the income data and employment data are
collected from tax records and other administrative registers. The household information
is from the Central Population Register.

Hourly wages and occupation. While the employer-employee registry contains data on
employment status and annual wages of all workers, it does not provide information on
hourly wages (or hours of work). When looking at the impact of broadband internet on
hourly wages, we use data from Statistics Norway’s Wage Statistics Survey for the years
2000-2008. In each year, the survey provides information on hourly wages and occupations.
For employees in the private sector, the data is based on an annual stratified random
sampling of all firms. The survey covers all employees in the public sector. Taken together,
the information on hourly wages covers about 80 percent of Norwegian employees in every
year (100 percent of the public sector employees and 70 percent of the private sector
employees).

2.2   Sample selection and descriptive statistics

Table 1 displays summary statistics for the labor outcomes over time. The table shows
averages of the employment rate and the (log) hourly wage over time, with standard
deviations in parentheses. When estimating the employment effects, we consider the full
population of individuals between the ages of 18 and 67 (the mandatory retirement age).
To estimate the impact on hourly wages, we consider all workers between the ages of 18
and 67 who are recorded in the wage statistics surveys. Due to a sluggish Norwegian
economy, the employment rates decline somewhat between 2000 and 2004. By comparison,
hourly wages were steadily increasing over over the entire period 2001–2007.




                                             6
Table 1. Summary statistics of labor outcomes

                                                                   2001            2004        2007          Overall
 Employment rate                                                  (level)         (level)     (level)        (level)
 Total                                                             0.72            0.70        0.72           0.71
                                                                  (0.45)          (0.46)      (0.45)         (0.45)
 Unskilled                                                         0.67            0.64        0.66           0.65
                                                                  (0.47)          (0.48)      (0.47)         (0.48)
 Skilled                                                           0.85            0.83        0.85           0.84
                                                                  (0.35)          (0.37)      (0.36)         (0.37)

 Number of individuals, aged 18-67                              2,829,739        2,899,342   2,991,389     20,327,515
 Hourly wage (USD)                                                 (log)            (log)       (log)         (log)
 Total                                                             2.95             3.05        3.12          3.04
                                                                  (0.27)           (0.28)      (0.30)        (0.30)
 Unskilled                                                         2.86             2.94        3.01          2.93
                                                                  (0.23)           (0.24)      (0.25)        (0.26)
 Skilled                                                           3.10             3.20        3.27          3.18
                                                                  (0.27)           (0.28)      (0.29)        (0.30)

 Number of workers in wage survey, aged 18-67                   1,161,912        1,246,036   1,349,481     8,759,388
Note: The employment rates are based on the population of workers between the ages of 18-67. The hourly wages are based
on workers recorded in the wage survey between the ages of 18 and 67. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college
degree. Detailed descriptions of the variables are given in Appendix Table A1.



    In the production function estimation, we use our data on joint-stock firms. In the
interest of external validity, we exclude firms that are carrying out extraction of natural
resources (including oil, gas and fish).12 We refine this sample to be appropriate for
estimation of production functions by focusing on firms with at least one employee in each
of the two levels of skill. When looking at the intention-to-treat effects of the increased
availability of broadband internet, we use the population of joint-stock firms (149,676
firms). By comparison, the analysis of broadband adoption in firms and the structural
production function estimation are based on the sample of joint stock firms recorded in
the internet survey (16,744 firms), for which we observe broadband adoption. We use
sampling weights to produce representative estimates for the corresponding population of
joint-stock firms.
    Table 2 displays summary statistics for key firm variables over time.13 The first panel
displays the mean of output and non-labor inputs over time, with standard deviations in
parentheses. In the production function, we use value added as the dependent variable,
defined as revenues (total sales) net of intermediates (procurement of materials and
intermediate inputs). We measure capital as the value of total stock of fixed assets. It is
  12
     The production function estimates barely move if we include firms carrying out extraction of natural
resources.
  13
     Throughout this paper, all monetary figures are fixed at 1998 level after adjusting for inflation. For
the figures expressed in U.S. dollars (USD), we have used the following exchange rate: NOK/USD = 7.5.



                                                            7
Table 2. Summery statistics of firm variables

                                                                   2001      2004        2007      Overall
                Input-output (USD, thousands)                      (log)     (log)       (log)      (log)
                Revenues                                           7.63      7.63        7.74       7.65
                                                                  (1.05)    (1.06)      (1.16)     (1.09)
                Value added                                        6.83      6.86        6.97       6.88
                                                                  (0.91)    (0.91)      (1.04)     (0.95)
                Intermediates                                      6.61      6.59        6.68       6.61
                                                                  (1.79)    (1.80)      (1.84)     (1.81)
                Capital                                            4.68      4.45        4.48       4.49
                                                                  (1.65)    (1.74)      (1.82)     (1.74)
                Wage bills (USD, thousands)                        (log)     (log)       (log)      (log)
                Total                                              5.90      5.98        6.19       6.01
                                                                  (0.84)    (0.87)      (0.93)     (0.88)
                Unskilled                                          5.52      5.60        5.80       5.63
                                                                  (0.99)    (1.01)      (1.08)     (1.02)
                Skilled                                            4.08      4.17        4.36       4.19
                                                                  (1.44)    (1.50)      (1.60)     (1.51)
                Number of firms
                Population                                        19,598    21,441     23,282      149,676
                Survey                                            2,118      2,270      3,093       16,744
Note: This table shows summary statistics for the population of joint-stock firms, consisting of all joint-stock firms with at
least one unskilled and one skilled employee. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. Detailed descriptions
of the variables are given in Appendix Table A1.



evident that these variables are fairly stable over time, perhaps with a weakly increasing
trend in revenues, value added and intermediates.
    The second panel of Table 2 show means and standard deviations of wage bills by skill
levels. There is a steady increase in the wage bills over time, especially for the high skilled.
Following Fox and Smeets (2011), our analysis measures labor inputs by wage bills instead
of the number of workers.14 This has the advantage of making the measure of physical
capital and human capital more comparable: Physical capital is measured in terms of
monetary units to reflect the quality of the machinery employed, while using the wage bill
to proxy for labor input also implies measuring labor in terms of its expense in order to
better reflect its quality.
    Appendix Figure A1 displays the distribution of firms by industry. This figure shows
the industry composition in our survey sample and in the corresponding population of
firms. The two main industries are manufacturing and wholesale/retail. This holds true
both in terms of number of firms, aggregate value added, number of employees, and total
wage bills. We can also see that the distributions in our sample (with sampling weights)
closely mirror the distributions for the population of firms. The ability of our sampling
weights to produce representative estimates are confirmed in Appendix Figures A2 and
  14
    Our findings of skill-biased technical change from broadband adoption in firms are robust to measuring
labor inputs by the number of workers instead of the wage bill.


                                                              8
A3: The former displays the distributions of output and inputs across firms, while the
latter shows the time trends in these variables.
    Appendix Table A2 reports estimates from a standard Cobb-Douglas production
function, based on the survey sample (with sampling weights) and the population of firms.
The first two columns report OLS estimates, while the last two columns use the method
for estimating production functions proposed by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003). It is evident
that whether we use the survey sample or the population of firms matters little for the
estimated output elasticities. We can also see that our estimates align well with the
findings in previous studies. As predicted by theory, OLS overstates the labor coefficients
because the level of inputs chosen is positively correlated with unobserved productivity.
The magnitudes of the output elasticities of capital and labor are comparable to what
found in previous studies using micro data (see e.g. Pavcnik, 2002; Fox and Smeets, 2011).


3         Expansion of broadband internet

Over the past decade, many OECD countries were planning the expansion of services
related to information and communications technology. In Norway, the key policy change
came with the National Broadband Policy, introduced by the Norwegian Parliament in the
late 1990s. This section provides details about the program and describes the expansion
of broadband internet.15

The program. The National Broadband Policy had two main goals. The first was to
ensure supply of broadband internet to every area of the country at a uniform price. The
second was to ensure that the public sector quickly adopted broadband internet.
    The Norwegian government took several steps to reach these goals. First and foremost,
it invested heavily in the necessary infrastructure. The investment in infrastructure was
largely channeled through the (state-owned) telecom company Telenor, which was the sole
supplier of broadband access to end-users in the early 2000s and continues to be the main
supplier today. Moreover, virtually all broadband infrastructure was, and still is, owned
and operated by Telenor.
    Second, local governments were required to ensure supply of broadband internet by
2005 to local public institutions, such as administrations, schools, and hospitals (St.meld.nr.
49, 2002–2003). To assist municipalities in rural areas, the federal government provided
financial support through a funding program known as Høykom. Local governments could
receive funds from this program by submitting a project plan that had to be reviewed
by a program board with expert evaluations. The stated aim was to ensure broadband
availability throughout the country. Once approved, financial support was provided in the
    15
         Our discussion draws on Bhuller, Havnes, Leuven, and Mogstad (2013).




                                                     9
initial years of broadband access, thus making it possible for public institutions to cover
relatively high initial costs.16

Supply and demand factors. The transmission of broadband signals through fiber-optic
cables required installation of local access points. Since 2000, such access points were
progressively rolled out, generating considerable spatial and temporal variation in broad-
band availability. The staged expansion of access points was in part due to limited public
funding, but also because Norway is a large and sparsely populated country. There are
often long driving distances between the populated areas, which are mostly far apart or
partitioned by mountains or the fjord-gashed shoreline.17
    The documents describing the National Broadband Policy and the roll-out of broadband
access points (see St.meld.nr. 38 (1997-1998); St.meld.nr. 49 (2002-2003); Bhuller, Havnes,
Leuven, and Mogstad, 2013), suggest the main supply factors determining the timing of
roll-out are topographical features and existing infrastructure (such as roads, tunnels, and
railway routes), that slow down or speed up physical broadband expansion.18 Based on
the program accounts, we expect the potential demand factors to be related to public
service provision, income level, educational attainment, and the degree of urbanization in
the municipality.

Evolution of broadband availability and usage. Appendix Figure A4 shows the variation
in our measure of broadband availability to households across municipalities and over time.
By 2000, broadband transmission centrals were installed in the cities of Oslo, Stavanger,
and Trondheim, as well as in a few neighboring municipalities of Oslo and Trondheim.
However, because of limited area signal range, broadband internet was available for less
than one-third of the households in each of these municipalities. More generally, the figure
illustrates that for a large number of municipalities there was no broadband availability
in the first few years, whereas most municipalities had achieved fairly high availability
rates in 2005. Moreover, there is considerable variation in availability rates within the
municipalities in these years. Indeed, few municipalities experience a complete shift from
no availability to full availability in a given year; rather, access points were progressively
  16
     During the period 1999–2005, the Høykom program received more than 1000 such applications and
co-funded nearly 400 projects, allocating a total of NOK 400 million. From 2002, the Ministry of Education
and Research co-financed another scheme (Høykom skole), providing financial support for broadband
infrastructure in public schools. There are virtually no private schools in Norway.
  17
     The Norwegian territory covers about 149,400 square miles, an area about the size of California or
Germany, with around 13 % and 6 % of those regions’ populations (in 2008), respectively. The country is
dominated by mountainous or high terrain, as well as a rugged coastline stretching about 1,650 miles,
broken by numerous fjords and thousands of islands.
  18
     The reason is that the transmission of broadband signals through fiber-optic cables required installation
of local access points. In areas with challenging topography and landscapes, it was more difficult
and expensive to install the local access points and the fiber-optic cables. Furthermore, the existing
infrastructure mattered for the marginal costs of installing cables to extend the availability of broadband
within a municipality and to neighboring areas.


                                                     10
rolled out within and across municipalitites, generating a continuous measure of availability
rates that display considerable temporal and spatial variation (even conditional on year
and municipality fixed effects).
    Appendix Figure A5 summarizes the evolution of broadband availability to households
and broadband usage in firms between 2001 and 2007. In each year, we report the overall
means and the distributions across municipalities. There is considerable variation in both
availability and usage, across municipalities and over time. The pattern in Figure A5
suggests a strong association between broadband availability to households and broadband
usage in firms. This indicates that our measure of broadband availability is a fairly good
proxy for the supply of broadband to firms, which we do not have direct information
on.19 Section 5 provides a more detailed regression-based analysis of the link between our
measure of broadband availability rates and broadband adoption in firms.


4        Identification strategy

Randomizing broadband adoption is not feasible: We cannot in practice force firms to
adopt a new technology. One can, however, think of a field experiment which randomizes
broadband availability at the municipality level. The randomization would break the
correlation between availability rates and unobserved determinants of productivity and
labor outcomes. The intention of our identification strategy approach is to mimic this
hypothetical experiment. Our source of exogenous variation comes from the staged
installation of broadband infrastructure, generating spatial and temporal variation in
broadband availability and adoption.

4.1      Regression model of intention-to-treat effects

To estimate the intention-to-treat effects of the increased availability of broadband internet,
we specify the following panel data regression:

                       yimt = x0imt δ0 + zmt x0imt δ1 + wimt
                                                         0
                                                             θ + ηm + τt + uimt ,                      (1)

where zmt is the availability rate of broadband internet in municipality m in period t.
Unobservable determinants of production that are fixed at the municipality level will be
controlled for through the municipality indicators (ηm ), just like common time shocks
are absorbed by the year indicators (τt ). Throughout the paper, all standard errors are
clustered at the municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity.20
    19
     Strictly speaking, all we need for the IV estimation is a variable that exogenously shifts some firms’
take up of broadband internet. For example, if the supply of broadband to households were a noisy proxy
for the supply to firms, this could generate a weak first stage for our instrument (which we do not have)
but it would not be a violation of exclusion or independence conditions.
  20
     There are 428 municipalities. Our standard errors change little if we instead cluster at the regional



                                                   11
    We use model (1) to estimate the intention-to-treat effects on the labor outcomes and
the productivity of high and low skilled workers. In the labor outcome regressions, yimt is
the (log) hourly wage or employment status of individual i in municipality m and in year t,
x is is a vector of mutually exclusive dummy variables for educational attainment, and w is
a vector of controls for gender, potential experience (linear and squared terms), and a full
set of (4-digit) industry indicators. In these regressions, the coefficients δ0 capture the pre
roll-out mean wage or employment rate of workers with different levels of education, while
the coefficients of primary interest δ1 measure the interaction effects between educational
attainment and broadband availability.
    In the production function estimation, yimt is the (log) value-added of firm i in
municipality m and in year t, x is is a vector of inputs (in log), and w includes a full set of
(4-digit) industry indicators. The coefficients δ0 are then capturing the pre roll-out output
elasticities of capital, skilled labor, and unskilled labor, whereas the coefficients of primary
interest δ1 measure the interaction effects between these input factors and broadband
availability. Because x includes a constant term, we allow broadband availability to directly
affect output through a change in the intercept.

4.2   Assessing the identification strategy

The key threat to identification is that the timing of the broadband roll-out might be related
to different underlying trends in labor outcomes or productivity across municipalities.
Before turning to a more detailed regression-based analysis that addresses this concern,
we provide a graphical depiction of the timing of the broadband roll-out and of how the
output elasticities and the returns to skill change with increased availability of broadband.

Timing of the broadband roll-out. Our identification strategy– which controls for munici-
pality and year fixed effects – is motivated by two features of the program that expanded
broadband availability. First, most of the supply and demand factors tend to vary little
over time. Second, the timing of the roll-out is unlikely to co-vary with key correlates of
labor outcomes and productivity.
    To investigate whether the data is consistent with these program features, we first
regress zmt on municipality and time fixed effects as well as time-varying supply and
demand factors. We find that 88 % of the variation in broadband availability can be
attributed to time-invariant municipality characteristics and common time effects, while
less than 1 % of the variation in broadband availability can be attributed to a large set of
time-varying variables.21
level (of which there is 46). See Appendix Tables B3 and B4.
  21
     The time-varying variables include demographic factors (income level, education, share of population
residing in a densely populated locality, size of population, and level of unemployment), inputs and
output (municipality averages of revenues, intermediates, capital stock, number of workers and wage bill),
industry structure (number of firms, employment share in manufacturing, employment share in wholesale,


                                                   12
   Second, we examine the relationship between the timing of broadband roll-out and
baseline municipality characteristics. To this end, we estimate the following equation

                                ∆zmt = ηm + [θt × wm ]0 ψt + mt                                 (2)

where ∆zmt = zmt − zm,t−1 , and θt is a vector of year fixed effects. We let wm include
municipality-level information from year 2000 on demography, average levels of inputs
and output, industry structure, and skill composition. Demography includes income level,
education, share of population residing in a densely populated locality (an urbanization
indictor), size of population and level of unemployment. For inputs and output, we have
included municipality averages of revenues, intermediates, capital stock, number of workers
and wage bill. As measures of industry structure, we use number of firms, employment
share in manufacturing, employment share in wholesale, employment share in construction,
and employment share in services. We measure skill composition as the shares of wages
and workers by skill level. On top of all this information from year 2000, wm includes
municipality-level averages of the growth rates in wages and employment over the pre
roll-out period 1998-2000.
    Appendix Figure A6 plots the estimated coefficients from the vector ψt for every t
(and the associated 95 % confidence intervals). Our results show that the timing of the
expansion does not correlate with baseline industry structure, the levels of output and
inputs, the skill composition, or the growth rates in labor outcomes prior to the expansion
of broadband. The only pattern we can find is that broadband expansion is correlated
with urbanization until 2002. From 2003 and onwards, there appears to be no systematic
relationship between the timing of the broadband expansion and this variable.
    Taken together, the evidence presented in Appendix Figure A6 suggest the roll-out
of broadband availability is unrelated to key observable correlates of labor outcomes and
productivity. Nevertheless, a concern is that there are differential underlying trends in the
outcomes of interest depending on urbanization or some unobserved characteristic. To
examine whether our estimates are biased because of differential trends by urbanization,
we perform two robustness checks. First, we make sure that our estimates are robust
to excluding firms or workers in the capital (Oslo) or in the three big cities. Second,
we explicitly allow for differential trends by urbanization. This is done by interacting
urbanization with linear and quadratic time trends. The estimates barely move. In
addition, we take steps to examine whether other sources of differential trends are biasing
our estimates. To check that the estimated effects are not driven by time-varying observable
factors, we report results with and without a large set of time-varying controls for the
potential supply and demand factors (discussed in Section 3). We also show robustness to
employment share in construction, and employment share in services), and skill composition (shares of
wages and workers by skill level).



                                                 13
allowing for differential time trends across municipalities by interacting baseline covariates
with time trends and by including linear municipality specific trends.

Event-study illustration. An advantage of the continuous nature of our measure of broad-
band availability is that it helps in obtaining precise estimates while credibly controlling
for potential confounders. At the same time, providing a graphical depiction of the
identificication strategy is more complicated in our context with spatial and temporal
variation in treatment intensity, as compared to the usual difference-in-differences setting
with a binary treatment variable. We still give a graphical illustration of the basic idea of
our identification strategy in the spirit of an event study.
    To provide a graphical illustration, it is helpful to recenter the data such that both
cause and effect occur at time zero: In each municipality, time zero represents the year with
the strongest growth in broadband availability.22 By doing so, we can visually examine
how the output elasticities and the returns to skill change around ’the event’ of the largest
increase in broadband availability. Separately for each time period before and after this
event, we regress log value added on log capital, log skilled labor, and log unskilled labor;
and we regress log hourly wage on a dummy for being a skilled worker while controlling for
gender and potential experience. The first (second) graph of Figure 1 shows that the event
of the sharp rise in availability rates from time -1 to zero is associated with a substantial
increase (decrease) in the estimated output elasticity of (un)skilled labor. The third graph
of this figure shows how the estimated return to skill increases after this rise in availability
rates.
    The time series evidence presented in Figure 1 is only suggestive of skill complimentarity
of broadband internet, since it may be driven by, for example, other secular changes in the
labor market or the macroeconomy more generally. In Appendix Figure B1, we control for
year and municipality fixed effects in the period-specific estimation of the wage regressions
and the production functions. It is interesting that the patterns of labor productivity and
skill premium in Appendix Figure B1 are quite similar to the simple time series evidence
in Figure 1.
    Another challenge to interpreting the time series evidence in Figure 1 is that we
have an unbalanced panel of municipalities before and after time zero, depending on
which year time zero represents. As a result, composition effects as opposed to actual
dynamics might drive the observed pattern. In Appendix Figure B2, we use a smaller
window around time zero, which makes the panel data much more balanced. This figure
compares the time series in output elasticities and skill premium with only 6 and 5 time
periods. It is reassuring to find that the patterns do not materially change. As shown
  22
    For example, if a municipality experienced the largest increase in the availability rate from 2003 to
2004, then time zero represents 2004 for this municipality. By comparison, if another municipality had
the largest increase in the availability rate from 2005 to 2006, then time zero represents 2006 for this
municipality.


                                                   14
Figure 1. Output elasticites and skill premiums, pre and post the largest increase in
availability rates (period 0)

                          (a) Output elasticity: Skilled labor




                                                 .24




                                                                                                                                                    1
                              Coefficient on skilled wage bills
                                                         .22




                                                                                                                                                    .8
                                                                                                                                                    Availability rate
                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                .6
                                        .18




                                                                                                                                                      .4
                               .16




                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                                 .14




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                     −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3
                                                                          Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates

                                                                                             Output elasticity of skilled workers
                                                                                             Availability rate




                          (b) Output elasticity: Unskilled labor
                                                 .61




                                                                                                                                                    1
                              Coefficient on unskilled wage bills
                                                          .59




                                                                                                                                                    .8
                                                                                                                                                    Availability rate
                                                  .57




                                                                                                                                                                .6
                                          .55




                                                                                                                                                      .4
                                .53




                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                                 .51




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                     −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3
                                                                          Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates

                                                                                            Output elasticity of unskilled workers
                                                                                            Availability rate




                          (c) Return to Skill: Hourly wage
                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                               .27
                                Skill premium in log hourly wage




                                                                                                                                                    .8
                                                       .26




                                                                                                                                                    Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                .6
                                               .25




                                                                                                                                                      .4
                                       .24




                                                                                                                                                    .2
                              .23




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                     −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3
                                                                          Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates

                                                                                              Skill premium in log hourly wage
                                                                                              Availability rate



Note: Time zero represents the year with the strongest growth in availability rates in a given period. In each period, we
estimate Cobb-Douglas production functions and wage regressions. Graphs (a) and (b) report period-specific OLS estimates
of the output elasticity of skilled and unskilled labor. Graph (c) reports period-specific OLS estimates of log hourly wage
on a dummy for skilled and controls for gender and potential experience.
                                                                                                        15
in Appendix Figure B1, this conclusion holds true also if we combine a smaller window
with controls for municipality and year fixed effects. By controlling for these variables, we
mimick the baseline regression model by looking within municipalities while eliminating
other secular changes over time in the labor market or the macroeconomy more generally.
Regardless of whether or not we add these controls, the time patterns point to strong skill
complementarity of broadband internet. In any case, compositional changes should not
matter for the estimated coefficients in model (1), where we have a balanced sample of
municipalities over the entire period.

4.3    Broadband adoption and technological change in production

Economic theory views the production technology as a function describing how a collection
of factor inputs can be transformed into output, and it defines a technological change as a
shift in the production function (i.e., a change in output for given inputs). To directly
examine whether broadband adoption in firms causes a technological change in production,
we will exploit that adoption increased as a result of the program that expanded broadband
availability. This can be represented by the following system of equations, where the second
stage represents a Cobb-Douglas production function with exponents that potentially
change with the adoption of broadband internet:

                    yimt = x0imt β0 + Dimt x0imt β1 + wimt
                                                       0
                                                           ξ + λm + τt + εimt ,                    (3)

while the first stages are given by

                                                     0
                     Dimt = x0imt δ + zmt x0imt φ + wimt ζ + γm + θt + νimt                        (4)
               Dimt x1,imt = x0imt δ1 + zmt x0imt φ1 + wimt
                                                        0
                                                            ζ1 + γ1,m + θ1,t + ν1,imt
                       ..       .
                        . = ..
               Dimt xn,imt = x0imt δn + zmt x0imt φn + wimt
                                                        0
                                                            ζn + γn,m + θn,t + νn,imt

where Dimt is a dummy variable which is equal to one if firm i in municipality m has
broadband internet in year t (and zero otherwise), n denotes the number of input factors,
and the remainder of the notation is the same as in equation (1).23
    The availability rate zmt serves as an instrument for broadband adoption in firms. While
exogeneity of the instrument is sufficient for a causal interpretation of the intention-to-treat
effects from equation (1), IV estimation of equations (3) and (4) require stronger assump-
tions. In particular, we have to assume that increased availability affects productivity and
wages only through broadband adoption in firms, and not directly in any other way. We
take several steps to challenge this exclusion restriction, finding suggestive evidence in
  23
    In line with previous studies using micro data to estimate Cobb-Douglas production functions, we do
not impose constant return to scale (see e.g. Pavcnik, 2002; Fox and Smeets, 2011).


                                                  16
favor of the assumption.
   Another concern is that the factor inputs in ximt could be correlated with broadband
adoption and unobserved productivity. Following Levinsohn and Petrin (2003, hereafter
LP), we take a more structural approach to address this threat to identification of
the production function. LP uses a structural model of an optimizing firm to derive
the conditions under which intermediate inputs can be used to proxy for unobserved
productivity in the production function.24 We refer to Appendix E for more details of the
LP approach.


5        Empirical results

5.1      Intention-to-treat effects

We use model (1) to estimate the intention-to-treat effects on the labor outcomes and
output elasticities of different types of workers. These estimates are informative about the
effects on workers and firms of the program that increased the availability of broadband
internet.

Worker evidence. Table 3 presents the effects of increased broadband availability on
wages and employment. When estimating the employment effects, we consider the full
population of individuals between the ages of 18 and 67. The impact on hourly wages
pertain to workers aged 18-67 who are recorded in the wage statistics surveys. In columns
1 and 3, we follow much of the previous literature in defining an individual as skilled if he
or she has a college degree, while individuals with less schooling are defined as unskilled.
In columns 2 and 4, we report estimates from specifications where we divide unskilled into
medium skilled (high school graduates) and low skilled (no high school diploma).
    The results show that increased availability of broadband internet improves the labor
outcomes of skilled individuals. For instance, the estimates imply that a 10 percentage
point increase in broadband availability in a municipality raises wages of skilled workers in
that local labor market by about 0.2 percent. By comparison, we find evidence of a decline
in wages of low skilled individuals, but no significant change in their employment rate.
To put the size of the labor market effects into perspective, we calculate counterfactual
labor outcomes that would have occurred in the absence of the broadband expansion. A
counterfactual outcome is measured as the actual outcome minus the predicted effect of
broadband availability on the outcome. Consider the predicted effect on (log) wages of
of (un)skilled labor. In each year, we compute this as the broadband availability rate
zmt multiplied by the coefficient on the interaction between broadband availability and
    24
     Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) extend on Olley and Pakes (1996) by using intermediate inputs instead
of investments as a proxy for unobserved productivity. This addresses the problem that investment is zero
in a non-trivial number of cases.



                                                   17
Table 3. Intention-to-treat effects on labor outcomes

                                               Log hourly wage                        Employment
                                             2 skills    3 skills                  2 skills  3 skills
                                               (1)         (2)                       (3)       (4)
             Unskilled                      2.939***                              0.691***
                                            (0.00455)                             (0.00262)
                Low skilled                             2.905***                            0.664***
                                                        (0.00431)                           (0.00231)
                Medium skilled                          2.977***                            0.731***
                                                        (0.00454)                           (0.00288)
             Skilled                        3.169***    3.171***                  0.734*** 0.737***
                                            (0.00420) (0.00407)                   (0.00480) (0.00477)
             Availability×
               Unskilled                     -0.00622                             0.000794
                                            (0.00455)                             (0.00252)
                   Low skilled                        -0.0108***                             -0.00392
                                                       (0.00325)                            (0.00244)
                   Medium skilled                       -0.00793                              0.00388
                                                       (0.00600)                            (0.00281)
                Skilled                     0.0178** 0.0202***                    0.0208** 0.0225**
                                            (0.00720) (0.00692)                   (0.00920) (0.00892)

                                           * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: Estimates are based on the model in equation (1). When estimating the employment effects, we consider the
population of individuals between the ages of 18 and 67. The impact on hourly wages pertain to workers aged 18-67 who
are recorded in the wage statistics surveys. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. Low skilled comprises
individuals without high school diploma and medium skilled consists of high school graduates (without a college degree).
The standard errors are clustered at the municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity.



(un)skilled labor.
    Figure 2 displays the actual time trends for wages and employment, as well as the pre-
dicted counterfactual time trends. Due to a sluggish Norwegian economy, the employment
rates are declining between 2000 and 2004. The expansion of broadband internet mitigates
the fall in employment rates among skilled workers. In 2005, for example, the employment
rate for skilled workers was 1.9 percentage points higher than it otherwise would have
been. By comparison, hourly wages increase throughout our sample period. In 2007, our
estimates suggest the wages are (0.6 % lower) 1.8 % higher for (un)skilled workers than
they would have been in the absence of the broadband expansion. Appendix Figure B3
complements by comparing the actual and counterfactual time trends in relative wage
bills (i.e. the skilled wage bill divided by the unskilled wage bill). To compute the trends
in relative wage bills, we combine the predicted effects on wages and employment. We
find that the expansion of broadband internet contributes to an increase over time in the
relative wage bill share of skilled workers.



                                                            18
Figure 2. Actual and counterfactual trends in labor outcomes
         (a) Log hourly wages
                                                             Skilled                                                                                   Unskilled




                                                                                                                  3.05
                    3.3




                                                                                                                  3
             Log hourly wage




                                                                                                         Log hourly wage
                         3.2




                                                                                                            2.9    2.95
            3.1




                                                                                                                  2.85
                                                                                                                  2.8
                    3




                               2000   2001   2002       2003          2004     2005       2006   2007                        2000   2001   2002       2003          2004     2005       2006   2007
                                                               year                                                                                          year

                                                    Actual               Counterfactual                                                           Actual               Counterfactual




         (b) Employment rates
                                                             Skilled                                                                                   Unskilled
                                                                                                                  .75
                    .9




                                                                                                                        .7
            Employment rate




                                                                                                         Employment rate
                      .85




                                                                                                              .65
            .8




                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                                                                  .55
                    .75




                               2000   2001   2002       2003          2004     2005       2006   2007                        2000   2001   2002       2003          2004     2005       2006   2007
                                                               year                                                                                          year

                                                    Actual               Counterfactual                                                           Actual               Counterfactual




Note: Solid line = actual outome. Dashed line = counterfactual outcome in the absence of broadband internet expansion.
A counterfactual outcome is measured as the actual outcome minus the predicted effect of broadband availability on the
outcome. In each graph, the vertical axis covers four standard deviations of the labor outcome across municipalities and
years.




                                                                                                    19
Firm evidence. Table 4 presents the effects of increased broadband availability on output
elasticities. We report estimates from specifications with two types of skill (college vs. no
college) and three types of skill (college, high school graduates, no high school diploma). In
line with the estimated changes in labor outcomes, the firm evidence suggest that increased
availability of broadband internet is associated with a substantial increase (decrease) in the
output elasticity of (low) skilled labor. By comparison, there is little if any change in the
output elasticity of capital. A comparison of the changes in output elasticities and labor
outcomes is informative about whether firms earn rent from the increased availability of
broadband internet. To make this comparison we need to translate the output elasticiticy
for, say, skilled labor into a measure of its marginal productivity, capturing that also the
intercept and the other output elasticities change and thus affect firms’ demand for skilled
labor.25 As shown in Appendix D, our estimates suggest that, in the short run, around 20
percent of the increase in marginal productivity of skilled workers is passed through to
their wages. When we perform the same calculation for unskilled labor, we find an even
smaller pass-through of changes in marginal productivity to wages.26
    The relatively low pass-through of changes in marginal productivity to labor outcomes
suggests that firms earn substantial rent from the expansion of broadband internet, at
least in the short run. To quantify this, we use the estimates in column 1 of Table 4
to compute the predicted effect on output from increasing the availability of broadband
internet. This prediction incorporates both the change in the intercept and the shifts in
the output elasticities of capital, unskilled labor, and skilled labor. As such, it tells us the
extent to which increased availability of broadband increases firm productivity, i.e. how
much more output the firm produces for a fixed set of inputs. Although this prediction
needs to be interpreted with caution, it suggests that a 10 percentage point increase in
broadband availability raises output by 0.4 percent for given inputs.

Specification checks. In Appendix B, we present results from a battery of specification
checks, all of which support our main findings. For brevity, we only report sensitivity
checks for the specification with two types of skills, but we find that also the estimates
based on three types of skills are robust to these checks.
    In Appendix Tables B1 and B2, we challenge the validity of our identification strategy
in several ways. Column 1 in these tables repeats the baseline estimates of the intention-
  25
     A direct interpretation of the (change in the) intercept is difficult. The intercept represents the
predicted value of the log value added when a firm uses one unit of each input factor; this value has no
empirical counterpart because the actual range of these inputs does not include one.
  26
     The relatively low pass-through to wages may be a short-run phenomenon or persist because of
imperfect competition. The firms we consider are all in the private sector. Barth, Bratsberg, Hageland,
and Raaum (2008) and Lunde and Grini (2007) suggest some scope for firms to adjust wages in response
to changes in labor productivity, even in the short run. At the same time, there is considerabe churning
in private sector firms in Norway (Hunnes, Moen, and Salvanes, 2009), suggesting that firms have some
possiblity to adjust the skill mix of employment in the short run through how they replace workers or hire
additional workers to expand.


                                                   20
Table 4. Intention-to-treat effects on output elasticities

                                                               2 skills             3 skills
                                                                 (1)                  (2)
                           Intercept                         3.880***              4.537***
                                                              (0.0965)             (0.0791)
                           Capital                           0.100***             0.0981***
                                                             (0.00495)            (0.00490)
                           Unskilled                         0.576***
                                                              (0.0116)
                               Low skilled                                        0.298***
                                                                                  (0.00804)
                               Medium skilled                                     0.265***
                                                                                  (0.00684)
                           Skilled                           0.136***             0.134***
                                                             (0.00678)            (0.00636)


                           Availability ×
                             Intercept                       -0.500***            -0.561***
                                                               (0.111)             (0.0976)
                               Capital                        -0.00169            0.000188
                                                             (0.00750)            (0.00661)
                               Unskilled                       -0.0226
                                                              (0.0234)
                                  Low skilled                                     -0.0274***
                                                                                   (0.00934)
                                  Medium skilled                                    0.0179*
                                                                                   (0.00967)
                               Skilled                       0.0755***             0.0645***
                                                              (0.0166)              (0.0137)

                                           * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: This table uses the population of joint-stock firms. Estimates are based on the model in equation (1). (Un)Skilled
comprises workers with(out) a college degree. Low skilled comprises individuals without high school diploma and medium
skilled consists of high school graduates (without a college degree). The standard errors are clustered at the municipality
level and robust to heteroskedasticity.




                                                           21
to-treat effects on labor outcomes and output elasticities, while columns 2 and 3 include a
wide range of controls for time-varying demographic and industry characteristics. When
we include these covariates, we find that the estimated intention-to-treat effects are quite
similar to our baseline estimates. Columns 4-6 allow for different underlying trends in
labor outcomes and output elasticities across municipalities. We first interact baseline
(year 2000) covariates with a linear (column 4) and quadratic time trend (column 5). By
including these controls, we allow the expansion of broadband internet to be related to
different underlying time trends in labor outcomes and productivity across municipalities,
depending on their initial characteristics (such as urbanization). A limitation of these
robustness checks is that baseline characteristics may not adequately capture differential
time trends across municipalities. Column 6 includes linear municipality-specific time
trends. It is reassuring to find that the intention-to-treat effects do not change significantly
when allowing for differential time trends across municipalities.
    In the baseline specification, we measure local labor markets at the municipality level
(of which there are 428). In Norway, this is the standard classification in official statistics
(see Bhuller, 2009), and it ensures comparability with previous empirical work that relies
on geographical segmentation of the Norwegian labor market (see e.g. Black, Devereux,
and Salvanes, 2005). While we think the municipality level is a reasonable approximation
of local labor markets, we take two steps to directly check for spillover or interaction effects.
First, we exclude firms or workers in the capital (Oslo) or in the three big cities (which
are the areas with most commuting) from the estimation of the intention-to-treat effects.
We still find positive (negative) effects on the labor outcomes and output elasticitiy of
(low) skilled workers. Second, we measure local labor markets at the regional level (of
which there are 46). This conservative classification minimizes commuting across the local
labor markets (see Bhuller, 2009). In this specification check, we measure the instrument
(household availability rate) at the regional level, and re-estimate how broadband internet
affects wages and productivity. Appendix Tables B3 and B4 display the estimates. It is
reassuring to find that the results do not materially change.
    Lastly, we make sure that the estimated output elasticities are robust using the LP
approach to control for correlation between input levels and the unobserved productivity.
Appendix Table B5 displays the results from the LP approach. As an alternative to this
approach, we also estimate intention-to-treat effects on output elasticities where inputs are
kept fixed at their values in 2001. Appendix Table B5 shows that the conclusion of skill
complementarity of broadband internet do not change if we only use pre roll-out measures
of input factors.

5.2   Broadband adoption in firms

The intention-to-treat results show how the increased availability of broadband internet
affect labor outcomes and productivity of different types of workers. To interpret these

                                               22
Figure 3. Association between broadband availability and usage rates, after taking out
municipality, industry and year fixed effects




                                             .2          .1
                               Residual subscription rates
                              −.1          0 −.2




                                                                −.5                    0              .5
                                                                            Residual coverage rates


Note: This figure uses the survey sample of joint-stock firms. Bins are based on the residual subscription rates of firms
with bin size = 0.12. The size of the circle represents the number of firms in each bin. Sampling weights are used to ensure
representative results for the population of joint-stock firms. The Y-axis reports residuals from a regression of broadband
subscription rates of firms on municipality, industry and year fixed effects. The X-axis reports residuals from a regression
of broadband availability rates of households on municipality, industry and year fixed effects.



results, an important first step is to understand the pattern of broadband adoption in
firms.
    Figure 3 draws a scatter plot of the broadband availability against the broadband
user rates of firms, after taking out municipality, year and industry fixed effects. We
let the size of the circle represent the number of firms in each bin. The figure shows a
strong association between the availability and user rates. This suggests a strong impact
on broadband adoption of the increase in broadband availability from the previous year.
To quantify this relationship, we use the survey sample of firms (for which we observe
broadband adoption) to estimate the model:

                                                                             0
                                                              Dimt = δzmt + wimt θ + γm + σt + νimt .                  (5)

We estimate the coefficient on the availability rate δ to be about 0.23 with a standard
error of 0.04. This estimate implies that a 10 percentage point increase in broadband
availability induces (an additional) 2.3 % of the firms to adopt broadband internet.
    To understand what type of firms that quickly adopt broadband when it becomes
available (compliers), we estimate equation (5) separately for different types of firms: We
partition the baseline sample into six mutually exclusive groups by industry and share
of workers with college degree (above and below median within each industry). Column
1 of Table 5 displays the proportion of the sample in each industry–skill group. The
estimates of δ for the different types of firms are shown in the second column of Table
5. The proportion of the compliers of a given type is then calculated as the ratio of δ̂


                                                                                  23
for that subgroup to the δ̂ in the overall sample, multiplied by the proportion of the
sample in the industry–skill group. Column 3 shows the distribution of the compliers by
industry and skill intensity. We see that firms with a large share of high skilled workers
are overrepresented among the compliers in every industry as compared to the sample of
firms at large.
    Columns 4–6 of Table 5 report the characteristics of each industry–skill group. Column
4 shows that in every industry the complier firms tend to be relatively large or productive
(as measured by value added), while columns 5 and 6 show that they are more likely
to deploy high skilled labor and use computers intensively. These findings suggest that
when broadband internet becomes available, it is not randomly adopted; instead, it is
more quickly adopted in firms in which complementary factors are abundent, including
computers and skilled workers. This conforms to the predictions of a model of endogenous
technology adoption where firms’ choices reflect principles of comparative advantage (see
e.g. Beaudry and Green, 2003, 2005; Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis, 2010).
    Our findings complement previous research by Acemoglu and Finkelstein (2008) and
Lewis (2011). The study by Acemoglu and Finkelstein (2008) looks at how changes in
relative factor prices faced by U.S. hospitals affect their demand for capital and labor and
their technology adoption decisions. They find that technology adoption in the health
care sector is sensitive to relative factor prices, and that the skill mix of workers respond
quickly to changes in technology. Lewis (2011) considers positive shocks to low skill labor
supply across U.S. labor markets (stemming from immigrant flows), and finds that firms
react quickly by changing their investments in new technology.

5.3   Broadband adoption and technological change

The above results showed that increased availability of broadband internet is associated
with i) changes in the output elasticities of different types of workers, and ii) a substantial
increase of broadband adoption in firms. Interpreted through the lense of the model in
equations (3)-(4), the results point to broadband adoption in firms changing the production
technology in a way that improves (worsens) the productivity of skilled (unskilled) workers.
However, drawing such an inference requires stronger assumptions than exogeneity of
the increase in broadband availability. In particular, we have to assume that increased
availability affects labor productivity only through broadband adoption in firms, and
not directly in any other way. Before presenting estimates of equations (3)-(4), we
therefore challenge this exclusion restriction and explore alternative explanations of the
intention-to-treat effects that are unrelated to broadband adoption in firms.

Alternative explanations. One alternative explanation is that increased availability of
broadband internet among households changes demand for goods in favor of skilled labor.
To examine this, we estimate the intention-to-treat effects of the increased availability of

                                              24
     Table 5. Characterizing complier firms.

                                             Composition                   Composition of           Log value       Share of skilled         Share of workers          Number
                                              of sample             δ̂       compliers               added             workers                  using PC               of obs.
                                                  (1)              (2)          (3)                    (4)                (5)                      (6)                   (7)
                      Manufacturing
                      Low                          0.19           0.17             0.16                14.16                0.11                      0.32               2,216
                      High                         0.19           0.20             0.19                14.35                0.31                      0.56               2,218

                      Wholesale
                      Low                          0.22           0.21             0.23                13.51                0.11                      0.57               2,609
                      High                         0.22           0.24             0.26                13.69                0.32                      0.73               2,609




25
                      Services
                      Low                          0.09           0.15             0.07                13.51                0.26                      0.65               1,079
                      High                         0.19           0.18             0.08                13.87                0.70                      0.96               1,080

                      Overall                      1.00           0.23             0.23                13.75                0.25                      0.54               16,744
     Note: We partition the survey sample of joint-stock firms into six mutually exclusive groups by industry and skill intensity (above and below median within each industry). Column 1 displays
     the proportion of the sample in each industry–skill intensity group. Column 2 reports estimates of δ from equation (4) for each group. The proportion of the compliers of a given type is then
     calculated as the ratio of δ̂ for that subgroup to the δ̂ in the overall sample, multiplied by the proportion of the sample in the industry–skill group. Column 3 shows the distribution of the
     compliers by industry and skill intensity. Columns 4–6 report characteristics of each industry–skill group. Sampling weights are used to ensure representative results for the population of
     joint-stock firms.
broadband among firms in the tradeable sector where demand is given by the world market
as Norway is a small open economy. Consistent with the baseline results, Appendix Tables
B6 and B7 show that increased availability of broadband internet increases (decreases)
the output elasticities and wages of (un)skilled labor also in the tradeable sector. Another
piece of evidence against this explanation is provided in Panel A of Appendix Table B8.
Here, we estimate equation (5) with a dummy variable for receiving orders online as the
dependent variable. There is no evidence of a significant effect of broadband availability
on the probability of receiving orders online. Taken together, these results suggest that
changes in demand for goods is not the key explanation of the intention-to-treat effects.
    A second possible explanation of the intention-to-treat effects is that they are driven
by changes in labor productivity and wages in firms that may have been directly affected
by the expansion of broadband access. However, both the output elasticities and the
labor outcome results barely move if we exclude telecom firms (including Telenor) or IT
consultancy companies from the estimation sample (see Appendix Tables B9 and B10). It
could also be that broadband adoption coincides with general technical upgrading in firms.
For example, the estimated changes in labor productivity might be due to investments in
computers at the time broadband is adopted. We investigate this by estimating equation
(5) with the share of workers using PC as the dependent variable. The estimate reported
in Panel B of Appendix Table B8 does not support this channel.
    Another possible explanation is that broadband allows skilled workers to work from
home, which then raises their output and pay potentially due to additional unmeasured
hours of labor input. Indeed, it is conceivable that this effect could be present for high but
not low skill workers if, for example, low skill workers do physical tasks that require on-site
presence, whereas high skill workers can perform their jobs remotely. In this scenario, we
would expect to see increases in productivity of skilled workers, and little if any change for
low skilled workers. However, we find that broadband internet has a significant negative
effect on the output elasticiticy of low skilled workers.

Exclusion restriction and production function estimates. The absence of evidence in favor
of alternative explanations gives some confidence in the exclusion restriction that increased
availability affects productivity and wages only through broadband adoption in firms, and
not directly in any other way. Additional support is given by the placebo test presented in
Appendix C. This placebo test exploits that under the exclusion restriction, there should
be no intention-to-treat effect for firms that were not induced to adopt broadband because
of the increase in availability.
    Invoking the exclusion restriction, we estimate how broadband adoption in firms
changes the production technology. Table 6 reports estimates based on OLS of equation
(3) and IV of equations (3) and (4). The full set of first stage results are reported in
Appendix Table B11. The first stages are strong, with large F-statistics on the excluded


                                              26
Table 6. Broadband adoption and technological change.

                                                        2 skills                            3 skills
                                                OLS               IV                  OLS             IV
                                                 (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)
          Intercept                           3.913***        3.854***             4.846***        4.801***
                                               (0.148)          (0.451)             (0.139)         (0.405)
          Capital                            0.0987***        0.0894***            0.110***       0.0980***
                                             (0.00736)         (0.0227)            (0.00764)       (0.0213)
          Unskilled                           0.583***        0.658***
                                              (0.0179)         (0.0427)
              Low skilled                                                          0.307***       0.352***
                                                                                   (0.0197)        (0.0332)
              Medium skilled                                                       0.228***        0.247***
                                                                                   (0.0116)        (0.0287)
          Skilled                             0.131***         0.0676**            0.129***       0.0844***
                                              (0.0105)         (0.0293)            (0.0120)        (0.0298)

          Availability ×
            Intercept                         -0.618***           -0.765           -0.835***       -0.961**
                                                (0.181)          (0.550)             (0.173)        (0.468)
              Capital                          0.00774           0.0212             -0.00572        0.0125
                                               (0.0111)         (0.0312)            (0.0109)       (0.0310)
              Unskilled                         -0.0297         -0.133**
                                               (0.0215)         (0.0604)
                 Low skilled                                                        -0.0340*        -0.100*
                                                                                    (0.0185)       (0.0512)
                 Medium skilled                                                    0.0396***         0.0174
                                                                                    (0.0135)       (0.0450)
              Skilled                        0.0910***         0.195***            0.0851***       0.160***
                                              (0.0111)         (0.0435)            (0.00756)       (0.0439)
                                            * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: This table uses the survey sample of joint-stock firms. OLS estimates are based on equation (3), whereas IV estimates
are based on equations (3) and (4). Sampling weights are used to ensure representative results for the population of joint-
stock firms. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. Low skilled comprises individuals without high
school diploma and medium skilled consists of high school graduates (without a college degree). The standard errors are
clustered at the municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity.




                                                             27
instruments which mean weak instrument bias is not a concern. Both the OLS and IV
estimates suggest that broadband adoption in firms is a skill biased technological change,
shifting how factor inputs are transformed to output.27 In particular, the output elasticity
of skilled labor increases substantially, while broadband internet seems to be a substitute
for unskilled labor. By comparison, there is little if any change in the output elasticity
of capital. As shown in Appendix Table B12, these conclusions are robust to using the
LP approach to control for correlations between factor inputs, broadband adoption and
unobserved productivity.
    Unfortunately, our data does not allow us to explore exactly how firms reorganize
work and production in response to adopting broadband. There are, however, a few case
studies that provides some insights.28 The general argument made in these studies is
that broadband internet complements workers in executing problem-solving, complex
communication, and information-intensive tasks. A related study by Bartel, Ichniowski,
and Shaw (2007) provide unique evidence on the channels through which a wide range of
information technology affect firms and workers in one narrowly defined industry. Their
study emphasizes that the adoption of IT-enhanced technology involves more than just in-
stallation of new equipment on the factory floor. Adoption of new information technologies
make firms shift their business strategies and begin producing more customized products
as well as improve the efficiency of all stages of the production process. Importantly, they
show adoption of IT-enhanced technology increases the demand for technical and problem
solvings and requires new human resource practices. Their empirical analysis suggest
that adoption of new information technology quickly reduces production time, improves
efficiency, and increases the demand for nonroutine problem solving skills.


6        Task based interpretation

To better understand the skill complementarity of broadband internet, we pursue a
task based approach to skill biased technological change. Starting with Autor, Levy,
and Murnane (2003), a growing literature suggest that ICT substitutes for workers in
performing routine tasks – more amenable to automatization – and complements workers
in executing nonroutine abstract tasks. To take the task based approach to our data, we
use the wage statistics surveys with information on occupation codes at the 4-digit level.29
    27
      Table 5 illustrates that the IV estimates are identified off a selective subgroup of early adopters of
broadband internet; as a result, we need to be cautious in extrapolating these local estimates to the
longer-run impact of broadband adoption for the population of firms at large. For the same reason, we
also need to be cautious in comparing the OLS estimates to the IV estimates. The OLS estimates differ
either because of endogeneity bias or because of heterogeneity across firms in the impact of adopting
broadband internet.
   28
      See e.g. the study of broadband adoption in the Canadian township of South Dundes (SNG, 2003).
   29
      We observe occupation codes for about 52% of the workers in the wage statistics surveys. As a result,
Tables 7 and 8 are based on a subsample of the data used in the estimation of the intention-to-treat effects
on wages. However, when re-estimating the intention-to-treat effects on this subsample, we get similar


                                                    28
     Table 7. Occupation types, wages and task intensities by skill category.

                                               Occupation types                                Mean relative wage                         Relative task intensities
                                            Professional &                                       Professional &
                                             Managerial      Other                     All        Managerial      Other                   M̂ /Â              R̂/Â                Number
                                                  (1)         (2)                      (3)             (4)         (5)                     (6)                 (7)                 of obs.
          A. 2 skill categories
          Unskilled                                 0.14                0.86          -0.09                0.20             -0.14          0.13                0.21               3,176,647
          Skilled                                   0.66                0.34          0.21                 0.30              0.02         -0.30               -0.47               1,409,686
          B. 3 skill categories
          Low skilled                               0.12                0.88          -0.13                0.16             -0.17         0.15                0.24                1,730,625




29
          Medium skilled                            0.17                0.83          -0.05                0.22             -0.10          0.11                0.18               1,446,022
          Skilled                                   0.66                0.34           0.21                0.30              0.02         -0.30               -0.47               1,409,686
     Note: We consider workers aged 18-67 who are recorded in the wage statistics surveys and for which we observe occupation code at the 4-digit level. The occupation codes are linked with
     measures of task intensity from the Dictionary of Occupational Title, as reported by Autor and Dorn (2013). In Panel A, (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. In Panel
     B, Low skilled comprises individuals without high school diploma and medium skilled consists of high school graduates (without a college degree). Columns (1) and (2) show the occupation
     distribution by skill category. Following Autor and Dorn (2013), we define professional and managerial occupations as white-collar managerial, professional specialists, technical, finance, and
     public safety occupations. Columns (3)-(5) provide mean relative wage by type of occupation and skill category. The mean relative wage is defined as the average log hourly wage within
     each skill-occupation group relative to the overall sample mean. Columns (6) and (7) report relative task intensities by skill level. Following Autor and Dorn (2009, 2013), we calculate M̂ /Â
     (R̂/Â) as the mean of the logarithm of the ratio of the manual (routine) task content in an occupation to the abstract task content in the same occupation. Both measures are standardized
     with mean zero and variance one.
Table 8. Wage regressions with interactions between tasks and broadband availability

                                                                                       Skill categories
                                                                                2 skill levels 3 skill levels
         Dep. variable: Log hourly wage                           (1)                 (2)             (3)
         Abstract                                              0.371***           0.283***        0.272***
                                                               (0.0142)            (0.0139)        (0.0140)
         Routine                                             -0.0641***          -0.0664***      -0.0699***
                                                              (0.00653)           (0.00573)       (0.00576)
         Manual                                               0.0248***           0.0156**         0.0138*
                                                              (0.00791)           (0.00769)       (0.00740)
         Availability×Abstract                                0.173***            0.157***        0.157***
                                                               (0.0320)            (0.0298)        (0.0297)
         Availability×Routine                                -0.0357***          -0.0344***      -0.0338***
                                                              (0.00798)           (0.00766)       (0.00791)
         Availability×Manual                                   0.00200             0.00145         0.00273
                                                               (0.0115)            (0.0107)        (0.0104)
         Additional controls:                                                          √                    √
         Skill categories                                                              √                    √
         Availability*Skill category
                                            * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: We consider workers aged 18-67 who are recorded in the wage statistics surveys and for which we observe occupation
code at the 4-digit leve. The occupation codes are linked with measures of task intensity from the Dictionary of Occupational
Title (DOT), as reported by Autor and Dorn (2013). Following Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003), we convert the DOT
measures into percentiles of the task distribution. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. Low skilled
comprises individuals without high school diploma and medium skilled consists of high school graduates (without a college
degree). Column 1 presents results from a regression of log hourly wages on task intensities and their interaction with
broadband availability in the local labor market. Column 2 adds indicator variables for two levels of skill and their
interaction with broadband availability. Column 3 includes indicator variables for three levels of skills and their interaction
with broadband availability. All regressions include fixed effects for year, municipality and industry, and controls for gender,
years of experience and years of experience squared. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered at the
municipality level.




                                                              30
We link these occupation codes with job task requirements from the DOT data base
provided by Autor and Dorn (2013). The measured job task intensities are (nonroutine)
abstract tasks, routine tasks and (nonroutine) manual tasks. Appendix Table B13 provides
examples of workplace activities with different task intensities.30
    A necessary condition for a task based explanation of the skill complementarity of
broadband internet is that workers of different educational background actually cluster
disproportionaly in occupations that require different tasks. Table 7 shows the occupational
types, wages and task intensities for each skill category.31 We find that college graduates
tend to work in professional and managerial occupations that are pervasive at abstract
tasks and pay more. By comparison, low educated workers are over-represented in poorly
paid occupations that involve relatively little abstract tasks, but require more routine or
manual tasks.
    Motivated by these differences, we estimate wage regressions which include interactions
between broadband internet and the tasks performed in jobs rather than (or in addition
to) the educational credentials of workers performing those jobs. All regressions control for
time, municipality, and industry fixed effects as well as (potential) experience and gender.
The estimates are provided in Table 8. Column 1 shows the expansion of broadband internet
re-enforced the wage premiums to workers performing abstract tasks. By comparison, the
wages paid to jobs requiring routine tasks declined because of the broadband expansion.
The estimates imply that, holding everything else equal, a 10 percentage point increase
in broadband availability in a municipality raises (lowers) hourly wages of workers with
abstract (routine) task intensity at the 75th percentile by 0.9 (0.2) percent, as compared
to workers at the 25th percentile of the task intensity. Importantly, columns 2 and 3 show
the estimates are quite similar when we control for skill levels and their interaction with
broadband availability.
    Taken together, the results presented in Tables 7 and 8 suggest an important mechanism
behind the skill bias of broadband internet is that it complements non-routine abstract
tasks but substitutes for routine tasks whilst not affecting manual tasks.


7    Conclusion

In 2009, the U.S. Congress asked for a plan that would provide affordable broadband
service to all America’s citizens. In other OECD countries, there has been similar calls
for public funding to roll out broadband infrastructure. While government agencies are
projecting broadband penetration rates to be important for productivity and wage growth,
results.
  30
     See Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) and Autor and Dorn (2009) for detailed descriptions of how the
task intensities are measured and intepreted.
  31
     Following Autor and Dorn (2013), we define professional and managerial occupations as white-collar
managerial, professional specialists, technical, finance, and public safety occupations.



                                                  31
there is little scientific evidence to substantiate these claims.
    Using rich Norwegian data, we contribute by examining how broadband internet affects
the labor outcomes and productivity of different types of workers. A public program with
limited funding rolled out broadband access points, and provides plausibly exogenous
variation in the availability and adoption of broadband internet in firms. Our results
suggest that broadband internet improves (worsens) the labor outcomes and productivity
of skilled (unskilled) workers. We explore several possible explanations for the skill bias
of broadband internet. We find suggestive evidence that broadband adoption in firms
complements skilled workers in executing nonroutine abstract tasks, and substitutes for
unskilled workers in performing routine tasks.
    Taken together, our findings have important implications for the debate about the role
of government policies in the expansion of broadband infrastructure. Our estimates suggest
that policy increasing the broadband penetration rates can be important in enhancing firm
productivity. A related issue is why policy changes, even if they encourage productivity,
do not always happen. One explanation is that established interests earning rents in the
unreformed environment could be able to stave off reform. Examining who wins, who
loses, and by how much could inform about the nature of these barriers and how to design
compensation schemes. Our study points to the skill bias of broadband induced shift
in production technology as a possible barrier to government investment in broadband
infrastructure.




                                            32
References

Acemoglu, D. (2003): “Patterns of Skill Premia,” Review of Economic Studies, 70(2),
 199–230.

Acemoglu, D., and D. H. Autor (2011): “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implica-
 tions for Employment and Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics Vol. 4, ed. by
 O. Ashenfelter, and D. E. Card, chap. 12, pp. 1043–1171. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Acemoglu, D., and A. Finkelstein (2008): “Input and Technology Choices in
 Regulated Industries: Evidence from the Health Care Sector,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 116(5), 837–880.

Atasoy, H. (2013): “The Effects of Broadband Internet Expansion on Labor Market
 Outcomes,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 66(2), 315–345.

Atkinson, A. B., L. Rainwater, and T. M. Smeeding (1995): Income Distribution
 in OECD Countries: Evidence from the Luxembourg Income Study. Organisation for
 Economic Co-operation and Development Paris.

Autor, D. H., and D. Dorn (2009): “This Job is ‘Getting Old’: Measuring Changes
 in Job Opportunities using Occupational Age Structure,” American Economic Review:
 Papers & Proceedings, 99(2), 45–51.

        (2013): “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the US
  Labor Market,” American Economic Review, 103(5), 1553–1597.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2006): “The Polarization of the U.S.
 Labor Market,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 96(2), 189–194.

        (2008): “Trends in US Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 300–323.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and A. B. Krueger (1998): “Computing Inequality:
 Have Computers Changed the Labor Market?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4),
 1169–1213.

Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003): “The Skill Content of Recent
 Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 118(4), 1279–1333.

Bartel, A., C. Ichniowski, and K. Shaw (2007): “How Does Information Technology
 Really Affect Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process
 Improvement and Worker Skills,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1721–1758.


                                        33
Barth, E., B. Bratsberg, T. Hageland, and O. Raaum (2008): “Performance Pay
 and Within-Firm Wage Inequality,” Statistics Norway, Discussion Paper No. 535.

Beaudry, P., M. Doms, and E. Lewis (2010): “Should the Personal Computer
 Be Considered a Technological Revolution? Evidence from U.S. Metropolitan Areas,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 118(5), 988 – 1036.

Beaudry, P., and D. A. Green (2003): “The Changing Structure of Wages in the US
 and Germany: What Explains the Differences?,” American Economic Review, 93(3),
 573–602.

         (2005): “Changes in U.S. Wages, 1976–2000: Ongoing Skill Bias or Major
  Technological Change?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 23(3), 609–648.

Berman, E., J. Bound, and Z. Griliches (1994): “Changes in the Demand for Skilled
 Labor within US Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(2), 367–397.

Bhuller, M. (2009): “Inndeling av Norge i arbeidsmarkedsregioner,” Statistics Norway,
 Note, 2009/24.

Bhuller, M., T. Havnes, E. Leuven, and M. Mogstad (2013): “Broadband
 Internet: An Information Superhighway to Sex Crime?,” Review of Economic Studies,
 80(4), 1237–1266.

Black, S. E., P. J. Devereux, and K. G. Salvanes (2005): “Why the Apple Doesn’t
 Fall Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital,” American
 Economic Review, 95(1), 437–449.

Black, S. E., and A. Spitz-Oener (2010): “Explaining Women’s Success: Technological
 Change and the Skill Content of Women’s Work,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
 92(1), 187–194.

Bloom, N., L. Garicano, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2009): “The Distinct Ef-
 fects of Information Technology and Communication Technology on Firm Organization,”
 NBER Working Paper 14975.

Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2012): “Americans Do IT Better: US
 Multinationals and the Productivity Miracle,” American Economic Review, 102(1),
 167–201.

Bond, S., and J. Van Reenen (2007): “Microeconometric Models of Investment and
 Employment,” in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. J. Heckman, and E. E. Leamer,
 pp. 4417–4498. North Holland, London.

                                         34
Bresnahan, T. F., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. M. Hitt (2002): “Information Technol-
 ogy, Workplace Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-level evidence,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), 339–376.

Brynjolfsson, E., and L. M. Hitt (2003): “Computing Productivity: Firm-level
 Evidence,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 793–808.

Caroli, E., and J. Van Reenen (2001): “Skill Biased Organizational Change? Evidence
 from a Panel of British and French Establishments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 116(4), 1449–1492.

Czernich, N., O. Falck, T. Kretschmer, and L. Woessmann (2011): “Broadband
 Infrastructure and Economic Growth,” Economic Journal, 121(May), 505–532.

DiNardo, J. E., and J.-S. Pischke (1997): “The Returns to Computer Use Revisited:
  Have Pencils Changed the Wage Structure Too?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 112(1), 291–303.

Draca, M., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2007): “Productivity and ICTs: A Review
 of the Evidence,” in Oxford Handbook of Information and Communication Technologies,
 ed. by R. Mansell, C. Avgerou, D. Quah, and R. Silverstone, pp. 100–147. Oxford
 University Press.

Firpo, S., N. M. Fortin, and T. Lemieux (2011): “Occupational Tasks and Changes
  in the Wage Structure,” IZA Discussion Paper 5542.

Forman, C., A. Goldfarb, and S. Greenstein (2012): “The Internet and Local
 Wages: A Puzzle,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 556–575.

Fox, J. T., and V. Smeets (2011): “Does Input Quality Drive Measured Differences In
  Firm Productivity?,” International Economic Review, 52(4), 961–989.

Goldin, C., and L. F. Katz (2007): “Long-Run Changes in the Wage Structure:
 Narrowing, Widening, Polarizing,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 38(2),
 135–168.

Goos, M., and A. Manning (2007): “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization
 of Work in Britain,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1), 118–133.

Hunnes, A., J. Moen, and K. G. Salvanes (2009): “Wage Structure and Labor
 Mobility in Norway, 1980-97,” in The Structure of Wages: An International Comparison,
 ed. by E. P. Lazear, and K. L. Shaw, pp. 315–372. University of Chicago Press.

Imbens, G. W., and J. D. Angrist (1994): “Identification and Estimation of Local
  Average Treatment Effects,” Econometrica, 62(2), 467–475.

                                         35
Jensen, J. B., and L. G. Kletzer (2005): “Tradable Services: Understanding the Scope
  and Impact of Services Outsourcing,” Institute for International Economics Working
  Paper 05-9.

Jorgenson, D. W., M. S. Ho, and K. J. Stiroh (2008): “A Retrospective Look at
  the U.S. Productivity Growth Resurgence,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(1),
  3–24.

Krueger, A. B. (1993): “How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence
 from Microdata, 1984-1989,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(1), 33–60.

Levinsohn, J., and A. Petrin (2003): “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
  to Control for Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 70(2), 317–341.

Lewis, E. (2011): “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital-Skill Complementarity,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 126(2), 1029–1069.

Lunde, H., and K. H. Grini (2007): “Bonus – hvor mye og til hvem?,” Statistics Norway
 Report, 2007(18).

Machin, S., and J. Van Reenen (1998): “Technology and Changes in Skill Structure:
 Evidence from Seven OECD Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1215–
 1244.

Michaels, G., A. Natraj, and J. Van Reenen (2014): “Has ICT Polarized Skill
 Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries over 25 years,” Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 96(1), 60–77.

Oliner, S. D., D. E. Sichel, and K. J. Stiroh (2007): “Explaining a Productive
 Decade,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 38(1), 81–152.

Olley, S. G., and A. Pakes (1996): “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommu-
 nications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64(6), 1263–1297.

Pavcnik, N. (2002): “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evi-
  dence from Chilean plants,” Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 245–276.

St.meld.nr. 38 (1997–1998): “IT-kompetanse i et regionalt perspektiv [A regional
  perspective on IT-competency],” Ministry of Trade and Industry.

St.meld.nr. 49 (2003): “Breiband for kunnskap og vekst [Broadband for knowledge and
  growth],” Ministry of Trade and Industry.

Strategic Networks Group (2003): “Economic Impact Study of the South Dundas
  Township Fiber Network,” Prepared for the U.K. Department of Trade and Industry,
  Ontario.

                                          36
Syverson, C. (2011): “What Determines Productivity?,” Journal of Economic Literature,
  49(2), 326–365.

Van Beveren, I. (2012): “Total Factor Productivity Estimation: A Practical Review,”
 Journal of Economic Surveys, 26(1), 98–128.




                                         37
Appendix A: Data and expansion

Figure A1. Distribution of firms by industry

                                                                          Industry distribution
                                                      Firm−year observations                                                        Value added
                             Wholesale/retail                                                              Wholesale/retail
                                Manufacturing                                                                 Manufacturing
                                 Construction                                                                  Construction
            Real estate and business services                                             Real estate and business services
                       Hotels and restaurants                                                        Hotels and restaurants
                                        Other                                                                         Other
                                    Transport                                                                     Transport
                                      Utilities                                                                     Utilities
                                   Agriculture                                                                   Agriculture
                             Communications                                                                Communications
                         Public administration                                                         Public administration

                                                  0      .1        .2          .3   .4                                          0   .1         .2     .3


                                                              Employees                                                                  Wage bills
                             Wholesale/retail                                                              Wholesale/retail
                                Manufacturing                                                                 Manufacturing
                                 Construction                                                                  Construction
            Real estate and business services                                             Real estate and business services
                       Hotels and restaurants                                                        Hotels and restaurants
                                        Other                                                                         Other
                                    Transport                                                                     Transport
                                      Utilities                                                                     Utilities
                                   Agriculture                                                                   Agriculture
                             Communications                                                                Communications
                         Public administration                                                         Public administration

                                                  0           .1          .2        .3                                          0   .1         .2     .3


                                                                        Weighted survey                    Population



Note: The figure compares the weighted survey sample of joint-stock firms to the population of joint-stock firms. Sampling
weights are used to ensure representative results for the population of joint-stock firms.
Figure A2. Cross-sectional distribution of key firm variables

                                                                                            Input−output




                          .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                          .1 .2 .3 .4
                         Kernel density




                                                                                                         Kernel density
                                   0




                                                                                                                   0
                                                   0               5           10             15                               −5           0          5          10    15
                                                                   Revenues (log)                                                               Value added (log)
                         0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25




                                                                                                         0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
                           Kernel density




                                                                                                           Kernel density
                                               −5           0           5          10             15                           −5           0          5          10    15
                                                                 Intermediates (log)                                                              Capital (log)


                                                                         Population Wage                 bills                       Unweighted survey
                                                                         Weighted survey
                                                                                                          .1 .2 .3 .4
                          .1 .2 .3 .4
                         Kernel density




                                                                                                         Kernel density
                                   0




                                                                                                                   0




                                                    0               5            10               15                            −5           0         5          10    15
                                                                  Total wages (log)                                                         Wages to unskilled (log)
                                       .3
                         Kernel density
                           .1    .20




                                                   −5            0        5          10           15
                                                                Wages to skilled (log)


                                                                         Population
                                                                               Number                          Unweighted survey
                                                                                                       of workers
                                                                         Weighted survey
                         0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5




                                                                                                          .1 .2 .3 .4
                           Kernel density




                                                                                                         Kernel density
                                                                                                                   0




                                               0        2            4       6          8     10                               0        2         4       6         8   10
                                                                  All workers (log)                                                         Unskilled workers (log)
                                        .3
                         Kernel density
                           .1     .2
                                   0




                                               0            2           4          6          8
                                                                Skilled workers (log)


                                                                         Population                                                  Unweighted survey
                                                                         Weighted survey


Note: The figures compare the weighted survey sample of joint-stock firms to the population of joint-stock firms. Sampling
weights are used to ensure representative results for the population of joint-stock firms. Detailed descriptions of the variables
are given in Appendix Table A1.
Figure A3. Time trends in key firm variables

                                                                              Input−output




                                                                                       6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5
                                        9




                                                                                         Value added (log)
                         Revenues (log)
                            8   8.5 7.5
                                                  2000   2002   2004   2006     2008                              2000      2002   2004      2006   2008
                                                                year                                                               year
                                             8




                                                                                                    6
                           Intermediates (log)




                                                                                       4.5 5 5.5
                                                                                       Capital (log)
                         6.5     7    7.5




                                                                                                    4
                                                  2000   2002   2004   2006     2008                              2000      2002   2004      2006   2008
                                                                year                                                               year


                                                                 Population Wage       bills                             Unweighted survey
                                                                 Weighted survey
                                                                                       Wages to unskilled (log)
                         12.5 13 13.5 14 14.5




                                                                                        12.5 13 13.5 14
                            Total wages (log)




                                                  2000   2002   2004   2006     2008                              2000      2002   2004      2006   2008
                                                                year                                                               year
                         Wages to skilled (log)
                         11 11.5 12 12.5




                                                  2000   2002   2004   2006     2008
                                                                year


                                                                 Population
                                                                       Number              Unweighted survey
                                                                                   of workers
                                                                 Weighted survey
                                                                                       Unskilled workers (log)
                         2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5




                                                                                                            4
                            All workers (log)




                                                                                       2.5     3   3.5




                                                  2000   2002   2004   2006     2008                              2000      2002   2004      2006   2008
                                                                year                                                               year
                                            2.5
                         Skilled workers (log)
                         1     1.5    2




                                                  2000   2002   2004   2006     2008
                                                                year


                                                                 Population                                              Unweighted survey
                                                                 Weighted survey


Note: The figures compare the weighted survey sample of joint-stock firms to the population of joint-stock firms. Sampling
weights are used to ensure representative results for the population of joint-stock firms. Detailed descriptions of the variables
are given in Appendix Table A1.
Figure A4. Geographical distribution of broadband availability rates.

            [0,.25)
            [.25,.5)
            [.5,.75)
            [.75,1]
            No data




        2001                                                      2003                                                      2005
Note: The graphs show the geographical distribution of broadband availability rates of households in 2001, 2003 and 2005.
Figure A5. Broadband availability rates of households and broadband subscription rates
of firms

                    Broadband availability rates of households           Broadband subscription rates of firms

             1                                                   1




            .8                                                   .8




            .6                                                   .6




            .4                                                   .4




            .2                                                   .2




             0                                                   0

             2001            2003          2005           2007    2001         2003            2005         2007




Note: The graphs show the overall mean and distribution of broadband availability rates of households and broadband
subscription rates of firms across municipalities for each year during the period 2001–2007.
Figure A6. Timing of broadband expansion and baseline covariates

                                                                                                Demography
                                           Income (log)                                          Education (log)                                      Urbanization
              −.005 0 .005




                                                                           .2




                                                                                                                                .5
                                                                                                                                −.5 0
                                                                           −.2 0
                             2001         2003          2005      2007              2001         2003          2005      2007           2001         2003          2005      2007
                                                 year                                                   year                                                year


                                         Population (log)                                        Unemployment




                                                                           5
              1
              0




                                                                           0
              −1




                                                                           −5
                             2001         2003          2005      2007              2001         2003          2005      2007
                                                 year                                                   year



                                                                                              Input and output
                                     Average revenues (log)                                Average intermediates (log)                         Average capital stock (log)
              5




                                                                                                                                1
                                                                           1
                                                                           −1 0
              0




                                                                                                                                0
              −5




                                                                                                                                −1
                             2001         2003          2005      2007              2001         2003          2005      2007           2001         2003          2005      2007
                                                 year                                                   year                                                year


                              Average number of workers (log)                                Average wage bill (log)
              1




                                                                           5
              0




                                                                           0
              −1




                                                                           −5




                             2001         2003          2005      2007              2001         2003          2005      2007
                                                 year                                                   year




                                                                                             Industry structure
                                      Number of firms (log)                            Empl. share in manufacturing                            Empl. share in wholesale
              .1




                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                                .5
              −.1 0




                                                                           −.5 0




                                                                                                                                −.5 0




                             2001         2003          2005      2007              2001         2003          2005      2007           2001         2003          2005      2007
                                                 year                                                   year                                                year


                                    Empl. share in construction                              Empl. share in services
              .5




                                                                           .5
              −.5 0




                                                                           −.5 0




                             2001         2003          2005      2007              2001         2003          2005      2007
                                                 year                                                   year



                                                                         Skill structure and growth 1998 − 2000
                                     Share high skilled wages                              Share high skilled workers
                                                                           2
              −1 0 1




                                                                           0
                                                                           −2




                             2001         2003          2005      2007              2001         2003          2005      2007
                                                 year                                                   year


                                     Growth employment rate                                   Growth hourly wage
              2




                                                                           −2 0 2
              −2 0




                             2001         2003          2005      2007              2001         2003          2005      2007
                                                 year                                                   year




Note: This figure report estimates from equation (2) of the vector ψt for every t (and the associated 95 % confidence
intervals).
Table A1. Variable definitions

Variable             Description
Firm accounts        Source: The Account Statistics.
Revenues             Total sales by a firm in year t.
Intermediates        Procurement of materials and intermediate inputs of a firm in year t.
Capital              Value of total fixed assets of a firm in year t.
Value added          Sales minus intermediates of a firm in year t.
Industry             4-digit code classifying a firm’s main activity in year t according to the
                     Standard Industry Classification (SIC2002) system.
Municipality         4-digit code for the municipality in which a firm is located in year t.
Exports              Total value of exported goods of a firm in year t.
Imports              Total value of imported goods of a firm in year t.
Internet variables   Source: The community survey on ICT in firms
Broadband            Dummy variable for whether a firm has adopted broadband internet
                     (speed at or above 256 kilobits per second) in year t.
Revenues from        Dummy variable for whether at least part of a firm’s total revenues
online orders        comes from online orders in year t.
Employees            Source: Register of Employers and Employees and the Wage Statistics
                     Survey.
Annual wages         Annual pre-tax wages in year t
Employment           Dummy variable for whether annual wages exceed the substantial
status               gainful activity threshold in year t (USD 6,850 in 2001), which defines
                     employment in the Social Security System.
Hourly wages         Hourly pre-tax wage per October in year t.
Occupation           4-digit occupation code of a job in year t.
Individual           Source: National Education Database and Central Population Register.
characteristics
Education level      Years of schooling.
Municipality         Municipality of residence in year t.
Age                  The age of a worker in year t.
Potential            Age in year t - years of schooling - 7
experience
Gender               The gender of a worker.
Variable            Description
Internet            Source: Norwegian Ministry of Government Administration.
availability
Availability rate   Fraction of households in year t in a given municipality for which
                    broadband internet is available, independently of whether they take it
                    up.
Demographic         Source: Central Population Register.
controls
Urbanization        Population share living in densely populated area in a given
                    municipality in year t.
Income              Average annual disposable income across individuals aged 16–59 years
                    in a given municipality in year t.
Education           Average years of schooling across individuals aged 16–59 in a given
                    municipality in year t.
Unemployment        Unemployment rate among individuals aged 16–59 in a given
                    municipality in year t.
Industry and firm Source: The Account Statistics and Register of Employers and
controls          Employees.
Share of skilled  Share of employed workers with a college degree in a given municipality
workers           in year t.
Share of total    Share of the total wage bill paid to workers with a college degree in a
wages to skilled  given municipality in year t.
workers
Share of          Share of workers in the manufacturing/wholesale/service industry in a
employment by     given municipality in year t.
industry
Average input     Average level of capital stock/value added/number of workers/wages
levels            paid/revenues across firms in a given municipality in year t.
Growth in         Change from 1998 to 2000 in the average employment rate of workers
employment rate aged 18-67 in a given municipality.
1998-2000
Growth in hourly Proportional change from 1998 to 2000 in the average hourly wage of
wage 1998-2000    workers aged 18-67 in a given municipality.
Table A2. Production function estimates

                                                                                    OLS                                                  LP
                                                                         Population Weighted Survey                       Population     Weighted Survey
                             Panel A: 1 skill category
                             Intercept                                     1.971***              1.841***                   4.172***          3.187***
                                                                           (0.0408)               (0.0851)                   (0.0958)          (0.191)
                             Capital                                      0.0780***              0.0821***                  0.104***          0.164***
                                                                          (0.00297)              (0.00497)                    (0.019)          (0.019)
                             Labor                                        0.845***               0.856***                   0.652***          0.676***
                                                                          (0.00351)              (0.00733)                  (0.00480)         (0.00934)
                             Panel B: 2 skill categories
                             Intercept                                     3.461***              3.380***                   5.887***           4.695***
                                                                           (0.0455)               (0.0984)                    (0.102)           (0.199)
                             Capital                                      0.0990***              0.106***                   0.107***           0.194***
                                                                          (0.00399)              (0.00599)                    (0.022)           (0.019)
                             Unskilled                                     0.558***              0.570***                   0.410***           0.429***
                                                                           (0.0136)               (0.0141)                   (0.0108)          (0.0143)
                             Skilled                                       0.198***              0.194***                   0.138***           0.135***
                                                                           (0.0115)               (0.0127)                  (0.00913)          (0.0105)
                             Observations                                   149,676                16,744                    149,676            16,744
                                                                              * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: The table compares estimates of Cobb-Douglas production functions based on the the weighted survey sample of joint-stock firms and the population of joint-stock firms. Sampling
weights are used to ensure representative results for the population of joint-stock firms. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The standard errors are clustered at the
municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include fixed effects for year, municipality and industry.
Appendix B: Specification checks and additional results
Figure B1. Output elasticites and skill premiums conditional on year and municipality fixed effects with varying window, pre and post
the largest increase in availability rates (period 0)

                                                                                                                                                                           (b) Output elasticity: Skilled la- (c) Output elasticity: Unskilled
                                  (a) Return to Skill: Hourly wage.                                                                                                        bor.                               labor.




                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .61




                                                                  .26
                                                                                                                                                       .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .58




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .6




                                                        .25
                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .55




                                                                                                                                                       Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Availability rate




                                              .24
                                                                                                                                                                                    .17




                                                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                             Coefficient on skilled wage bills




                                     Skill premium in log hourly wage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Coefficient on unskilled wage bills




                                                      .23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .52




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                              .14
                                                                        −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3
                                                                             Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates

                                                                                                 Skill premium in log hourly wage                                                                                                        Output elasticity of skilled workers                                                                                                    Output elasticity of unskilled workers
                                                                                                 Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate




                                                                                                                                                                           (e) Output elasticity: Skilled la- (f) Output elasticity: Unskilled
                                  (d) Return to Skill: Hourly wage.                                                                                                        bor.                               labor.




                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .61




                                                                  .26
                                                                                                                                                       .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .58




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .6




                                                        .25
                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .55




                                                                                                                                                       Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Availability rate




                                              .24
                                                                                                                                                                                    .17




                                                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                             Coefficient on skilled wage bills




                                     Skill premium in log hourly wage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Coefficient on unskilled wage bills




                                                      .23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .52




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                              .14
                                                                        −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3
                                                                             Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates

                                                                                                 Skill premium in log hourly wage                                                                                                        Output elasticity of skilled workers                                                                                                    Output elasticity of unskilled workers
                                                                                                 Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate




                                                                                                                                                                           (h) Output elasticity: Skilled la- (i) Output elasticity: Unskilled
                                  (g) Return to Skill: Hourly wage.                                                                                                        bor.                               labor.




                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .61




                                                                  .26
                                                                                                                                                       .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .58




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .6




                                                        .25
                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .55




                                                                                                                                                       Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Availability rate




                                              .24
                                                                                                                                                                                    .17




                                                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                             Coefficient on skilled wage bills




                                     Skill premium in log hourly wage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Coefficient on unskilled wage bills




                                                      .23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .52




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                              .14
                                                                        −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3
                                                                             Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates

                                                                                                 Skill premium in log hourly wage                                                                                                        Output elasticity of skilled workers                                                                                                    Output elasticity of unskilled workers
                                                                                                 Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate




Note: Time zero represents the year with the strongest growth in availability rates in a given period. In each period, we estimate Cobb-Douglas production functions and wage regressions
with year and municipality fixed effects. Graphs (b), (c), (e), (f), (h), and (i) report period-specific OLS estimates of the output elasticity of skilled and unskilled labor. Graphs (b), (d), and
(g) report period-specific OLS estimates of log hourly wage on a dummy for skilled and controls for gender and potential experience.
Figure B2. Output elasticites and skill premiums with varying window, pre and post the largest increase in availability rates (period 0)

                                                                                                                                                                              (b) Output elasticity: Skilled la- (c) Output elasticity: Unskilled
                                  (a) Return to Skill: Hourly wage.                                                                                                           bor.                               labor.




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .61




                                                                     .27
                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .59




                                                             .26
                                                                                                                                                                      .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .57




                                                     .25
                                                                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4




                                                                                                                                                                                          .18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .55




                                                                                                                                                          Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Availability rate




                                             .24
                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                 .16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .53




                                                                                                                                                                                Coefficient on skilled wage bills




                                      Skill premium in log hourly wage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Coefficient on unskilled wage bills




                                    .23
                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .51
                                                                           −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3
                                                                                Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates

                                                                                                    Skill premium in log hourly wage                                                                                                        Output elasticity of skilled workers                                                                                                    Output elasticity of unskilled workers
                                                                                                    Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate




                                                                                                                                                                              (e) Output elasticity: Skilled la- (f) Output elasticity: Unskilled
                                  (d) Return to Skill: Hourly wage.                                                                                                           bor.                               labor.




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .61




                                                                     .27
                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .59




                                                             .26
                                                                                                                                                                      .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .57




                                                     .25
                                                                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4




                                                                                                                                                                                          .18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .55




                                                                                                                                                          Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Availability rate




                                             .24
                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                 .16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .53




                                                                                                                                                                                Coefficient on skilled wage bills




                                      Skill premium in log hourly wage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Coefficient on unskilled wage bills




                                    .23
                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .51
                                                                           −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3
                                                                                Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates

                                                                                                    Skill premium in log hourly wage                                                                                                        Output elasticity of skilled workers                                                                                                    Output elasticity of unskilled workers
                                                                                                    Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate




                                                                                                                                                                              (h) Output elasticity: Skilled la- (i) Output elasticity: Unskilled
                                  (g) Return to Skill: Hourly wage.                                                                                                           bor.                               labor.




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .61




                                                                     .27
                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .59




                                                             .26
                                                                                                                                                                      .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .57




                                                     .25
                                                                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4




                                                                                                                                                                                          .18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .55




                                                                                                                                                          Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Availability rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Availability rate




                                             .24
                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                 .16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .53




                                                                                                                                                                                Coefficient on skilled wage bills




                                      Skill premium in log hourly wage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Coefficient on unskilled wage bills




                                    .23
                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .51




                                                                           −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3                                                             −3          −2          −1            0          1           2             3
                                                                                Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates                                                                      Year relative to period with largest increase in availability rates

                                                                                                    Skill premium in log hourly wage                                                                                                        Output elasticity of skilled workers                                                                                                    Output elasticity of unskilled workers
                                                                                                    Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate                                                                                                                       Availability rate




Note: Time zero represents the year with the strongest growth in availability rates in a given period. In each period, we estimate Cobb-Douglas production functions and wage regressions.
Graphs (b), (c), (e), (f), (h), and (i) report period-specific OLS estimates of the output elasticity of skilled and unskilled labor. Graphs (b), (d), and (g) report period-specific OLS estimates
of log hourly wage on a dummy for skilled and controls for gender and potential experience.
Figure B3. Actual and counterfactual trends in relative wage bills.
                         .85      .8
           Skilled relative wage bill
           .7         .75.65




                                        2000   2001   2002       2003          2004     2005       2006     2007
                                                                        Year

                                                             Actual               Counterfactual

Note: Solid line = actual outome. Dashed line = counterfactual outcome in the absence of broadband internet expansion.
The counterfactual outcome is measured as the actual outcome minus the predicted effect of broadband availability on the
relative wage bill of skilled workers using the intention-to-treat estimates for hourly wages and employment in Table 3.
Table B1. Specification checks for intention-to-treat effects on labor outcomes

                                                                                                                       Time interacted
                                                                                                                       with covariates                     Linear
                                                               Baseline             Covariates                      Linear      Quadratic             muncipality trends
                                                                 (1)             (2)         (3)                      (4)           (5)                      (6)
            Panel A:        Unskilled                         0.691***        0.690***    0.691***                 0.697***      0.697***                 0.696***
            Employment rate                                   (0.00262)       (0.00143) (0.00129)                 (0.000966)     (0.00104)               (0.000927)
                            Skilled                           0.734***        0.733***    0.733***                 0.739***      0.739***                 0.738***
                                                              (0.00480)       (0.00379) (0.00363)                  (0.00233)     (0.00231)                (0.00238)
                                        Availability×
                                           Unskilled          0.000794         0.00170          0.00140          -0.00637***        -0.00679***             -0.00522**
                                                              (0.00252)       (0.00122)        (0.00125)          (0.00245)          (0.00257)               (0.00245)
                                              Skilled         0.0208**        0.0217***        0.0214***           0.0141**           0.0138**               0.0153**
                                                              (0.00920)       (0.00797)        (0.00775)          (0.00595)          (0.00588)               (0.00596)
            Panel B:                    Unskilled             2.939***        2.939***         2.940***            2.943***           2.943***               2.945***
            Log hourly wage                                   (0.00455)       (0.00391)        (0.00355)          (0.00174)          (0.00181)               (0.00197)
                                        Skilled               3.169***        3.170***         3.170***            3.174***           3.174***               3.175***
                                                              (0.00420)       (0.00361)        (0.00327)          (0.00173)          (0.00185)               (0.00190)
                                        Availability×
                                           Unskilled           -0.00622       -0.00714*        -0.00790**         -0.0119***         -0.0118***             -0.0140***
                                                              (0.00455)       (0.00376)         (0.00336)          (0.00190)          (0.00199)              (0.00208)
                                              Skilled         0.0178**        0.0168***         0.0161***          0.0116***         0.0117***              0.00924**
                                                              (0.00720)       (0.00639)         (0.00592)          (0.00335)          (0.00347)              (0.00366)
                                                                                  √                 √                  √                  √                      √
                                        Demographic                                                 √                  √                  √                      √
                                        Industry
                                                                             * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: All regressions include fixed effects for year, municipality and industry, and controls for gender, years of experience and years of experience squared. When estimating the employment
effects, we consider the full population of individuals between the ages of 18 and 67. The impact on hourly wages pertain to workers aged 18-67 who are recorded in the wage statistics
surveys. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The standard errors are clustered at the municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity. Column 2 adds demographic
controls to the baseline model, including municipality-level information on average household income, mean years of schooling, share of population residing in a densely populated locality,
size of population and level of unemployment. Column 3 also includes industry controls, consisting of municipality averages of revenues, intermediates, capital stock, number of workers and
wage bills as well as employment share in manufacturing, employment share in wholesale, employment share in services, and shares of wages and workers by skill level. Columns 4 and 5
interact linear and quadratic time trends with baseline values of these covariates. Column 6 includes municipality-specific linear time trends.
Table B2. Specification checks for intention-to-treat effects on output elasticities

                                                                                                        Time interacted
                                                                                                         with covariates                    Linear
                                                    Baseline              Covariates                   Linear    Quadratic            municipality trends
                                                       (1)              (2)         (3)                  (4)         (5)                      (6)
                            Intercept              3.880***         3.901*** 3.876***                3.897***     3.896***                3.899***
                                                    (0.0965)         (0.0964)    (0.0945)             (0.0961)    (0.0962)                 (0.0967)
                            Capital                0.100***         0.101*** 0.101***                0.101***     0.101***                0.101***
                                                   (0.00495)        (0.00499) (0.00486)              (0.00495) (0.00496)                  (0.00501)
                            Unskilled              0.576***         0.575*** 0.577***                0.576***     0.576***                0.576***
                                                    (0.0116)         (0.0116)    (0.0116)             (0.0117)    (0.0117)                 (0.0119)
                            Skilled                0.136***         0.136*** 0.135***                0.135***     0.135***                0.134***
                                                   (0.00678)        (0.00680) (0.00670)              (0.00675) (0.00676)                  (0.00689)
                            Availability ×
                              Intercept            -0.500*** -0.525***              -0.498***       -0.524***        -0.522***               -0.527***
                                                     (0.111)   (0.111)                (0.107)         (0.110)          (0.110)                 (0.112)
                               Capital              -0.00169  -0.00232               -0.00249        -0.00282         -0.00287                -0.00284
                                                   (0.00750) (0.00752)              (0.00736)       (0.00749)        (0.00749)               (0.00757)
                               Unskilled             -0.0226   -0.0216                -0.0238         -0.0231          -0.0232                 -0.0232
                                                    (0.0234)  (0.0234)               (0.0232)        (0.0234)         (0.0235)                (0.0238)
                               Skilled             0.0755*** 0.0761***              0.0766***       0.0774***        0.0776***               0.0781***
                                                    (0.0166)  (0.0167)               (0.0166)        (0.0167)         (0.0167)                (0.0169)
                            Controls                                     √               √                √                √                      √
                            Demographic                                                  √                √                √                      √
                            Industry
                                                                             * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: This table uses the population of joint-stock firms. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The standard errors are clustered at the municipality level and robust
to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include fixed effects for year, municipality and industry. Column (2) adds demographic controls to the baseline model, including municipality-level
information on average household income, mean years of schooling, share of population residing in a densely populated locality, size of population and level of unemployment. Column 3
also includes industry controls, consisting of municipality averages of revenues, intermediates, capital stock, number of workers and wage bills as well as employment share in manufacturing,
employment share in wholesale, employment share in services, and shares of wages and workers by skill level. Columns 4 and 5 interact linear and quadratic time trends with baseline values
of these covariates. Column 6 includes municipality-specific linear time trends.
Table B3. Intention-to-treat effects on labor outcomes: Clustering and regional level

                                                                   Log hourly wage                                                       Employment
                                                  Baseline       Cluster at region Regional level                      Baseline      Cluster at region Regional level
                                                    (1)                 (2)             (3)                              (4)                (5)             (6)
          Unskilled                              2.939***            2.939***        2.927***                         0.691***           0.691***        0.686***
                                                 (0.00455)          (0.00441)        (0.00882)                        (0.00262)         (0.00268)        (0.00736)
          Skilled                                3.169***            3.169***        3.160***                         0.734***           0.734***        0.730***
                                                 (0.00420)          (0.00287)        (0.00622)                        (0.00480)         (0.00534)        (0.00857)
          Availability×
                                Unskilled         -0.00622            -0.00622*                 0.00912               0.000794             0.000794                 0.00773
                                                 (0.00455)            (0.00326)                (0.00891)              (0.00252)            (0.00278)               (0.00887)
                                Skilled          0.0178**             0.0178***                0.0298***              0.0208**             0.0208**                 0.0255*
                                                 (0.00720)            (0.00660)                 (0.0111)              (0.00920)            (0.00881)                (0.0130)

                                                                             * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: When estimating the employment effects, we consider the full population of individuals between the ages of 18 and 67. The impact on hourly wages pertain to workers aged 18-67 who
are recorded in the wage statistics surveys. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The standard errors in columns 1 and 4 are clustered at the municipality level and in
columns 2-3 and 5-6 at the regional level (see Bhuller, 2009). In columns 3 and 6 we measure availability rates as the average availability rate at the regional level. All regressions include
fixed effects for year, municipality and industry and controls for gender, years of experience and years of experience squared.
Table B4. Intention-to-treat effects on output elasticities: Clustering, and regional level.

                                            Baseline        Cluster at region          Regional level
                                               (1)                 (2)                       (3)
                   Intercept               3.880***             3.880***                 3.975***
                                            (0.0965)             (0.113)                   (0.137)
                   Capital                 0.100***             0.100***                 0.117***
                                           (0.00495)           (0.00506)                 (0.00836)
                   Unskilled               0.576***             0.576***                 0.543***
                                            (0.0116)            (0.0129)                  (0.0170)
                   Skilled                 0.136***             0.136***                 0.144***
                                           (0.00678)           (0.00668)                  (0.0104)
                   Availability ×
                     Intercept            -0.500***              -0.500***                -0.721***
                                            (0.111)               (0.0944)                  (0.152)
                       Capital             -0.00169               -0.00169                  -0.0139
                                          (0.00750)              (0.00681)                (0.00913)
                       Unskilled            -0.0226                -0.0226                 -0.00135
                                           (0.0234)               (0.0237)                 (0.0228)
                       Skilled            0.0755***              0.0755***                0.0890***
                                           (0.0166)               (0.0197)                 (0.0230)
                                            * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: This table uses the population of joint-stock firms. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The
standard errors in columns 1 are clustered at the municipality level and in columns 2 and 3 at the regional level (see Bhuller
(2009)). In column 3 we measure availability rates as the average availability rate the regional level. All regressions include
fixed effects for year, municipality and industry.
Table B5. Intention-to-treat effects on output elasticities: LP approach and fixed inputs

                                              Full sample                    Firms observed in 2001
                                                                                            Fixed
                                        Baseline             LP               Baseline     inputs
                                           (1)               (2)                 (3)         (4)
                Intercept              3.880***          5.935***             3.624***   3.730***
                                        (0.0965)           (0.164)             (0.105)     (0.123)
                Capital                0.100***          0.107***            0.0995*** 0.0992***
                                       (0.00495)           (0.028)           (0.00507)   (0.00560)
                Unskilled              0.576***          0.460***             0.586***   0.589***
                                        (0.0116)          (0.0108)            (0.0119)    (0.0139)
                Skilled                0.136***          0.104***            0.145***    0.148***
                                       (0.00678)         (0.00536)           (0.00650)   (0.00681)
                Availability ×
                  Intercept            -0.500***          -0.186*            -0.814***          0.00954
                                         (0.111)          (0.110)              (0.126)           (0.121)
                   Capital              -0.00169         -0.00854             -0.0126*           0.0124
                                       (0.00750)        (0.00563)            (0.00696)         (0.00901)
                   Unskilled             -0.0226          -0.0236             0.00818          -0.0548**
                                        (0.0234)         (0.0200)             (0.0247)          (0.0216)
                   Skilled             0.0755***        0.0561***            0.0831***         0.0501***
                                        (0.0166)         (0.0128)             (0.0167)          (0.0153)
                                            * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: This table uses the population of joint-stock firms but columns 3 and 4 restrict the sample to joint-stock firms which
are observed in 2001. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. In column 2 we apply the Levinsohn Petrin
method and in column 4 we use 2001 values of inputs in every year. The standard errors are clustered at the municipality
level and robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include fixed effects for year, municipality and industry.
Table B6. Intention-to-treat effects on output elasticities in tradable and non-tradable
sectors.

                                                                          Above/below median
                                            Baseline           Trade/Revenues      Geographic concentration
                                                              High        Low         High         Low
                                                (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)
     Intercept                              3.880***       3.537***    4.470***    3.781***     3.973***
                                             (0.0965)        (0.122)     (0.137)     (0.160)      (0.110)
     Capital                                0.100***       0.108*** 0.0944*** 0.115***          0.0938***
                                            (0.00495)      (0.00678) (0.00715) (0.00676)        (0.00695)
     Unskilled                              0.576***       0.557***    0.569***    0.565***     0.579***
                                             (0.0116)       (0.0153)    (0.0148)    (0.0191)     (0.0124)
     Skilled                                0.136***       0.185*** 0.0878*** 0.148***           0.125***
                                            (0.00678)       (0.0108)   (0.00875)    (0.0102)    (0.00709)
     Availability ×
       Intercept                           -0.500***        -0.310**      -0.958***      -0.461***         -0.509***
                                             (0.111)         (0.142)        (0.157)        (0.168)           (0.129)
         Capital                            -0.00169        -0.0147*        0.00815       -0.00744          -0.00515
                                           (0.00750)       (0.00828)      (0.00971)      (0.00907)         (0.00815)
         Unskilled                           -0.0226         -0.0214       -0.00152        -0.0387          -0.00513
                                            (0.0234)        (0.0272)       (0.0223)       (0.0308)          (0.0190)
         Skilled                           0.0755***       0.0669***      0.0887***      0.0926***         0.0621***
                                            (0.0166)        (0.0193)       (0.0185)       (0.0214)          (0.0119)
     Mean of tradability measure                               0.28           0.02        0.00024            0.00007
     N                                      149,676          74,619          75,057         68,379           81,297
                                            * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: This table uses the population of joint-stock firms. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The
standard errors are clustered at the municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include fixed effects
for year, municipality and industry. We use two measures of tradability. In columns 2 and 3, we measure tradability in
each 4-digit industry by dividing total levels of exports and imports by the value added of firms. In columns 4 and 5,
we follow Jensen and Kletzer (2005) in measuring tradability by the geographic concentration of an industry, defined as
the Herfindahl index of employment shares across municipalities in each 4-digit industry. For both measures, we estimate
separately for firms in industries with values of tradability above and below the median in the baseline firm sample.
Table B7. Intention-to-treat effects on wages in tradable and non-tradable sectors.

                                                                                                         Above/below median
                                                                          Baseline             Trade/Revenues      Geographic concentration
                                                                                             High        Low        High          Low
                                                                       (1)                    (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)
                                      Dependent variable: Log hourly wage
                                      Unskilled                     2.939***              3.007***        2.976***       2.991***         2.959***
                                                                   (0.00455)              (0.00438)       (0.00291)      (0.00412)        (0.00214)
                                      Skilled                       3.169***              3.296***        3.149***       3.221***         3.162***
                                                                   (0.00420)              (0.00695)       (0.00868)      (0.00866)        (0.00732)
                                      Availability ×
                                        Unskilled                   -0.00622              0.000217       -0.00924***      0.00166          -0.00161
                                                                   (0.00455)              (0.00494)       (0.00312)      (0.00403)        (0.00250)
                                        Skilled                     0.0178**              0.0230**        0.0422***      0.0275**         0.0463***
                                                                   (0.00720)               (0.0103)        (0.0140)       (0.0133)         (0.0120)
                                      Mean of tradability measure                            0.45            0.04           0.41             0.08
                                      N                            8,759,388               989,470        1,522,999      2,284,875        1,576,368
                                                                            * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: We include workers aged 18-67 who are recorded in the wage statistics surveys. In columns 2-9 we restrict the sample to workers employed by one of the firms in our sample. (Un)Skilled
comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The standard errors are clustered at the municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include fixed effects for year,
municipality and industry. We use two measures of tradability. In columns 2, 3, 6 and 7 we measure tradability in each 4-digit industry by dividing total levels of exports and imports by
the value added of firms. In columns 4, 5, 8 and 9, we follow Jensen and Kletzer (2005) in measuring tradability by the geographic concentration of an industry, defined as the Herfindahl
index of employment shares across municipalities in each 4-digit industry. For both measures, we estimate separately for workers in industries with values of tradability above and below the
median in the baseline firm sample.
Table B8. Intention-to-treat effects on E-commerce and computerization.

                                                                             Estimate         Dependent mean
                                                                                (2)                (3)
        Panel A: E-commerce:
        Dep. variable: Receiving orders online                                -0.00265                 0.26
                                                                              (0.0319)

        Panel B: Technical upgrading
        Dep. variable: Share of workers using a PC                            -0.00217                 0.58
                                                                              (0.0228)
                                            * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: This table uses the survey sample of joint-stock firms. Sampling weights are used to ensure representative results for
the population of joint-stock firms.All regressions include fixed effects for year, municipality and industry. Standard errors
are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered at the municipality level. The standard errors are clustered at the municipality
level and robust to heteroskedasticity.




Table B9. Intention-to-treat effects on output elasticities excluding telecom firms and IT
consultancy companies.

                                            Baseline        No telecom          No IT consultancy
                    Intercept              3.880***          3.876***                3.829***
                                            (0.0965)          (0.0957)               (0.0987)
                    Capital                0.100***          0.101***               0.0985***
                                           (0.00495)         (0.00499)              (0.00504)
                    Unskilled              0.576***          0.575***                0.586***
                                            (0.0116)          (0.0116)               (0.0119)
                    Skilled                0.136***          0.137***               0.130***
                                           (0.00678)         (0.00678)              (0.00698)
                    Availability ×
                      Intercept            -0.500***         -0.476***                -0.483***
                                             (0.111)           (0.106)                  (0.111)
                        Capital             -0.00169          -0.00380                 -0.00208
                                           (0.00750)         (0.00747)                (0.00770)
                        Unskilled            -0.0226           -0.0215                  -0.0224
                                            (0.0234)          (0.0233)                 (0.0229)
                        Skilled            0.0755***         0.0743***                0.0747***
                                            (0.0166)          (0.0166)                 (0.0160)
                    N                        149,676           148,973                 145,282
                                            * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: Column 1 uses the population of joint-stock firms. Column 2 excludes telecom firms (NACE code 64), whereas
column 3 excludes IT consultancy firms (NACE code 72). (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The
standard errors are clustered at the municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include fixed effects
for year, municipality and industry.
Table B10. Intention-to-treat effects on labor outcomes excluding telecom firms and IT
consultancy companies.

                                                                             No telecom         No computer
                                                             Baseline        employees            workers
                                                               (1)               (2)                (3)
          Panel A:        Unskilled                         0.691***          0.689***           0.690***
          Employment rate                                   (0.00262)         (0.00266)          (0.00268)
                          Skilled                           0.734***          0.731***           0.732***
                                                            (0.00480)         (0.00477)          (0.00486)
                                      Availability×
                                        Unskilled           0.000794           0.00109              0.00117
                                                            (0.00252)         (0.00255)            (0.00257)
                                          Skilled           0.0208**          0.0211**             0.0212**
                                                            (0.00920)         (0.00924)            (0.00932)
          Panel B:                    Unskilled             2.939***          2.935***             2.936***
          Log hourly wage                                   (0.00455)         (0.00443)            (0.00450)
                                      Skilled               3.169***          3.165***             3.166***
                                                            (0.00420)         (0.00410)            (0.00423)
                                      Availability×
                                        Unskilled            -0.00622          -0.00698             -0.00665
                                                            (0.00455)         (0.00439)            (0.00444)
                                          Skilled           0.0178**          0.0180**             0.0187**
                                                            (0.00720)         (0.00716)            (0.00737)
                                                                 √                 √                    √
                                      Experience                 √                 √                    √
                                      Female
                                            * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: In column 1, when estimating the employment effects, we consider the full population of individuals between the ages
of 18 and 67. The impact on hourly wages pertain to workers aged 18-67 who are recorded in the wage statistics surveys.
Column 2 excludes workers in telecom firms (NACE code 64), whereas column 3 excludes workers in IT consultancy firms
(NACE code 72). (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The standard errors are clustered at the
municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include fixed effects for year, municipality and industry
and controls for gender, years of experience and years of experience squared.
Table B11. First stage regressions

                                                                  Internet ×         Internet × Internet ×
          Dependent variable:                    Internet            Capital          Unskilled    Skilled
                                                    (1)                (2)                (3)        (4)
          Intercept                             -0.897***          -15.27***          -15.56***  -13.17***
                                                  (0.190)            (2.162)            (2.259)    (2.101)
          Capital                                 0.0142            0.354***             0.182      0.163
                                                 (0.0100)            (0.123)            (0.123)    (0.105)
          Unskilled                              0.0428*           0.646***            0.860***    0.598**
                                                 (0.0219)            (0.246)            (0.253)    (0.233)
          Skilled                               0.0665***          0.849***            0.863***   0.905***
                                                 (0.0151)            (0.173)            (0.187)    (0.152)
          Availability ×
            Intercept                             0.919***          5.630**            5.034**            4.311*
                                                   (0.215)           (2.431)            (2.535)           (2.342)
             Capital                              -0.00392          0.603***            -0.0512           -0.0402
                                                  (0.0110)           (0.135)            (0.135)           (0.116)
             Unskilled                             -0.0197            -0.344             0.298             -0.283
                                                  (0.0245)           (0.277)            (0.283)           (0.260)
             Skilled                             -0.0375**         -0.515***           -0.492**             0.189
                                                  (0.0166)           (0.187)            (0.203)           (0.163)
          F-value (instruments)                      41.4              56.7               38.5               28.6
                                             * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: This table uses the survey sample of joint-stock firms. Sampling weights are used to ensure representative results
for the population of joint-stock firms. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The standard errors are
clustered at the municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include fixed effects for year, municipality
and industry and controls for gender, years of experience and years of experience squared.
Table B12. Broadband adoption and technological change: Levinsohn-Petrin

                                                                   2 skills            3 skills
                                                                     (1)                 (2)
                              Intercept                           4.225***            4.911***
                                                                   (0.535)             (0.505)
                              Capital                             0.216***            0.236***
                                                                   (0.040)             (0.039)
                              Unskilled                           0.537***
                                                                  (0.0372)
                                 Low skilled                                          0.278***
                                                                                      (0.0283)
                                 Medium skilled                                       0.202***
                                                                                      (0.0236)
                              Skilled                               0.0328            0.0500**
                                                                   (0.0236)           (0.0241)


                              Availability ×
                                Intercept                           -0.0511              -0.300
                                                                    (0.497)             (0.404)
                                 Capital                             0.0110            0.00531
                                                                   (0.0251)            (0.0255)
                                 Unskilled                        -0.151***
                                                                   (0.0530)
                                     Low skilled                                      -0.0830*
                                                                                      (0.0426)
                                     Medium skilled                                    -0.0188
                                                                                      (0.0365)
                                 Skilled                          0.161***            0.127***
                                                                  (0.0365)            (0.0360)

                                             * p < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Note: This table uses the survey sample of joint-stock firms. Sampling weights are used to ensure representative results
for the population of joint-stock firms. (Un)Skilled comprises workers with(out) a college degree. The standard errors are
clustered at the municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include fixed effects for year, municipality
and industry.
Table B13. Examples of workplace tasks

                                      Task measures
 Routine                            Abstract                     Manual

 Record-keeping                     Forming/testing hypotheses   Picking/sorting
 Calculation                        Medical diagnosis            Repetitive assembly
 Repetitive customer service        Legal writing                Janitorial services
 (e.g., bank teller)                Persuading/selling           Truck driving
                                    Managing others

Source: Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003).
Appendix C: Placebo test

This appendix performs a placebo test, exploiting that under the exclusion restriction,
there can be no intention-to-treat effect for firms that were not induced to adopt broadband
because of the increase in availability.
    Recall that zmt ∈ [0, 1] is a continuous measure of the availability rate to households
in municipality m in year t. Our survey data shows that some firms had installed their
own broadband networks prior to the rollout. In the terminology of Imbens and Angrist
(1994), these firms are always takers, as they have adopted broadband even when zkt = 0.
By comparison, firms that do not adopt broadband internet even when zkt = 1 are never
takers.
    In Table C1, we re-estimate model (1) on the subsample of always takers and never
takers. A significant intention-to-treat effect on this subsample would be a violation of
the exclusion restriction, that increased availabaility affects productivity and wages only
through broadband adoption in firms, and not directly in any other way. By contrast, we
find no significant relationship between labor productivity and availability rates among
always and never takers, lending support to the exclusion restriction. In Table C2, we
perform the same excercise for wages. Again, we find no evidence of a significant effect
of availability rates on the subsample of workers in firms that are always takers or never
takers.
Table C1. Placebo test: Output elasticities

                                                                         Always/never
                                                            All           takers only
                                                            (1)               (2)
                              Intercept                 3.880***           5.096***
                                                         (0.0965)           (0.809)
                              Capital                   0.100***           0.114***
                                                        (0.00495)          (0.0313)
                              Unskilled                 0.576***           0.505***
                                                         (0.0116)          (0.0869)
                              Skilled                   0.136***           0.171***
                                                        (0.00678)          (0.0295)

                              Availability ×
                                Intercept               -0.500***              -0.212
                                                          (0.111)             (0.709)
                                  Capital                -0.00169             -0.0230
                                                        (0.00750)            (0.0345)
                                  Unskilled               -0.0226              0.0295
                                                         (0.0234)            (0.0860)
                                  Skilled               0.0755***            0.00944
                                                         (0.0166)            (0.0278)
                              Observations                149,676               2,233
Note: The first column uses the population of joint-stock firms. The second column restricts the sample to firms that
have adopted broadband even when the household availability rate is zero (always takers) and firms that have not adopted
broadband even when the household availability rate is one (never takers). All regressions include fixed effects for year,
industry and municipality. The standard errors are clustered at the municipality level and robust to heteroskedasticity.
Table C2. Placebo test: Labor outcomes

                                                            Log hourly wage
                                                                  Always/never
                                                           All     takers only
                                                           (1)          (2)
                                  Unskilled             2.939***     2.916***
                                                        (0.00455)    (0.0105)
                                  Skilled               3.169***     3.171***
                                                        (0.00420)    (0.0125)
                                  Availability×
                                    Unskilled            -0.00622             0.0139
                                                        (0.00455)            (0.0146)
                                      Skilled           0.0178**              0.0135
                                                        (0.00720)            (0.0188)
                                  Observations          8,759,388             99,124
Note: In column 1, we consider workers aged 18-67 who are recorded in the wage statistics surveys. The second column
restricts the sample to workers in firms that have adopted broadband even when the household availability rate is zero
(always takers) and firms that have not adopted broadband even when the household availability rate is one (never takers).
All regressions include fixed effects for year, industry and municipality. The standard errors are clustered at the municipality
level and robust to heteroskedasticity.




Appendix D: Changes in marginal productivity vs. wages

To compare the changes in marginal productivity and wages, we rewrite the intention-to-
treat model in equation (1) such that all variables are in levels. Abstracting from fixed
effects and control variables, this equation corresponds to a Cobb-Douglas production
function with exponents that potentially change with the availability of broadband internet:

                                                 δk0 +zmt δk1 δu0 +zmt δu1 δs0 +zmt δs1
                             Yimt = eα0 +α1 zmt Kimt         Uimt         Simt          ,                                  (6)

where Yimt represents value added of firm i in municipality m in period t, Kimt , Uimt
and Simt are inputs of capital, unskilled, and skilled labor. In terms of equation (1),
(α0 , δk0 , δs0 , δu0 ) is the coefficient vector δ0 , and (α1 , δk1 , δs1 , δu1 ) is the coefficient vector δ1 .
     The marginal productivity of skilled labor is defined as

                                                                      Yimt
                                                  (δs0 + zmt δs1 )
                                                                      Simt

where δs0 + zδs1 denotes the output elasticity of skilled labor.
    To measure the pass-through, we compare a situation with no broadband availability
(zmt = 0) to a situation with full availability (zmt = 1). In particular, we use the intention-
to-treat effects on output elasticites and labor outcomes to compare the proportional
change in the marginal productivity of skilled workers to the proportional change in the
hourly wages of skilled workers. The latter is given directly from the intention-to-treat
effects on wages. To compute the former, we use the estimates reported in Table 4 to
calculate the predicted change in output elasticitiy of skilled labor and output Yimt . To
calculate the predicted change in the wage bills Simt , we use the intention-to-treat effects
on hourly wages and employment. In all calculations, we use the data on firms and
workers in the population of joint-stock firms. Our calculation suggest that around 20
percent of the increase in marginal productivity of skilled workers is passed through to
their wages. When we perform the same calculation for unskilled labor, we find an even
smaller pass-through of changes in marginal productivity to wages.
Appendix E: Levinsohn Petrin approach

The system of equations given in (3) and (4) is used to estimate production functions
where firms can change their technology by adopting broadband internet. To address the
concern that the factor inputs in ximt might be correlated with broadband adoption and
unobserved productivity, we follow LP and take a more structural approach to address
this threat to identifitcation of the production function.
    LP use a structural model of an optimizing firm to derive the conditions under which
intermediate inputs can be used to proxy for unobserved productivity in the production
function. The error term εimt in (3) is assumed to be additively separable in a transmitted
component (ωimt ) and an i.i.d. component (χimt ). The key difference between ωimt and
χimt is that the former is a state variable, and therefore impacts the firm’s decision rule,
while the latter has no impact on the firm’s decision. The intermediate input demand
function depends on the firm-specific state variables, ωimt and capital (kimt ),

                                         aimt = gt (ωimt , kimt ).                                    (7)

and it must be monotonic in ω for all relevant k.32 The monotonicity condition for
intermediate inputs means that conditional on capital, profit maximizing behavior must
lead more productive firms to use more intermediate inputs.
    The monotonicity allows gt (ωimt , kimt ) to be inverted to yield ω as a function of
intermediate inputs and capital, ωimt = ωt (aimt , kimt ). By expressing the unobserved
productivity variable ωimt as a function of observables, we are able to control for ωimt in
the second stage equation:

           yimt = x0imt β0 + Dimt x0imt β1 + wimt
                                              0
                                                  θ + λm + τt + ωt (aimt , kimt ) + χimt .            (8)

where β0 is a vector consisting of (α0 , βk0 , βs0 , βu0 ), namely the pre roll-out intercept and
output elasticities of capital, skilled labor, and unskilled labor. The vector β1 is a vector
consisting of (α1 , βk1 , βs1 , βu1 ) and measures the change in the intercept and the interaction
effects between the input factors and broadband adoption. As in Olley and Pakes (1996)
and LP, we use a polynomial expansion in a and k to approximate ωt (·). By simultaneous
estimation of the first stage equations in (4) and the second stage equation in (8), we obtain
consistent estimates of βu0 , βs0 , βk1 , βu1 , βs1 , and Φt (aimt , kimt ) = βk0 kimt + ωt (aimt , kimt ).
    While these output elasticities are sufficient to assess how broadband adoption affects
labor productivity, we need to identify βk0 to recover the full shift in production tech-
nology. Because kimt is collinear with the non-parametric function ωt (aimt , kimt ), further
  32
     For simplicity, we assume as Olley and Pakes (1996) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) that capital is
the only state variable over which the firm has control, while intermediates, labor and broadband internet
are viewed as non-dynamic input factors.
assumptions are necessary.33
   Assuming that ωimt follows a first-order Markow process, we can write

                                    ωimt = E [ωimt |ωimt−1 ] + ξimt .

This simply decomposes ωimt into its conditional expectation at time t − 1, E [ωimt |ωimt−1 ],
and a deviation from that expectation, ξimt . If the capital stock is pre-determined and
current investment (which will react to productivity shocks) takes one period before it
comes productive, it follows that

                                            E [ξimt kimt ] = 0.

This is the moment which LP use to identify the capital coefficient. Roughly speaking,
variation in kimt conditional on ωimt−1 is the exogenous variation used for identification.
To operationalize this approach in a GMM context, note that given a guess on the capital
coefficient βk0 , we can rewrite unobserved productivity as

                                     ωimt (βk0 ) = Φ̂imt − βk0 kimt .

Given these ωimt (βk0 ), we compute ξimt by non-parametrically regressing ωimt (βk0 )’s on
ωimt−1 (βk0 )’s and a constant term; we then form the residual

                              ξimt (βk0 ) = ωimt (βk0 ) − Ψ̂ (ωimt−1 (βk0 ))

where Ψ̂ (ωimt−1 (βk0 )) are predicted values from the non-parametric regression.
   The ξimt (βk0 )’s are used to form a sample analogue to the above moment. i.e.

                                      1 1 XX
                                             ξimt (βk0 ) · kimt
                                      TN t i

where N denotes number of firms and T number of time periods. We estimate β k0 by
minimizing the GMM criterion function
                                                                               2
                                                   Ti1
                                          1 1 X X
                         Q (βk0 ) = min                ξimt (βk0 ) · kimt 
                                    βk0   N Ti1 i t=Ti0

where i indexing firms and Ti0 and Ti1 index the second and last period in which firm i is
observed.
   Because our baseline sample is a repeated cross-section (rather than panel data), we
adjust the above estimation procedure. Exploiting the random sampling of firms, we can
  33
    βk1 is identified as the interaction of capital with Dimt provides independent variation. Note also
that the intercept in the production function is not separately identified from the mean of E [ωimt |ωimt−1 ]
without some further restriction.
identify βk0 from the moment

                                       h        i
                                     E ξ¯mt , k mt = 0.

where the municipality average of a variable is denoted by upper bar. By applying the
above procedure to our panel data at the municipality level, we obtain the GMM criterion
function                                                                 2
                                            T
                                  1 1        m1 q

                                                   Nmt ξ¯mt (βk0 ) · k̄mt 
                                         X  X
                 Q (βk0 ) = min 
                            βk0   M Tm1 m t=Tm0

where Tm0 and Tm1 index the second and last period municipality m is observed and Nmt
is the number of firms in municipality m in period t. To obtain standard errors on βk0 , we
use bootstrap while clustering by municipality.
