                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          EXPLORATION FOR HUMAN CAPITAL:
                        EVIDENCE FROM THE MBA LABOR MARKET

                                         Camelia M. Kuhnen
                                            Paul Oyer

                                        Working Paper 20825
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20825


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




Research support for this study was provided by Stanford University, Northwestern University, and
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Camelia M. Kuhnen and Paul Oyer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Exploration for Human Capital: Evidence from the MBA Labor Market
Camelia M. Kuhnen and Paul Oyer
NBER Working Paper No. 20825
January 2015
JEL No. G31,J44,M51

                                               ABSTRACT

We empirically investigate the effect of uncertainty on corporate hiring. Using novel data from the
labor market for MBA graduates, we show that uncertainty regarding how well job candidates fit with
a firm’s industry hinders hiring, and that firms value probationary work arrangements that provide
the option to learn more about potential full-time employees. The detrimental effect of uncertainty
on hiring is more pronounced when firms face greater firing and replacement costs, and when they
face less direct competition from other similar firms. These results suggest that firms faced with uncertainty
use similar considerations when making hiring decisions as when making decisions regarding investment
in physical capital.


Camelia M. Kuhnen
University of North Carolina
Kenan-Flagler Business School
300 Kenan Center Drive, MC #4407
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
camelia_kuhnen@kenan-flagler.unc.edu

Paul Oyer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pauloyer@stanford.edu
1         Introduction
Human capital is a critical asset for firms, yet the process by which companies decide whom
to hire is still not well understood. The decision to hire people is similar to the decision to
invest in physical assets, as both types of investments are generally made under uncertainty
regarding their future productivity. Here we combine insights from the investments literature
in finance and from the labor and personnel economics literature to conduct an empirical
analysis of the process by which firms select employees.1
        Studying the MBA hiring market, we find that uncertainty regarding the productivity
of potential employees, which we capture through a lack of prior experience in a hiring
firm’s industry, has a negative effect on firms’ hiring. We document that corporations value
temporary employment arrangements that provide the option to learn about the productivity
of workers before making long-term hiring decisions. The hindering effect of uncertainty on
corporate hiring is more pronounced when firing and replacement costs are lower (as they
are in the case of summer interns), and when firms face less competition from other firms in
their industry. The patterns in hiring that we document here are similar in many ways to
those shown by the literature studying the effects of uncertainty on corporate investment in
physical assets.2
        Our empirical setting is the labor market for students at a large and prestigious MBA
program. In our sample, a large fraction of job applicants have unknown industry fit, which
creates uncertainty regarding their future productivity. We find that firms prefer to make
offers to candidates characterized by low uncertainty – namely, those individuals who have
worked in the firms’ industry. These applicants’ odds of success at getting a job offer are
1.71 times higher than those of applicants characterized by more uncertainty regarding their
industry fit.
        We document that employers value the option to learn about candidates lacking industry
experience by making significant use of cheap probationary employment – namely, summer
intern positions after the students’ first year in the MBA program – which allow the ter-
mination of revealed poor matches at low cost. We document that separation rates at the

    1
    See Oyer and Schaefer (2011) for a review of the successes and limitations of the economics literature
on employer-employee matching. For empirical evidence on the selection of senior executives, see Bandiera,
Guiso, Prat and Sadun (2010), Graham, Harvey and Puri (2010) and Kaplan, Klebanov and Sorensen (2012).
    2
        See Grenadier (2002), Bloom, Bond and Van Reenen (2007) and references therein.


                                                      1
end of the summer are 19% higher for interns without industry expertise relative to their
more experienced peers, indicating that probationary employment is used to learn about
candidates’ industry fit.
   Consistent with the idea that exploration of riskier workers is costlier past the proba-
tionary employment stage, we show that the preference that firms have toward hiring less
uncertain applicants is significantly stronger at the full-time recruiting stage, compared to
the internship stage. At the full-time stage, a low uncertainty candidate has 2.38 times
better odds of getting an offer relative to a higher uncertainty applicant. At the internship
stage, the odds are only 1.66 times better for the low uncertainty applicants relative to the
rest. We also document that the preference towards certainty when hiring is particularly
high for firms that are less prestigious or smaller, and when firms face fewer competitors
recruiting from the same pool of applicants.
   Overall, these results suggest that uncertainty hinders hiring, and that this effect is
magnified by the costs that firms face for firing poor matches or finding replacements, and
diminished by the degree of competition for talent that they face.
   Probationary or temporary employment arrangements similar to the summer internships
we consider are widespread and continue to gain importance. This type of employment has
been shown to be a stepping stone to permanent employment, accounting for a significant
percentage of jobs across the world: for example, 10% in the U.K. (Booth, Francesconi
and Frank (2002)) and 35% in Spain (Guell and Petrongolo (2007)). Using U.S. survey
data, Houseman (2001) reports that temporary and part-time workers are employed by 46%
and 72% of business establishments, respectively. While providing firms with flexibility to
weather changes in the economic environment (Segal and Sullivan (1997), Levin (2002)),
temporary and contract employment is also valued for offering firms the option to learn
about the quality of workers. In the U.S. survey sample constructed by Houseman (2001),
21% of employers using temporary workers from agencies and 15% using part-time workers
cite screening as an important reason for using these types of work arrangements.
   In this paper we focus on a specific form of employee uncertainty – the unknown degree
to which an individual will be a good fit for a firm’s industry. There are other characteristics
of workers that may be uncertain, including general ability traits that cannot be fully de-
termined in the hiring process and the degree to which a potential hire fits the specific firm
that considers hiring her. We focus on industry fit uncertainty because we can measure the


                                               2
degree to which a candidate’s fit with a particular industry is known by firms, and because
we observe significant variation in the data regarding industry fit uncertainty.
       In human capital investments, concerns about the inherent heterogeneity of human cap-
ital add to those brought by uncertainty regarding product market demand. Our data allow
us to focus on firms’ option to learn as they determine the value of these assets (i.e., the
employees) over time rather than on the option to wait for information revelation in the
product market.3
       As documented by Oyer and Schaefer (2011), few prior papers have studied firms’ strate-
gic choice about how much risk to take when hiring, and most of this work is theoretical.
One paper in this area is Lazear (1998), which presents a model of the option to learn in
a labor market context, and states conditions under which hiring risky workers can be a
profit-maximizing strategy for firms. Given the institutional context we study empirically,
our setting differs from that in Lazear (1998) in a few key ways. We focus on industry-
specific productivity and study an environment where firms post and pay the same wage to
all employees. While few empirical papers have studied how much and why firms choose to
hire workers with uncertain productivity (see Bollinger and Hotchkiss (2003) and Hendricks,
DeBrock and Koenker (2003) for examples from sports markets), much of the extant labor
literature takes it as a given that firms take substantial risks when hiring workers. For ex-
ample, our work builds on the large literatures regarding matching and employer learning.
However, while most prior work focuses on firms learning about an employee’s ability or the
quality of the match to the firm, we focus on workers’ match to an industry. Our work is
inspired by the classic Jovanovic (1979) matching model, the learning models in Waldman
(1984), Greenwald (1986), and Farber and Gibbons (1996), and the idea in Prescott and
Visscher (1980) that organization capital is enhanced by the ability to learn more about
workers’ characteristics, before assigning them to specific production tasks, by observing
their performance in an apprenticeship-like endeavor.

   3
     Stein and Stone (2013) show empirically that product demand-side uncertainty depresses aggregate
hiring. Also, Kahn and Lange (2014, forthcoming) point out a type of employee heterogeneity that is more
analogous to the option to wait in real option models of physical capital by considering the fact that workers’
productivity is constantly changing and that these changes differ across people. This suggests that firms
might value both the option to learn and the option to wait on employees as they do with other assets (see
Grenadier and Malenko (2010)), so that they can see how a given worker’s productivity develops. However,
because our empirical analysis focuses (due to data availability) on the initial firm/worker match, we cannot
analyze this form of option value.



                                                      3
        Getting a better understanding of the matching process in high-skill environments such
as the one studied here is important, given the increasing prevalence of graduate degrees
and the significant role of high-skill and professional labor markets in the economy. The
process of matching firms and employees early in their career is also particularly interesting
to study, in light of the strong impact of these initial matches on long-term employment
and compensation (Oyer (2008)). Our empirical results provide some guidance on what
employers are searching for in at least one high-talent market.4
        Our paper complements the emerging finance literature regarding the role of workers on
corporate decisions and outcomes. For example, the firms’ workforce characteristics have
been shown to influence capital structure choices, theoretically and empirically (e.g., Berk,
Stanton and Zechner (2010), Agrawal and Matsa (2011), Schmalz (2013)), as well as the cost
of capital (Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013)). The acquisition of productive labor, not just
physical assets, is an important driver of M&A decisions (Ouimet and Zarutskie (2011)).
        We discuss the underlying conceptual framework that motivates our empirical analysis
in Section 2 of the paper. We describe the data set and the key features of our empirical
setting in Sections 3 and 4. Section 5 contains the empirical results, and Section 6 concludes.



2         Conceptual framework
We now motivate the empirical work to follow by laying out an intuitive conceptual frame-
work to match the setting we analyze. Our data come from a two-year full-time MBA
program. The vast majority of students have a work history from before their time in the
MBA program, do an internship in the summer between the two years of the program, and
take a full-time job upon graduation. Internships give summer employers an opportunity to
learn about the students before making a commitment for full-time employment.
        Following Lazear (1998), we consider a market where potential hires vary in both pre-
dictable and unpredictable ways. Specifically, a potential hire’s productivity at a firm is

    4
     Data on MBA graduates has recently been used in other economics and finance research. For example,
Shue (2011) finds that networking through MBA education leads executives to exhibit commonalities in firm
policies. Bertrand, Goldin and Katz (2010) document a rising gap in earnings between men and women after
graduation from business school. Kaniel, Massey and Robinson (2010) find that optimistic MBA students
receive job offers faster than their peers. Ahern, Duchin and Shumway (2013) find positive peer effects in
risk aversion among MBA students, while Malmendier and Lerner (forthcoming) document MBA peer effects
in entrepreneurial pursuits.


                                                    4
increasing in each of three attributes. First, the person will be more productive if his general
ability, which we will measure through grades, is higher. Second, the person will be more
productive if his skills and interests are a good match for the industry in which the firm op-
erates. Finally, there is an idiosyncratic firm-worker match component driven, for example,
by how well the person fits with the other workers of the firm or with the firm’s strategies.
Employers can learn important things along all these dimensions during an internship. How-
ever, given that firms already have a significant amount of information about the person’s
academic success, which is our proxy for general ability, internships are especially likely to
be informative about industry and idiosyncratic match quality. Learning along both these
dimensions during the summer internship is certainly valuable to firms. However, we only
have the ability to empirically study learning about industry fit, and hence we focus our
analysis on this dimension.5 Specifically, our data allow us to quantify the uncertainty re-
garding the fit between a potential employee and a firm’s industry. We observe the pre-MBA
jobs of the students in our sample, and hence we can measure the degree of experience that
a job candidate has with the industry of the firm to which he is applying.
       A simple way to capture this setting is to have the productivity of candidate i working for
firm j in industry k be: P roductivityijk = General Abilityi +F irm-Specif ic F itij +Industry
F itik , where Industry F itik = 1 with probability p or 0 with probability (1 − p). In other
words, the industry fit of a candidate could be high or low. Upon receiving a job application
from a candidate, the firm knows the probability p that the industry fit will be high, but not
the actual value of Industry F itik . It is easy to show that the expected value, as well as the
variance of Industry F itik depend on the probability p. Specifically, E[Industry F itik ] = p
     2                     2
and σIndustryF itik = p − p .

       The Expected value of industry fit will be increasing in p and, as long as p is at least
0.5, the variance of industry fit will be decreasing in p. In the setting we study, we believe
a lower bound of 0.5 is reasonable for p. Conditional on the applicant wanting a job and

   5
     There is no variation in our sample in terms of the uncertainty in the firm-specific fit of each applicant-
firm pair, since for each such pair there is no prior employment relationship (i.e., there is a high level of
uncertainty about the firm-specific fit for each of these pairs). The variation that we can observe, and relate
to hiring outcomes, comes from uncertainty in the industry fit of these candidates, as given by their industry
experience. Hence, the paper focuses on the importance of learning about industry fit, and documents that
this aspect of the candidates productivity is important for firms hiring decisions. However, firm-specific
fit could also be very important, and we leave it to future work, based on data where there is measurable
variation in firm-specific fit, to cleanly identify this effect.



                                                       5
surviving several rounds of interviews, firms will have a pretty good (but far from perfect)
sense for industry fit. As we show below, just over forty percent of those with no relevant
industry experience at the start of a Summer Internship receive an offer to return to a full-
time position. Given that many firms cannot make an offer for budgetary reasons or because
a better candidate comes along, we believe that 0.5 is a reasonable lower bound for p.6
       Now compare two job candidates: for one of them, it is equally likely that the industry
fit will be high or low. In other words, the firm has the least amount of information about
this person’s fit. This corresponds to p near 12 . A natural case in which this may happen is
when the job candidate is somebody who never worked in the industry of the firm before.
For this person, the expected value of the industry fit is low and the variance of industry
                                                1        2                1
fit is relatively high: E[Industry F itik ]     2
                                                    and σIndustryF itik   4
                                                                            .   For the other candidate, the
firm assigns a very high probability that the industry fit will be high, p 1. A natural case
in which this may happen is when the job candidate is somebody who worked in the exact,
narrow industry of the firm before. This candidate therefore has high industry fit, as well as
                                                             2
low variance of his industry fit: E[Industry F itik ] 1 and σIndustryF itik 0.

       Empirically, the industry experience of a candidate will be our proxy for the probability p
that the person has a high value for Industry F itik . The lowest degree of industry experience
corresponds to a value of p close to 12 . The highest degree of industry experience corresponds
to a value of p close to 1. Therefore, as the industry experience of the candidate increases, p
will increase, which means that the expected value of Industry F itik increases and the vari-
ance, or uncertainty, of Industry F itik decreases. This implies that learning more about the
candidate is particularly useful to firms when they consider the high uncertainty applicants,
which are those people with the least amount of industry experience.
       In the analysis, we label the uncertainty about the candidates’ industry fit as either low,
medium or high. Uncertainty is low in the case of people who have worked in the specific,
narrowly-defined industry of the firm. For these people, the probability p that Industry F itik
is high is close to 1. For example, this would be the case of a student previously employed
by an investment bank who applies for a job with another investment bank recruiting on
campus. Uncertainty is high in the case of candidates who have not worked in organizations

   6
    An alternative framework, which would be somewhat more complicated, but would lead to similar
predictions, is to let Industry F itik follow a distribution where its mean is increasing, and its variance is
decreasing, in relevant pre-MBA experience.



                                                       6
that, broadly speaking, belong to the same industry as that of the firm they are applying
to. For these applicants, p is relatively low (and possibly close to 21 ). This would be the
case of somebody whose entire work experience is in consulting, but is now applying to a job
in investment banking. Finally, uncertainty is medium when the candidate has previously
                                                                                  1
worked in the same broadly-defined industry. In these cases, p is between         2
                                                                                      and 1. For
example, this would happen when a candidate previously employed by a commercial bank
now applies to an investment banking position. In other words, we can classify each applicant
to a particular job as being characterized by either low, medium or high uncertainty regarding
their fit with the industry of the firm posting that job. The main empirical prediction we
test is whether the odds that an application results in a job offer are higher for candidates
characterized by low uncertainty about industry fit, relative to candidates characterized by
either medium or high uncertainty about industry fit.
   Our predictions regarding the effect of general ability on a student’s job market prospects
are straight-forward: we expect students with better grades to be more attractive in the job
market. This should be true at both the summer internship and permanent hiring stages.
Hence we expect better academic performance to have a positive effect on the probability of
an interested student getting a job offer from a given firm.
   As we proceed empirically, we assume that it is detrimental for a firm to hire a person who
is a poor industry fit because the employee will be unproductive and firing and replacing the
person will be costly. Moreover, the cost of hiring a bad fit is likely lower for summer interns
than for permanent hires because the firm can simply choose not to continue the employment
relationship at the end of the summer. Perhaps most controversially, we assume that firms
offer the same wage to all people to whom they offer jobs. This is a strong assumption in
that it precludes the labor market clearing through wage competition. As we show below,
we can justify this in our context, as employers generally offer the same wage to all new
MBA hires, and post these wages prior to observing the candidate pool.
   Under these assumptions, consider a firm deciding to whom it should make offers. At
either the summer internship or full-time hiring stage, the firm will always prefer higher
general ability candidates and will prefer industry stayers (i.e., low uncertainty applicants) to
industry switchers (i.e., higher uncertainty ones). We expect firms to be less concerned about
the uncertainty in the candidate’s industry fit in situations when firing or replacing a revealed
poor match is easier, and when firms face the risk that waiting before making offers may


                                               7
lead them to face a worse pool of available candidates. Hence, we expect to find that firms
will take more risks in summer hiring. That is, the lack of industry experience will be less of
a factor for summer hiring than for full-time hiring. Moreover, like Lazear (1998), we expect
to find firms to be less risk-tolerant when they face higher firing or replacement costs. In
our setting, higher costs of this type will induce firms to value industry experience relatively
highly. Since firms do not own employees’ human capital, we expect that the negative effect
of uncertainty on hiring is not reduced for candidates with high levels of general ability, or
redeployability. Finally, we expect that when firms face many competitors, they should be
more inclined to hire riskier workers, rather than wait for the resolution of uncertainty but
likely face a pool of candidates of lower quality during later stages of recruiting.
        Our empirical analysis tests these predictions about the role of uncertainty regarding job
applicants’ industry fit on the decisions of firms to hire.



3         Data
We use a novel dataset describing detailed aspects of the recruiting process conducted by
a large number of globally-known firms at a top business school in the United States. The
data span three MBA cohorts during 2007-2009, encompassing 1,482 job applicants and 383
firms, covering both internship and full-time recruiting. The data include details regarding
the firms’ identity and industry, job openings posted, as well as the candidates’ personal
and work background, MBA coursework completed, applications sent during both recruiting
stages, and offers received. Importantly, we also know the grade point average (GPA) of
these individuals while in business school, which provide us with a proxy for their general
ability.7 Table 1 provides basic summary statistics for these job candidates and firms.
        We describe firms using various measures of industry, size, and prestige. We use a broad
breakdown of industry, putting firms into one of six categories – consulting, finance, general
corporations, technology, government/non-profit and other services (mainly law firms), as
well as a narrow classification scheme, based on the 60-industry breakdown used by the
business school providing the data. We measure firm size based on annual revenues or the
number of employees. These figures are collected from Compustat in the case of publicly-
traded firms, and from databases compiled by Hoovers, Manta.com, and Vault.com in the

    7
        See Kuhnen (2011) for more details regarding the dataset.

                                                       8
case of private firms. We classify a firm as prestigious if it is listed in the Fortune MBA 100
annual rankings during 2007-2009.8 Fortune constructs this list by asking MBA students at
various business schools where they would most like to work. Companies that are included
on this list are labeled as “Top 100 MBA Employers”.
      The recruiting process at the business school providing the data for this study is well
structured. It unfolds in a series of steps. 1) The recruiting process begins during the first-
year of the two-year MBA program when students submit resumes (at no cost) to companies
that will offer on-campus recruiting for summer internships, indicating they would like the
company to interview them. 2) Employers select some of these students, known as the
“closed” interviewing list. 3) Then an “open” or “bidding” phase takes place. Students bid
points from their annual endowment of 800 to obtain an interview slot. Given the scarcity
of bid points, getting an open interview is costly. 4) The firm interviews those chosen on
the closed list and those who bid enough points to get on the open list, and after these
interviews, the firm makes offers to some students. 5) Each student then accepts or rejects
the offer. 6) At some point after the summer internship, the firm may make the student an
offer to return to a full-time position upon graduation.
      Steps 1-5 repeat for the second-year students applying for full-time post-MBA positions.
Those who participate in the full-time recruiting stage include most students who did not
get an offer to return to their summer employer (at least not as of the start of the on-campus
recruiting season) and those who got an offer but want to continue to explore alternatives.
      The data we have on this process include which students applied to which openings
through both the open and closed systems, how many points each student bid when applying
for an open interview, whether or not the person got an offer from each job to which they
applied, which offer the student accepted, and whether each summer internship led to a
full-time offer. Unfortunately, we do not see data on intermediate steps such as whether
a student was selected for a closed interview or how many rounds of interviews a student
completed.
      On-campus recruiting for summer internships occurs from January to March of the first
year in the program. On-campus recruiting for full-time positions begins near the start of the
second year of the MBA program, in October. For the students in the cohorts studied here we
observe 2286 internship offers, 68% of which are obtained through the on-campus internship

  8
      The rankings for 2007-2009 are available at: http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/mba100/2007.

                                                   9
recruiting system during the students’ first year in the MBA program, 1% are summer
positions with their pre-MBA employer, and 31% are obtained through other, off-campus
channels. Also, we observe 1676 full-time job offers. Among these, 34% are the result of a
successful summer internship, 35% are obtained through the on-campus full-time recruiting
stage in the students’ second year of the MBA program, 9% are offers from their pre-MBA
employer, and 22% come through other, off-campus channels. Our analysis is focused on the
on-campus hiring activity, because for firms that post either internship or full-time positions
using the on-campus recruiting system, we know the complete set of applications received
for each position, as well as which applications resulted in offers. The resulting sample
consists of 30783 applications, of which 21683 are for internships and come from 1249 unique
students and 9100 are for full-time positions and come from 968 unique students. 100% of
the students in the three cohorts studied here used the on-campus recruiting process, either
for internships or full-time jobs.



4       Key features of the empirical setting

4.1     Wages are set prior to hiring
The first key feature in the data is that firms offer a single wage for any given position. This
implies that wages offered to candidates do not depend on individual characteristics such
as general ability or industry experience. An institutional detail driving this feature is that
employers that recruit on campus are required to post details such as the job title, location,
and salary at the very beginning of the recruiting season, before seeing any candidates. As
shown in the regression model in Table 2, the data confirms that starting salaries for full-
time positions, which characterize the first year of employment after graduate school, are
specific to the position available and do not depend on characteristics of the person who
receives the employment offer.9 Specifically, controlling for class, industry, job location and

    9
    We only have data concerning starting salaries. It is likely that after working for a company for a while,
an employee will be compensated based on proven performance. The flexibility to give lower raises and
bonuses to poor performers lowers adjustment costs for firms and therefore may ease the hiring of risky
workers. Signing bonuses are also not included in our dataset. It is possible that firms offer a signing bonus
commensurate with the industry experience of the candidate receiving the offer. If firms make significant
changes in compensation on this margin, this would make it less likely for us to observe that industry
experience is positively related to the likelihood of application success. This is because people with more
industry experience, who might be offered high signing bonuses, become relatively more expensive relative


                                                     10
company-job title fixed effects, we find no evidence that the GPA, quality of undergraduate
institution attended, industry experience, age, gender, or international student status of the
person receiving the full-time offer are related to the offered wage (either in logs or levels).
Furthermore, in the data only 10.8% of starting full-time wages are renegotiated, and the
corresponding figure for internships is 1.72%. As a result, it is unlikely that wages are used
in this setting as a means for selecting, screening, or bargaining with candidates with specific
characteristics (e.g., a high or a low level of uncertainty regarding their productivity). This
feature of the setting eases the interpretation of our empirical results concerning firms’ hiring
decisions and their dependence on the uncertainty regarding candidates’ industry fit.


4.2     Hiring firms face uncertainty
The second key data feature for our analysis is that many applicants have unknown industry
fit, because they have not worked in the exact industry of the hiring firm, creating uncertainty
regarding their future productivity. We observe that among all applications sent for jobs,
the fraction coming from individuals who have not worked in the broadly defined industry of
the hiring firm is 68% at the internship stage and 65% at the full-time stage. The fraction of
applications that come from individuals who have not worked in the narrowly defined (i.e.,
using the 60-category classification scheme created by the school) industry of the hiring firm
is 89%. For full-time jobs, the corresponding fraction is 86%.
    Hence, when considering the majority of potential candidates, firms face medium or
high levels of uncertainty regarding these individuals’ industry-specific fit. Importantly,
while candidates lacking either narrowly or broadly defined industry experience are not as
successful in securing offers, as the rest of the analysis will show, they are represented in the
pool of people that firms end up making offers to. Specifically, across internships and full-
time jobs, high uncertainty (i.e., lacking even broadly defined industry experience) candidates
represent 67% of the applications pool and 58% of the offer pool. Medium uncertainty (i.e.,
lacking narrowly defined, but not broadly defined industry experience) candidates represent
21% of the applicant pool and 24% of the offer pool. Finally, low uncertainty (i.e., possessing

to those with less industry experience and hence more uncertainty about industry fit, which would make the
latter category of applicants more attractive. The fact that we still see in the data a very strong connection
between industry experience and odds of application success indicates that signing bonuses likely do not
vary much with industry experience.



                                                     11
narrowly-defined industry experience) candidates represent 12% of the applicant pool and
18% of the offer pool.


4.3    Uncertainty is reduced by learning during internships
In our setting, we interpret a lack of industry experience as an indication that firms are
uncertain about a candidate’s fit in their industry. However, an alternative interpretation is
that lack of industry experience is simply a lack of useful, industry-specific human capital.
Thus, observing that firms are reluctant to hire industry switcher may not indicate that firms
dislike uncertainty, but that they dislike candidates with lower skill levels. According to this
alternate account, there is no learning involved, since the level of industry-specific fit or skill
is known by the firm when it considers a candidate’s application. While this could certainly
be happening (i.e., candidates with lots of experience in a particular industry already possess
certain skills that firms in that industry find valuable), in the data we observe patterns that
strongly indicate that firms do learn about the candidates industry fit – in particular, during
the summer internship period.
   Assume that learning is not important to firms – perhaps because the level of industry-
specific fit is known by firms with certainty when the candidate applies for the job. Consider
two people who both received internship offers at a firm and both accepted and completed
these internships. One of these people had no industry experience when he was offered
the internship and the other had significant industry experience. If industry experience is
a perfect indicator of industry fit, then the hiring firm would know that the first person
has low industry fit and the second person has high industry fit, at the moment when the
internship offers are made. In other words, the summer internships of these two people will
not provide the firm with any new information about the industry fit of these two interns.
   Therefore, when the firm has to decide whether these summer interns get full-time job
offers at the end of the internship, the probability that each intern gets the full-time offer
should not depend on the industry experience of that person. In particular, the person with
no industry experience should have an equal chance to convert the internship into a full-time
offer as the person with a high level of industry experience. This is because the firm had
known from the beginning the degree of industry fit of each of these people and did not learn
anything more about this aspect of the candidate during the summer.
   However, as shown by the statistics in Table 3, the data do not support this scenario

                                                12
where firms do not learn about industry fit during the internship. For all categories of
firms in our sample, large, small, prestigious or non-prestigious, we observe a very large
difference in the probability that a summer internship results in a full-time offer, depending
on whether the intern is somebody with low or high levels of industry experience. Specifically,
summer interns who had worked in the narrow industry of the firm before business school
(these are people we referred to as low uncertainty candidates) have between 14%-27%
higher probabilities of converting the internship into a full-time job, relative to interns with
lower levels of industry experience (these are the people with medium or high uncertainty
about industry fit). These differences – driven by industry experience – in the likelihood of
having an internship resulting in an offer for long-term employment are economically large
and statistically significant (p < 0.01). In a world where firms would not use the summer
internship to learn about industry fit, these differences would not exist. That is, in that world
with no learning occurring over the summer, industry switchers should not be disadvantaged
relative to industry stayers, in terms of their success at obtaining full-time offers at the end
of internships.
    Therefore, by observing these patterns in the conversion of internships into full-time jobs,
we can infer that learning about industry fit – that is, reducing uncertainty about this aspect
of an employees productivity – is important to firms.



5     Results

5.1    Uncertainty hinders hiring
We find that uncertainty hinders hiring. Figure 1 shows that the success rate of job applica-
tions decreases monotonically with the level of uncertainty regarding the industry fit of the
candidates. The fraction of applications for internships and full-time jobs that result in offers
is 7.77% among low uncertainty candidates, 5.65% among medium uncertainty candidates,
and 4.39% among high uncertainty candidates. These sample frequencies are different from
each other at p < 0.001, indicating that firms’ hiring decisions may differ across applicant
types in a systematic way. Specifically, Figure 1 suggests that employers prefer to make offer
to applicants characterized by less uncertainty regarding their productivity, namely, those
individuals with more experience in the particular industry of the hiring firm.


                                               13
   A natural measure of the firms’ preference towards certainty can be obtained by compar-
ing the odds that applications result in offers across various types of candidates, where odds
are defined in the usual way as the probability of success (i.e., offer) divided by the probabil-
ity of failure (i.e., no offer). In our sample the odds of application success are 8.42%, 5.99%,
and 4.59% for applications coming from low, medium and high uncertainty candidates, re-
spectively. Comparing these odds of success across candidate subsamples, we observe that
firms’ interest in making offers is 1.83 times stronger among low uncertainty candidates rela-
tive to high uncertainty ones, and 1.30 times stronger among medium uncertainty candidates
versus high uncertainty ones. The preference for low uncertainty applicants is 1.71 times
stronger than for the other two categories (i.e., medium and high uncertainty) combined.
These ratios of odds of success in getting offers are summarized in Figure 2. An odds ratio
equal to 1 would indicate that firms’ hiring decisions do not differ across different types of job
candidates. However, Wald chi-square tests show that all these odds ratios are significantly
different from 1 at p < 0.001, implying that firms prefer less uncertainty to more when they
decide to whom jobs should be offered.
   While these univariate results suggest that uncertainty hinders hiring decisions, other in-
terpretations are possible and must be investigated. For example, people with less experience
in the industry of the firm to which they apply, whom we have so far referred to as higher
uncertainty candidates, may have lower general ability or other characteristics that make
them less desirable to employers. It is also possible that there are more industry switching
(i.e., higher uncertainty) candidates in particular cohorts graduating at times when firms do
not hire as much, for example during recession years. Moreover, industry switching candi-
dates may tend to apply to industries with fewer jobs available, or, within an industry, to
firms with a lower capacity to hire, or to those faced with a higher number of applicants.
   We account for these potential confounds in the econometric models in Table 4. There,
we estimate three models predicting the likelihood that a job application results in an offer:
a linear probability model, a logistic regression showing odds ratios effects, and a GLM
model indicating risk ratios effects, with the goal of identifying the effect of the candidates’
uncertainty about industry fit on their likelihood of success. As control variables, we include
the candidates’ GPA, which is our proxy for their general ability, as well as indicator variables
for gender and international student status (the latter may influence hiring decisions due
to work-visa concerns). We also include cohort fixed effects, as well industry fixed effects.


                                               14
Moreover, we control for the number of interview slots available to applicants for each specific
job opening, as a way to account for the firms’ capacity to hire. Finally, to account for the
possibility that different organizations may face different numbers of applicants, we control
for firm size (as measured by sales) and prestige, as well as for the number of competing
companies in the same industry that are recruiting concurrently.
   As shown by the results in Table 4, even after accounting for these confounding factors
in hiring decisions, we continue to observe a very strong negative effect of industry fit uncer-
tainty on the likelihood that an application will result in the firm making an offer. Using the
logistic regression specification, which is the easiest to interpret, we find that low uncertainty
and medium uncertainty candidates have odds of receiving an offer that are 1.90 times and
1.24 times higher, respectively, as those candidates characterized by high uncertainty about
industry fit. These estimates are very close to the univariate results shown in Figure 2, and
illustrate yet again that firms prefer certainty when they make hiring decisions. These effects
are significant at p < 0.01 and are common across all three empirical specifications in the
table.
   The control variables included in the model in Table 4 have the expected effects. Specif-
ically, the odds of application success are higher for candidates with higher GPA during
business school, those who are not international students, women, those applying to larger
or to less prestigious firms, as well as to job openings with more interview slots. Applications
are also significantly more likely to result in offers at the internship stage compared to the
full-time recruiting stage. Specifically, the odds of an application resulting in an offer are
1.38 times higher for internships than for full-time jobs (p < 0.01).
   The results in Table 4 indicate that, controlling for other firm and applicant characteris-
tics that may be important for hiring decisions, higher uncertainty regarding the applicants’
industry fit lessens the chance that firms will hire them. In other words, uncertainty about
productivity hinders corporate investment in people, similar to the effect previously doc-
umented in the case of investment in physical assets. We now turn to analyzing whether
differences in the adjustment costs or competition faced by firms impact the effect of uncer-
tainty on hiring in ways that also parallel the effects documented in the context of physical
investments.




                                               15
5.2     Adjustment costs magnify the effect of uncertainty on hiring
5.2.1   Firing costs

To understand whether uncertainty is more detrimental to hiring when firms face higher
firing costs we analyze whether the lack of information about a candidate’s industry fit
reduces the odds of success of their application more at the full-time recruiting stage, when
the costs of dissolving a poor match are high, than at the internship recruiting stage, when
these costs are relatively small.
   The logistic regression in Table 5 presents evidence consistent with this hypothesis. The
goal of the econometric model is to identify the differences in the odds that an application
results in a job offer across different levels of uncertainty about industry fit, and across the
two recruiting stages.
   The analysis includes the same set of firm and job applicant controls as used in Table
4. The reference category refers to applications coming from individuals characterized by
medium or high uncertainty about industry fit. Our prior results suggest that this category
of applications should have lower odds of success compared to low uncertainty candidates,
and the results in the table confirm that is indeed the case. At the internship stage, the odds
of success of a low uncertainty applicant are 1.66 times as high as those of other candidates
(p < 0.01), while at the full-time recruiting stage, the odds of success of a low uncertainty
applicant are 2.38 times as high as those of the other, more uncertain, candidates (p < 0.01).
These two effects are significantly different from each other, as well as significantly different
from 1 (i.e., the indifference threshold), at p < 0.05. Therefore, the preference of firms to
hire people characterized by low uncertainty about industry fit is particularly pronounced at
the full-time recruiting stage, when the costs of firing and replacing a poor match are much
higher than at the internship stage.
   Note that the estimation method in Table 5 allows us to avert two potential confounding
effects. First, perhaps there are more industry switchers (i.e., less experienced and thus
higher uncertainty candidates) in the applicant pool at the internship stage relative to the
full-time stage, so even if firms have equally strong reservations about hiring more uncertain
candidates at the two stages, they would mechanically end up making more offers to such
applicants at the internship stage. To account for this, the logistic models in Table 5 compare
at each recruiting stage the odds of application success for the subset of low uncertainty


                                               16
candidates to the odds of success in the subset of more uncertain candidates, and this
comparison does not depend on the difference in the prevalence of low uncertainty applicants
between the two recruiting stages. Second, perhaps the pool of industry switchers (i.e., higher
uncertainty candidates) at the internship stage is better somehow – for example, they may
have higher general ability – than the pool of switchers still looking for a job at the full-time
stage. This should lead to firms being more likely to make offers to higher uncertainty people
at the internship stage compared to the full-time stage. However, this cannot drive the wedge
in the firms’ preference for low uncertainty people between these two recruiting stages that
we document in Table 5, since there we control for candidate characteristics, including their
general ability as measured by their GPA.
   Another potential confound in the interpretation of the difference in the effect of the low
uncertainty indicator on the odds of application success at the internship and the full-time
stage (1.66 vs. 2.38) is that perhaps people whom we label as low uncertainty candidates at
the full-time recruiting stage may in fact be characterized by lower uncertainty about their
industry fit, relative to people whom we label as low uncertainty candidates at the internship
recruiting stage. This can happen if people who apply to jobs in a particular industry at
the full-time stage tend to have already done internships in that same industry. In such a
scenario, firms recruiting for full-time positions would assess that the probability of these
industry-experienced candidates of having high industry fit is greater than the probability
they would assign for a similar applicant at the internship stage.
   To check whether or not this alternative mechanism explains our finding that the odds of
success for low uncertainty people vs. the others are significantly better at the full-time stage
relative to the internship stage (i.e., 2.38 vs. 1.66), in unreported analyses we estimated the
same logistic model for the probability that an application results in an offer at the full-
time stage, as in the last column of Table 5. We did this, however, only for full-time job
applications coming from individuals who at the internship stage took a summer job in a
broad industry different from that they were in before coming to business school. If the
alternative account is correct, then the coefficient on the low uncertainty variable in this
logistic regression should be equal to that obtained in the logistic regression estimated at
the internship stage, which is in column 1 of Table 5 (i.e., 1.66). This is because the degree
of uncertainty is the same for the people in these two analyses, since for both samples of
applicants the only information about their industry fit is conferred by the identity of their


                                               17
pre-MBA industry. However, what we find is that the coefficient in this logistic regression
is 2.45, which is close to, and statistically not distinguishable from, the 2.38 coefficient in
the logistic model estimated for the full-time stage, for all those applying for jobs at that
stage, irrespective of their internship industry. This implies that the difference in the impact
of the low uncertainty variable on the odds of application success that we see between the
internship and the full-time stage is not related to a change in the degree of uncertainty of
what we label as low uncertainty candidates.
   Overall, these results suggest that there exists a strengthening in firms’ preference to
hire workers with less uncertain industry fit from the probationary to the full-time recruiting
stage, consistent with the idea that at the full-time stage it is more costly to fire an employee
who has been revealed to be a poor match.


5.2.2   Replacement costs

We now turn to examining whether firms that face lower costs of hiring a replacement for a
revealed poor match will be less concerned about candidates’ uncertainty regarding industry
fit, and hence, more likely to hire riskier workers. Two categories of firms are likely to face
relatively low replacement costs for poor matches: prestigious and large organizations. First,
firms that are widely regarded as prestigious places to work are likely to receive numerous
applications through many recruiting channels, and hence can find suitable candidates with
ease. Second, large firms have dedicated human resources departments and can tap into
numerous recruiting venues (including internal staff, see Tate and Yang (2011)) to find new
candidates for a particular position. Hence we expect that the firms that will be the least
concerned about candidate uncertainty will be the prestigious and large ones.
   In the logistic regressions in Table 6, we estimate the effect of uncertainty on hiring
decisions as a function of firm prestige. A firm is labeled as prestigious if it was included in
the Fortune MBA 100 annual rankings during 2007-2009. The analysis includes the same
set of firm and job applicant controls as used in Table 4. We find that the preference of firms
for low uncertainty candidates is stronger for non-prestigious firms compared to prestigious
ones, as predicted. Specifically, low uncertainty candidates have odds of getting an offer
that are 2.58 times higher than those of riskier candidates when applying for positions at
non-prestigious firms, but only 1.57 times higher when applying for positions at prestigious
firms. These odds ratio estimates are significantly different at p < 0.01.

                                               18
       A natural concern is that these differences in the odds ratios across the two different
types of firms do not indicate differences across firms in their dislike for uncertainty, but
rather, differences in the composition of the pool of applicants faced by prestigious and non-
prestigious firms. Our choice to use odds ratios to measure firms’ hiring propensities allows
to us alleviate this concern. Note that in a world where the uncertainty in the candidates’ fit
did not matter for firms’ hiring decisions, the ratio of odds of success (where odds are defined,
as usual, as the probability of success, i.e., that the an application will result in an offer,
divided by the probability of failure, i.e., that the application will not result in an offer) of the
low uncertainty candidates vs. the rest would be equal to 1. This is not what the data show.
We consistently find this odds ratio to be significantly higher than 1, meaning that the odds
of success in getting job offers are better for low uncertainty applicants. Since the odds ratios
we estimate in Table 6 are 1.57 for prestigious firms and 2.58 for non-prestigious ones, the
difference between these numbers indicates that, for reasons independent of the composition
of the applicant pools faced by these two types of firms, low uncertainty candidates are
particularly successful in getting offers at non-prestigious firms. Or equivalently, prestigious
firms are those where higher uncertainty applicants have better odds of success.10
       The discrepancy in the preference for certainty between these two types of firms is par-
ticularly large at the full-time recruiting stage. At that stage, low uncertainty candidates
have 3.57 times higher odds of getting offers, relative to the other candidates, when applying
to non-prestigious firms, whereas for prestigious ones, the corresponding increase in odds
is only 1.74 times. These effects are significantly different at p < 0.01. This suggests that
when firms face both high firing costs, as well as high replacement costs, they are particularly
reluctant to make offers to candidates characterized by higher uncertainty about industry
fit.
       Turning to our other source of variation in replacement costs, in the logistic regression
in Table 7 we estimate the effect of uncertainty on hiring decisions as a function of firm size,
measured by sales. Conducting the same analysis using the number of employees as our

  10
    It is also possible that the most prestigious firms attract the best overall candidates, for whom prior
knowledge about the firms industry may be less important. That is, industry switchers hired by prestigious
firms may have better ability. In our analysis we try our best to control for general ability – we use the
students’ GPA while in business school as our proxy for general ability, as well as the students’ GMAT scores,
in alternate specifications unreported here for brevity. That being said, there may be complementarities
between industry expertise and general ability, or non-linear effects, that differ between prestigious and
non-prestigious firms, which our empirical specification may not capture.


                                                     19
measure of firm size yields very similar results in terms of both magnitude and significance
levels, so we omit them here for brevity. The analysis includes the same set of firm and
job applicant controls as used in Table 4. The results support the idea that small firms
(i.e., with below-median sales) are more inclined to hire low uncertainty applicants than
large firms (i.e., with above-median sales), in general as well as at each of the two recruiting
stages.11 For example, across both internship and full-time recruiting, the odds of success of
low uncertainty candidates are 2.19 times higher than those of riskier candidates in the case
of small firms, but only 1.69 times higher in the case of large firms. This difference, however,
is not statistically significant at conventional levels.
       The estimates in Table 7 show an interesting interaction of the effects of replacement
costs as indicated by firm size with those of firing costs as indicated by the recruiting stage.
The biggest difference in firms’ preference for certainty can be seen when comparing the
relative odds of success of low uncertainty candidates across two scenarios: when applying
for full-time jobs at small firms, and when applying for internships at large firms (odds
ratio estimates of 2.71 vs. 1.55, significantly different at p < 0.05). In the first scenario,
the recruiting firms face a high firing cost, as well as a high replacement cost. In the
second scenario, recruiting firms can easily fire a revealed bad match and also face lower
costs of finding a suitable replacement for a revealed poor match. Hence, high firing and
high replacement costs appear to induce firms to prefer certainty more in the first scenario
relative to the second.


5.2.3      General ability

As a final dimension of adjustment costs, we now examine the general ability of a candidate.
Thinking in terms of option value, we would expect people who are of higher ability to be
easier to redeploy if their initial employment arrangement does not work out for some reason.
Also, it is possible that high ability candidates can compensate through on-the-job learning
for lack of industry fit. This is potentially analogous to the option value of physical assets
that can be more easily redeployed. Firms are not reluctant to invest in physical capital with
uncertain productivity if those assets can be easily sold or put to another use. This would

  11
    While we argue that large firms likely face lower costs of finding a replacement for a revealed bad match,
they may also face lower costs of dissolving that bad match by reassigning the person to a different division.
Both these channels are very much in line with our thinking, that is, with the idea that firing and replacement
costs modulate the effects of uncertainty regarding industry fit on firms hiring decisions.

                                                      20
suggest that in the case of candidates with high general ability, the relationship between
their industry expertise and their odds of receiving job offers may be weak or non-existent.
   Note, however, that there is an important difference from a companys perspective between
human capital and physical assets. Firms capture the rents of valuable physical assets
whether those rents occur with the intended use of those assets or, if the firm finds the
assets not valuable, through resale or redeployment. But, while the rents from human
capital are shared between the firm and the worker if the match lasts, the worker captures
all the rents if he leaves the firm. This suggest that, while firms are not as concerned about
uncertainty regarding physical assets’ future productivity if they are characterized by higher
redeployability (Bloom et al. (2007)), higher general ability will not influence the negative
effect of uncertainty about industry fit on the firms’ willingness to make job offers. In other
words, the negative effect of industry-fit uncertainty on the odds of application success will
be equally strong for either low general ability, or high general ability job applicants.
   The data, as shown in Table 8, suggest that this second mechanism may be more impor-
tant than the first, as we find that the strength of the preference that firms have towards
low uncertainty workers is similar across candidates with high or low general ability. We
measure general ability using the person’s grades while in the MBA program. We charac-
terize each student as having either a high or a low GPA, depending on whether their GPA
is above or below the median. The results in Table 8 show that the odds of an application
resulting in an offer for low uncertainty candidates are 1.81 times as high as for the other
applicants in the subset of low GPA students, and 1.83 times as high in the subset of high
GPA students. Hence, as predicted, in general the strength of the preference that firms have
towards low uncertainty workers is similar across candidates with high or low general ability.
The estimates in Table 8 do suggest that at the full-time recruiting stage firms’ preference
for low uncertainty may be stronger among the low GPA candidates relative to the high
GPA ones, but the two odds ratios estimates (3.27 vs. 1.96) for these subsamples are only
weakly statistically different (p < 0.09).
   Overall, these results suggest that adjustment costs – in particular, firing and replacement
costs, and to a much lesser extent, the value of the person in alternative jobs – strengthen
the preference of hiring firms towards less risky candidates. These effects parallel those con-
cerning the interaction between uncertainty and adjustment costs in the context of physical
investments when the firm can capture the option value. However, in the case of general


                                              21
ability, where employees capture the value of the (human) capital if it is put to an alternate
use, the parallel to physical capital is not as strong.


5.3       Competition diminishes the effect of uncertainty on hiring
The investments literature has shown that firms faced with more competition are less con-
cerned by project uncertainty because waiting for its resolution may lead to more limited
opportunities later on. In our setting this argument implies that we should observe a lower
impact of candidate uncertainty on firms’ decisions to make offers for those firms that have
more competitors recruiting at the same time from the same pool of students. We find
evidence consistent with this hypothesis, as illustrated by the results in Table 9. There, we
estimate the effect of uncertainty on the odds that applications result in offers separately for
firms that face below or above median competition, as measured by the number of firms in
the same industry that are concurrently recruiting in the same pool of MBA students. For
the typical, narrowly defined industry in the sample, the median number of firms recruiting
on campus at any given stage (internship or full-time) is 10. Hence, for example, if there are
10 or more firms from the investment banking industry recruiting on campus for full-time
positions in 2007, we label each of these organizations at this particular point in time as
facing high competition – or, for sake of clarity, facing many competing firms.12
       The results in Table 9 show that the preference for certainty is particularly strong among
recruiters that face few competitors. For these firms, low uncertainty applicants have 2.49
times higher odds of getting offers compared to the riskier applicants. For firms faced with
many competitors, the odds of success for low uncertainty applicants are only 1.63 times
higher than for the rest. These odds ratios are significantly different (p < 0.05). The
estimates in Table 9 also show an interesting interaction of the effects of competition with
those of firing costs. Specifically, the biggest difference in firms’ preference for certainty can
be seen when comparing the relative odds of success of low uncertainty candidates across
two scenarios: when applying for full-time jobs to firms that face few competitors, and when
applying for internships at firms that face many competitors (odds ratio estimates of 2.90

  12
    Indicating that firms with more industry peers recruiting at the same time indeed face more competition
for talent, we find that with each additional competitor, the number of applications a firm receives per
interview slot decreases by 0.02 (p < 0.05). The median number of applications per interview slot in our
sample is 1.42.



                                                    22
vs. 1.60, significantly different at p < 0.05). In the first scenarios, the recruiting firms face
a high firing cost, and also, can afford to be selective, since applicants do not have much
choice. In the second scenario, recruiting firms can easily fire a revealed bad match and also
do not have the luxury of delaying hiring, since applicants have many choices of employers
in that same industry that are present on campus at the same time. Hence both competition
effects and firing costs effects lead firms to prefer certainty more in the first scenario relative
to the second.
       These results indicate that the concerns that firms have regarding employee uncertainty
indeed diminish with the intensity of competition for talent, in a similar way as found in the
context of physical investments.13



6        Conclusion
We conduct an empirical study of the role of uncertainty in corporate hiring decisions. We
find that firms are less inclined to make job offers to candidates characterized by higher
uncertainty regarding their industry fit. The preference of firms for certainty when hiring is
magnified when they are more likely to face higher firing and replacement costs, and when
they face less competition for talent. Our analysis is based on a unique dataset covering
MBA recruiting activity at a top U.S. business school.
       We should note the data have limitations that lead to caveats about the internal and
external validity of our results. First, even though the career office at the school that provided
the data works hard to encourage students to report all of their offers, it is possible that
students do so with some error. Second, a substantial amount of the job search by students
at this school is done through channels other than on-campus recruiting. In these cases, we
do not have any information about firms’ preferences because we do not observe who applies
to these firms. While we do not think that these issues bias our results substantially (if
anything, the measurement error would imply any relationships in the data are likely to be
stronger than our analysis suggests), we do not know for sure. Third, the external validity

  13
    A necessary condition for competition to speed up hiring and lessen the delaying effect of uncertainty is
that firms that wait longer before making offers will be faced with a lower quality pool of potential workers.
We observe this effect in our sample, as better candidates leave the available pool sooner. For example,
when examining how the applicant pool changes from the internship stage to the full time stage, we observe
a decrease in average GPA of a quarter standard deviation, and a 5% decrease in the prevalence of low
uncertainty candidates.

                                                     23
of our analysis is limited by the fact that our data set covers job seekers at one school and
the particular firms that choose to conduct recruiting activities there.
   While these limitations are important, high-skill labor markets such as the one we study
are growing in importance world-wide. Also, there has been limited empirical work analyzing
the matching process between firms and workers. Therefore, we believe our analysis makes
a useful contribution by showing that considerations similar to those used in the context of
physical investments are also significant determinants of corporate hiring decisions.




                                              24
References
Agrawal, A. K. and Matsa, D. A.: 2011, Labor unemployment risk and corporate financing deci-
    sions, Working paper .

Ahern, K. R., Duchin, R. and Shumway, T.: 2013, Peer effects in economic attitudes, Working
    paper .

Bandiera, O., Guiso, L., Prat, A. and Sadun, R.: 2010, Matching firms, managers, and incentives,
    Working paper .

Berk, J. B., Stanton, R. and Zechner, J.: 2010, Human capital, bankruptcy and capital structure,
    Journal of Finance 65, 891–926.

Bertrand, M., Goldin, C. and Katz, L. F.: 2010, Dynamics of the gender gap for young profession-
    als in the financial and corporate sectors, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
    2(3), 228–255.

Bloom, N., Bond, S. and Van Reenen, J.: 2007, Uncertainty and investment dynamics, Review of
    Economic Studies 74, 391–415.

Bollinger, C. R. and Hotchkiss, J. L.: 2003, The upside potential of hiring risky workers: Evidence
    from the baseball industry, Journal of Labor Economics 21, 923–944.

Booth, A. L., Francesconi, M. and Frank, J.: 2002, Temporary jobs: Sepping stones or dead ends?,
    The Economic Journal 112, F189F213.

Eisfeldt, A. L. and Papanikolaou, D.: 2013, Organization capital and the cross-section of expected
    returns, Journal of Finance 68(4), 1365–1406.

Farber, H. S. and Gibbons, R.: 1996, Learning and wage dynamics, Quarterly Journal of Economics
    111, 1007–1047.

Graham, J., Harvey, C. R. and Puri, M.: 2010, Managerial attitudes and corporate actions, Working
    paper .

Greenwald, B. C.: 1986, Adverse selection in the labor market, Review of Economic Studies 53, 325–
    347.

Grenadier, S. and Malenko, A.: 2010, A bayesian approach to real options: The case of distinguish-
    ing between temporary and permanent shocks, Journal of Finance 65(5), 1949–1986.


                                                25
Grenadier, S. R.: 2002, Option exercise games: An application to the equilibrium investment
    strategies of firms, Review of Financial Studies 15(3), 691–721.

Guell, M. and Petrongolo, B.: 2007, How binding are legal limits? Transitions from temporary to
    permanent work in spain, Labour Economics 14, 153–183.

Hendricks, W., DeBrock, L. and Koenker, R.: 2003, Uncertainty, hiring, and subsequent perfor-
    mance: The NFL draft, Journal of Labor Economics 21, 857–886.

Houseman, S. N.: 2001, Why employers use flexible staffing arrangements: Evidence from an
    establishment survey, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55(1), 149–170.

Jovanovic, B.: 1979, Job matching and the theory of turnover, Journal of Political Economy
    87, 972–990.

Kahn, L. B. and Lange, F.: 2014, forthcoming, Employer learning, productivity, and the earnings
    distribution: Evidence from performance measures, Review of Economic Studies .

Kaniel, R., Massey, C. and Robinson, D. T.: 2010, The importance of being an optimist: Evidence
    from labor markets, NBER Working paper 16328 .

Kaplan, S., Klebanov, M. M. and Sorensen, M.: 2012, Which CEO characteristics and abilities
    matter?, Journal of Finance 67(3), 973–1007.

Kuhnen, C. M.: 2011, Searching for jobs: Evidence from MBA graduates. Northwestern University.

Lazear, E. P.: 1998, Hiring risky workers, in I. Ohashi and T. Tachibanaki (eds), Internal Labour
    Markets, Incentives, and Employment, St. Martin’s Press, New York.

Levin, J.: 2002, Multilateral contracting and the employment relationship, Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 117(3), 1075–1103.

Malmendier, U. and Lerner, J.: forthcoming, With a little help from my (random) friends: Success
    and failure in post-business school entrepreneurship, Review of Financial Studies .

Ouimet, P. and Zarutskie, R.: 2011, Acquiring labor, Working paper .

Oyer, P.: 2008, The making of an investment banker: Stock market shocks, career choice, and
    lifetime income, Journal of Finance 63, 2601–2628.

Oyer, P. and Schaefer, S.: 2011, Personnel economics: Hiring and incentives, in O. Ashenfelter and
    D. Card (eds), The Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4b, North-Holland, Great Britain.

                                               26
Prescott, E. C. and Visscher, M.: 1980, Organization capital, Journal of Political Economy
    88(3), 446–461.

Schmalz, M. C.: 2013, Managing human capital risk, Working paper .

Segal, L. M. and Sullivan, D. G.: 1997, The growth of temporary services work, Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 11(2), 117–136.

Shue, K.: 2011, Executive networks and firm policies: Evidence from the random assignment of
    mba peers, Working paper .

Stein, L. C. and Stone, E.: 2013, The effect of uncertainty on investment, hiring, and R&D: Causal
    evidence from equity options, Working paper .

Tate, G. and Yang, L.: 2011, The bright side of corporate diversification: Evidence from internal
    labor markets, Working paper .

Waldman, M.: 1984, Job assignments, signaling, and efficiency, RAND Journal of Economics
    15, 255–267.




                                               27
                                                            9%




              Probability that application results in job
                                                            8%            7.77%

                                                            7%

                                                            6%                                               5.65%

                                                            5%
                                offer


                                                                                                                                          4.39%
                                                            4%

                                                            3%

                                                            2%

                                                            1%

                                                            0%
                                                                     Low uncertainty                  Medium uncertainty             High uncertainty

                                                                                              Job applicant uncertainty level


Figure 1: Fraction of applications that result in job offers, by the level of uncertainty in
candidates’ productivity as indicated by their industry experience.




                                                             2.0
                                                                            1.83
                                                             1.8                                                                         1.71

                                                             1.6
                   (Preference for certainty)




                                                             1.4                                              1.30
                                                             1.2
                          Odds Ratio




                                                             1.0

                                                             0.8

                                                             0.6

                                                             0.4

                                                             0.2

                                                             0.0
                                                                   Low vs. high uncertainty        Medium vs. high uncertainty   Low vs. high or medium
                                                                                                                                      uncertainty
                                                                                                    Comparison groups


Figure 2: Firms’ preference for certainty, as measured by the ratio of the odds of application
success (i.e., resulting in offer) for different types of candidates: low vs. high uncertainty
candidates, medium vs. high uncertainty candidates, and low vs. either high or medium
uncertainty candidates. All odds ratios are significantly different than 1 at p < 0.01. An
odds ratio equal to 1 would indicate that firms’ hiring decisions do not differ across different
types of job candidates.




                                                                                                        28
          Table 1: Summary statistics for job candidates and firms.

                     Panel A: Job candidates (N = 1482)
Male                                                                  65.80%
International student                                                 39.13%
Attended Top 100 college                                              48.33%
GPA                                  Mean: 3.45; St. Dev.: 0.28; Median:3.46
Age (years)                        Mean: 30.11; St. Dev.: 2.19; Median: 30.00


                           Panel B: Firms (N = 383)
Industry                         General Coporations: 33.94%
                                 Finance: 29.50%
                                 Technology: 17.23%
                                 Consulting: 15.93%
                                 Other services: 2.09%
                                 Government/Non-Profit: 1.31%
On Fortune MBA 100 list          24.28%
Publicly traded                  58.49%
Annual sales ($ billions)        Mean: 22.56; St. Dev.: 43.52; Median: 6.03.
Employees (thousands)            Mean: 54.63; St. Dev.: 135.20; Median: 15.40.
Posted jobs located in the U.S. 98.10%




                                     29
Table 2: OLS wage regression. Keeping the company and job characteristics fixed, salaries
for full-time job offers do not depend on the ability of the person receiving the offer.

                     Dependent variable     W agei Ln(W age)i
                     GP AM
                         i
                           BA
                                           –1011.57       –0.01
                                            (–1.01)    (–1.04)
                     T op100Undergradi       332.39        0.00
                                              (0.73)     (0.53)
                     Low uncertaintyi       –201.90       –0.01
                                            (–0.38)    (–0.92)
                     InternationalStudenti  –293.09       –0.00
                                            (–0.54)    (–0.40)
                     Malei                   522.53        0.01
                                              (1.03)     (1.02)
                     Agei                    –30.89       –0.00
                                            (–0.24)    (–0.40)
                     Constant              93878.65       11.45
                                           (9.28)∗∗∗ (98.05)∗∗∗
                     Class FEs                   Yes        Yes
                     Industry FEs                Yes        Yes
                     Job Source FEs              Yes        Yes
                     Job Location FEs            Yes        Yes
                     Company-Job title FEs       Yes        Yes
                     R2                         0.48       0.40
                     Observations              1676        1676



Table 3: Across all firm categories, industry experience has a significant and positive im-
pact on the probability that a summer internship results in a full-time offer. ∗∗∗ indicates
differences significant at p < 0.01.


                         Probability that a summer internship results in a full-time job offer
                              Low uncertainty     Mid/high uncertainty               Difference
                              interns (those at         interns (those at         between low
                         firms in same narrow firms not in same narrow             uncertainty
                             industry as their          industry as their          interns and
                         pre-MBA employers)        pre-MBA employers)                  the rest
 All firms                              63.22%                    40.19%            23.03% ∗∗∗
 Prestigious firms                      75.36%                    48.54%            26.82% ∗∗∗
 Non-prestigious firms                  43.53%                    29.23%            14.30% ∗∗∗
 Large firms                            63.53%                    46.29%            17.24% ∗∗∗
 Small firms                            79.45%                    52.13%            27.30% ∗∗∗



                                             30
Table 4: The effect of uncertainty regarding job applicants’ industry fit on the firms’ decision
to make offers. The dependent variable across the three models estimated in the table is an
indicator equal to 1 for each application that resulted in an offer. The three panels report
the results of a linear probability model, a logistic regression, and a GLM model. Candidate
i to job j is characterized as having low, medium or high uncertainty regarding industry fit if
they have worked in the same narrowly defined industry as that of the firm offering job j, if
they have worked in the same broadly (but not narrowly) defined industry as that of the firm
offering job j, and, respectively, if they have not worked in the broadly defined industry to
which the firm belongs. For example, candidates applying to a job j in investment banking
have high uncertainty regarding industry fit if they never worked in any finance-related
industry before; if they previously worked in commercial banking, for example, they would
have a medium level of uncertainty regarding industry fit; whereas candidates who worked
in investment banking before have a low level of uncertainty regarding industry fit for job j.
The reference (thus omitted) category in all three models is High uncertaintyij . Standard
errors are clustered at the job level and are robust to heteroskedasticity.

   Dependent                               Indicator equal to 1 if candidate i’s
   variable                             application to job j resulted in an offer
                                   Linear          Logistic regression      GLM model
                              probability model Odds ratios effects Risk ratios effects
   Low uncertaintyij                         0.03                  1.90                 1.81
                                        (6.95)∗∗∗             (8.32)∗∗∗            (8.77)∗∗∗
   Medium uncertaintyij                      0.01                  1.24                 1.22
                                        (2.68) ∗∗∗
                                                              (3.02) ∗∗∗
                                                                                   (3.26)∗∗∗
   GP Ai                                     0.05                  3.19                 2.96
                                        (9.93) ∗∗∗
                                                             (10.23) ∗∗∗
                                                                                  (10.99)∗∗∗
   InternationalStudenti                    -0.03                  0.53                 0.55
                                    (–10.27)   ∗∗∗
                                                             (–9.76) ∗∗∗
                                                                                 (–10.09)∗∗∗
   Malei                                    -0.02                  0.69                 0.71
                                      (–5.53)∗∗∗             (–6.24)∗∗∗           (–6.70)∗∗∗
   Interview slotsj                       0.0003                   1.01                 1.01
                                         (2.26)∗∗              (2.51)∗∗            (3.25)∗∗∗
   Ln(F irm salesj )                        0.003                  1.09                 1.08
                                        (3.58) ∗∗∗
                                                              (3.20) ∗∗∗
                                                                                   (4.14)∗∗∗
   P restigiousj                            -0.01                  0.78                 0.80
                                      (–2.63)  ∗∗∗
                                                             (–2.63) ∗∗∗
                                                                                  (–3.20)∗∗∗
   Many Competitorsj                         0.01                  1.08                 1.07
                                           (1.40)                (0.99)               (1.17)
   Internship stage                          0.01                  1.38                 1.35
                                        (4.11)∗∗∗             (4.09)∗∗∗            (4.81)∗∗∗
   Class FEs                                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes
   Industry FEs                               Yes                   Yes                  Yes
   R2                                        0.02                  0.05                 0.05
   Observations                            30783                 30783                30783


                                              31
Table 5: The effect of uncertainty on hiring decisions for each of the two recruiting stages:
internship and full-time hiring. The internship recruiting stage applications in our dataset are
the applications sent to firms that come to campus to recruit when students are in their first
year of the MBA program. The full-time recruiting stage applications are the applications
sent to firms that come to campus to recruit when students are in their second year of the
MBA program. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 for each application of a
candidate i to job j that resulted in an offer. Standard errors are clustered at the job level
and are robust to heteroskedasticity.

              Dependent                   Indicator equal to 1 if candidate i’s
              variable                  application to job j resulted in an offer
                                        Internship            Full-time
                                        recruiting            recruiting
                                           stage                stage
              Low uncertaintyij                1.66                           2.38
                                          (5.83) ∗∗∗
                                                                         (6.07)∗∗∗
              GP Ai                            3.31                           2.88
                                          (9.11) ∗∗∗
                                                                         (4.76)∗∗∗
              InternationalStudenti            0.57                           0.44
                                         (–7.77) ∗∗∗
                                                                       (–6.31)∗∗∗
              Malei                            0.70                           0.63
                                         (–5.13)∗∗∗                    (–3.78)∗∗∗
              Interview slotsj                 1.01                           0.99
                                          (3.14) ∗∗∗
                                                                          (–1.65)∗
              Ln(F irm salesj )                1.08                           1.11
                                           (2.37) ∗∗
                                                                          (2.40)∗∗
              P restigiousj                    0.78                           0.81
                                          (–2.28) ∗∗
                                                                           (–1.26)
              Many Competitorsj                1.17                           0.92
                                            (1.87)∗                        (–0.43)
              Class FEs                         Yes                            Yes
              Industry FEs                      Yes                            Yes
              R2                               0.04                           0.07
              Observations                   21683                           9100




                                              32
Table 6: The effect of uncertainty on hiring decisions, as a function of firm prestige. The
dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 for each application of a candidate i to job j
that resulted in an offer. A firm is labeled as prestigious if it was included in the Fortune
MBA 100 annual rankings during 2007-2009. Standard errors are clustered at the job level
and are robust to heteroskedasticity.


 Dependent                                    Indicator equal to 1 if candidate i’s
 variable                                   application to job j resulted in an offer
                          Non-                         Non-          Non-
                       Prestigious    Prestigious Prestigious Prestigious Prestigious Prestigious
                         Firms          Firms         Firms         Firms         Firms        Firms
                                                    Internship     Full-time    Internship    Full-time
                                                       stage         stage         stage        stage
 Low uncertaintyij             2.58          1.57           2.16          3.57          1.54         1.74
                          (7.18)∗∗∗     (5.01)∗∗∗     (4.72)∗∗∗     (5.87)∗∗∗     (4.19)∗∗∗    (3.01)∗∗∗
 GP Ai                         2.95          3.31           3.43          2.14          3.28         3.62
                          (5.70)∗∗∗     (8.51) ∗∗∗
                                                      (5.16)  ∗∗∗
                                                                     (2.44)  ∗∗
                                                                                  (7.54)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                               (4.16)∗∗∗
 InterntnlStudenti             0.50          0.55           0.63          0.29          0.53         0.59
                         (–5.83)∗∗∗    (–7.91) ∗∗∗
                                                     (–3.37)  ∗∗∗
                                                                   (–5.57)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                 (–7.21)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                              (–3.29)∗∗∗
 Malei                         0.71          0.68           0.75          0.66          0.68         0.60
                         (–3.27)∗∗∗    (–5.40) ∗∗∗
                                                      (–2.28)  ∗∗
                                                                    (–2.19)  ∗∗
                                                                                 (–4.64)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                              (–3.20)∗∗∗
 Interview slotsj              1.01          1.01           1.02          0.98          1.01         1.00
                             (1.33)      (2.02)∗∗       (2.00)∗∗      (–0.93)       (2.27)∗∗     (–0.61)
 Ln(F irm salesj )             1.06          1.06           1.07          1.08          1.02         1.24
                            (1.76)∗        (1.22)         (1.46)       (1.50)         (0.37)   (2.97)∗∗∗
 ManyCompetitorsj              0.94          1.12           1.00          1.04          1.23         0.77
                           (–0.43)         (1.21)         (0.02)       (0.12)       (2.02) ∗∗
                                                                                                 (–1.14)
 Internship stage              1.25          1.41
                            (1.75)∗     (3.41)∗∗∗
 Class FEs                      Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
 Industry FEs                   Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
 R2                            0.06          0.04           0.04          0.11          0.04         0.06
 Observations                10608         20175           6682          3849         14949         5174




                                              33
Table 7: The effect of uncertainty on hiring decisions, as a function of firm size, as measured
by sales (small vs. large firms, depending on whether their sales are below or above median).
The dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 for each application of a candidate i to job
j that resulted in an offer. Standard errors are clustered at the job level and are robust to
heteroskedasticity.


 Dependent                                    Indicator equal to 1 if candidate i’s
 variable                                   application to job j resulted in an offer
                             Small        Large        Small        Small       Large        Large
                             Firms        firms        firms        firms       firms        firms
                                                    Internship Full-time Internship Full-time
                                                       stage        stage       stage        stage
 Low uncertaintyij               2.19         1.69          2.02        2.71         1.55        2.28
                            (5.56)∗∗∗    (5.67) ∗∗∗
                                                      (4.14)  ∗∗∗
                                                                   (4.59) ∗∗∗
                                                                               (4.13)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                            (4.26)∗∗∗
 GP Ai                           3.52         3.04          3.68        3.25         3.17        2.76
                            (5.35)∗∗∗    (8.63) ∗∗∗
                                                      (4.46)  ∗∗∗
                                                                   (2.98) ∗∗∗
                                                                               (7.83)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                            (3.75)∗∗∗
 InternationalStudenti           0.54         0.53          0.61        0.41         0.55        0.46
                           (–4.90)∗∗∗   (–8.43) ∗∗∗
                                                     (–3.46)  ∗∗∗
                                                                  (–3.82) ∗∗∗
                                                                              (–7.04)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                           (–5.00)∗∗∗
 Malei                           0.63         0.71          0.66        0.60         0.72        0.64
                           (–3.61)∗∗∗   (–4.99)∗∗∗ (–2.70)∗∗∗ (–2.38)∗∗ (–4.27)∗∗∗ (–2.99)∗∗∗
 Interview slotsj                1.01         1.01          1.01        0.99         1.01        1.00
                               (1.16)    (3.35)∗∗∗      (1.69)∗     (–0.94)    (3.64)∗∗∗     (–0.29)
 P restigiousj                   1.01         0.75          1.11        0.91         0.69        0.90
                               (0.06)   (–3.17) ∗∗∗
                                                          (0.53)    (–0.19) (–3.49)    ∗∗∗
                                                                                             (–0.57)
 Many Competitorsj               0.95         1.11          0.95        1.17         1.22        0.79
                              (–0.28)       (1.30)      (–0.25)       (0.43)    (2.25)  ∗∗
                                                                                             (–1.10)
 Internship stage                1.39         1.32
                             (2.09)∗∗    (3.20)∗∗∗
 Class FEs                        Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 Industry FEs                     Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 R2                              0.06         0.04          0.04        0.10         0.03        0.06
 Observations                  10266        20517          6665        3525        15018        5499




                                              34
Table 8: The effect of uncertainty on hiring decisions, as a function of the candidate’s
general ability measured by their GPA while in business school. The dependent variable is
an indicator equal to 1 for each application of a candidate i to job j that resulted in an offer.
High GP A and Low GP A are indicators for whether a candidate’s GPA is above or below
median. Standard errors are clustered at the job level and are robust to heteroskedasticity.


 Dependent                                     Indicator equal to 1 if candidate i’s
 variable                                    application to job j resulted in an offer
                             Low           High          Low          Low         High         High
                             GPA           GPA          GPA          GPA          GPA          GPA
                           applicants    applicants applicants applicants applicants applicants
                                                     Internship Full-time Internship Full-time
                                                        stage        stage        stage        stage
 Low uncertaintyij                1.81         1.83         1.47         3.27          1.81        1.96
                             (5.07)∗∗∗    (6.15)∗∗∗    (2.59)∗∗∗    (6.00)∗∗∗    (5.48)∗∗∗    (3.11)∗∗∗
 InternationalStudenti            0.44         0.56         0.47         0.36          0.58        0.48
                            (–7.86)∗∗∗   (–7.24) ∗∗∗
                                                      (–6.29) ∗∗∗
                                                                   (–4.88) ∗∗∗
                                                                                (–5.99)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                             (–4.20)∗∗∗
 Malei                            0.75         0.75         0.79         0.63          0.75        0.73
                            (–3.28)∗∗∗   (–3.83) ∗∗∗
                                                       (–2.43) ∗∗
                                                                    (–2.43) ∗∗
                                                                                (–3.33)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                              (–1.96)∗∗
 Interview slotsj                 1.00         1.01         1.00         0.98          1.01        1.00
                              (–0.01)     (3.20) ∗∗∗
                                                          (0.62)    (–2.40) ∗∗
                                                                                 (3.53)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                                (–0.56)
 Ln(F irm salesj )                1.06         1.11         1.05         1.10          1.11        1.11
                                (1.34)    (3.55)∗∗∗       (0.87)      (1.69)∗    (2.99)∗∗∗      (1.89)∗
 P restigiousj                    0.93         0.68         0.97         0.83          0.66        0.80
                              (–0.50)    (–3.58)∗∗∗      (–0.20)      (–0.81) (–3.36)∗∗∗        (–1.03)
 Many Competitorsj                1.12         1.06         1.29         0.65          1.08        1.18
                                (1.03)       (0.63)     (2.05) ∗∗
                                                                     (–1.78) ∗
                                                                                     (0.74)      (0.64)
 Internship stage                 1.36         1.41
                             (2.89)∗∗∗    (3.57)∗∗∗
 Class FEs                         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
 Industry FEs                      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
 R2                               0.04         0.04         0.03         0.09          0.03        0.06
 Observations                   15358        15425        10448          4850        11228        4175




                                               35
Table 9: The effect of uncertainty on hiring decisions, as a function of the degree of compe-
tition for talent faced by firms, as measured by the number of competing firms in the same
industry that are concurrently recruiting on-campus (few vs. many, depending on whether
the number of competitors is below or above the median). The dependent variable is an
indicator equal to 1 for each application of a candidate i to job j that resulted in an offer.
Standard errors are clustered at the job level and are robust to heteroskedasticity.


 Dependent                                      Indicator equal to 1 if candidate i’s
 variable                                     application to job j resulted in an offer
                               Few         Many           Few           Few        Many         Many
                           competing competing competing competing competing competing
                              firms        firms         firms         firms        firms       firms
                                                      Internship Full-time Internship Full-time
                                                         stage         stage        stage       stage
 Low uncertaintyij                 2.49        1.63           2.12         2.90         1.60        1.98
                             (7.18)∗∗∗    (5.43)∗∗∗     (4.42)∗∗∗     (5.47)∗∗∗    (4.56)∗∗∗   (3.54)∗∗∗
 GP Ai                             2.61        3.86           2.61         2.42         3.98        3.99
                             (5.66)∗∗∗    (8.97)∗∗∗     (4.57)∗∗∗     (3.03)∗∗∗    (8.31)∗∗∗   (3.96)∗∗∗
 InternationalStudenti             0.55        0.51           0.56         0.53         0.56        0.30
                            (–6.41)  ∗∗∗
                                         (–7.55) ∗∗∗
                                                       (–5.16)  ∗∗∗
                                                                    (–3.80)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                 (–6.09)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                              (–5.43)∗∗∗
 Malei                             0.67        0.68           0.75         0.54         0.65        0.85
                            (–4.62)  ∗∗∗
                                         (–4.78) ∗∗∗
                                                       (–2.76)  ∗∗∗
                                                                    (–3.75)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                 (–4.80)  ∗∗∗
                                                                                                 (–0.94)
 Interview slotsj                  1.00        1.01           1.01         0.99         1.01        1.00
                                 (0.87)     (1.74) ∗
                                                          (1.78)  ∗
                                                                        (–1.27)      (1.70) ∗
                                                                                                 (–0.44)
 Ln(F irm salesj )                 1.02        1.13           1.00         1.08         1.13        1.19
                                 (0.66)   (3.71)∗∗∗         (0.02)      (1.68)∗    (3.47)∗∗∗    (2.28)∗∗
 P restigiousj                     0.79        0.78           0.71         0.95         0.87        0.46
                              (–1.95)∗     (–1.84)∗     (–2.39)∗∗       (–0.25)      (–1.02)   (–2.17)∗∗
 Internship stage                  1.21        1.60
                               (1.85)  ∗
                                          (3.84)∗∗∗
 Class FEs                          Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
 Industry FEs                       Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
 R2                                0.04        0.06           0.03         0.07         0.05        0.09
 Observations                    14110        16673          9219         4891         12464       4209




                                             36
