NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CENTRAL BANK CREDIBILITY:
AN HISTORICAL AND QUANTITATIVE EXPLORATION
Michael D. Bordo
Pierre L. Siklos
Working Paper 20824
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20824

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015

Presented at the 2014 Norges Bank Conference “Of the Uses of Central Banks: Lessons from History”,
Oslo, Norway. The second author thanks CIGI-INET for financial support. Nicolo Battestini, Samantha
St. Amand, and Cesar Tamayo provided excellent research assistance. Earlier versions of this paper
were presented as a keynote presentation at the 7th Conference of the South-Eastern European Monetary
History Network, Bank of Albania, the Norges Bank 2016 pre-conference at the Graduate Institute
in Geneva, the 7th World Congress of the Cliometrics Society, the 2014 ASSA Conference (Cliometrics
Society) in Philadelphia, and the 31st SUERF Colloquium and Baffi Finlawmetrics Conference in
Milan (June 2014). Comments on earlier drafts by Oyvind, Eitrheim, Marc Flandreau, Peter Ireland,
Lars Jonung, Josh Hausman, Athanasios Orphanides, and Eugene White, are gratefully acknowledged.
We are also grateful to our discussant, Lars Svensson, for insightful comments as well as participants
at the Norges Bank Conference and other conferences. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20824.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Michael D. Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Central Bank Credibility: An Historical and Quantitative Exploration
Michael D. Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos
NBER Working Paper No. 20824
January 2015
JEL No. C32,C36,E31,E58,N10
ABSTRACT
In this paper we provide empirical measures of central bank credibility and augment these with historical
narratives from eleven countries. To the extent we are able to apply reliable institutional information
we can also indirectly assess their role in influencing the credibility of the monetary authority. We
focus on measures of inflation expectations, the mean reversion properties of inflation, and indicators
of exchange rate risk. In addition we place some emphasis on whether credibility is particularly vulnerable
during financial crises, whether its evolution is a function of the type of crisis or its kind (i.e., currency,
banking, sovereign debt crises). We find credibility changes over time are frequent and can be significant.
Nevertheless, no robust empirical connection between the size of an economic shock (e.g., the Great
Depression) and loss of credibility is found. Second, the frequency with which the world economy
experiences economic and financial crises, institutional factors (i.e., the quality of governance) plays
an important role in preventing a loss of credibility. Third, credibility shocks are dependent on the
type of monetary policy regime in place. Finally, credibility is most affected by whether the shock
can be associated with policy errors.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
Pierre L. Siklos
Wilfrid Laurier University
75 University Ave
Waterloo, ON, CANADA, N2L 3C5
psiklos@wlu.ca

1. Introduction

Central Bank credibility is defined as a commitment to follow well articulated and
transparent rules and policy goals. More precisely, credibility refers to the “…extent to
which the public believes that a shift in policy has taken place when, indeed, such a shift
has actually occurred“(Cukierman 1986, p.6). Blinder (1999, p. 64-65) offers a more
prosaic definition, namely “… that your pronouncements are believed – even though you
are bound by no rule and may have an incentive to renege.” He goes on to add: “…it is …
built up by a history of matching deeds to words.” More generally, Brunner (1983) makes
the connection between credibility and the performance of the institutions mandated to
carry out policies: “Credibility depends…on the history of policy making and the behavior
of the policy institution.”
We recognize that central banks may have adopted several goals over time (e.g., the
price of gold, exchange rate pegs, monetary targets, inflation targets). Partly for practical
reasons, but also because alternatives to inflation objectives are typically subservient to the
goal of controlling the rate of change in the price level, we interpret credibility in terms of
inflation performance. Our approach has the virtue of being quantifiable. However, we
recognize that such a broad definition could also be viewed at times as being too
restrictive. Put differently, model-based estimates of credibility can be sensitive to the
parameterizations employed. Therefore, while numerical estimates of credibility are useful
these can only tell an incomplete story. Hence, we supplement the quantitative approach
with narrative evidence.
Credibility then is best thought of as a flow like variable that changes as observed
inflation is seen to deviate from a time-varying inflation objective, which need not be
explicit or publicly announced. Credibility is also partially determined by the relative
importance the central bank attaches to real and nominal economic objectives. Regular
economic shocks and the manner in which the central bank manipulates monetary policy
instruments dictate how credibility evolves over time.
Credibility evolves possibly in a non-linear manner, is earned slowly and painstakingly
yet susceptible to evaporate on a moment’s notice. In the words of Benjamin Franklin “It

takes many good deeds to build a good reputation, and only one bad one to lose it.”2
Identifying and measuring credibility is challenging. Nevertheless, as Cukierman (1986,
p.5) again points out, “…the ability of monetary policymakers to achieve their future
objectives depends on the inflationary expectations of the public. These inflationary
expectations depend, in turn, on the public’s evaluation of the credibility of the monetary
policy makers…” Paul Volcker, former Chair of the U.S. Federal Reserve’s Open Market
Committee (FOMC), once underscored the point that “[T]o break the inflation cycle we
must have credible and disciplined monetary policy” (Bernanke 2013, p. 35). Indeed,
Volcker went on to remark that “…inflation undermines trust in government.” (Silber 2012,
p. 266). Therefore, autonomy, transparency, accountability, and the monetary policy
strategy in place each can influence both the credibility and reputation of the monetary
authority.
Not everyone shares the view that credibility is a sought after objective of central
banks. Romer (2013, p. 109), for example, claims: “There is remarkably little evidence that
credibility in monetary policy making buys one much when it comes to lowering the costs
of disinflation.” Ball (1994), and Ball and Sheridan (2005), are similarly skeptical. Notice,
however, that Romer’s criticism relates to views about the costs of lowering inflation and
this is also highly dependent not only on how expectations are formed but on the
constraints faced by the monetary authorities. Ball and Sheridan’s (2005) analysis is
selective and appears to be offset by contrary evidence based on the success of regimes
such as inflation targeting. Mishkin (2005), for example, reviews the arguments against a
role for credibility and finds them wanting.3
In this paper we back up our interpretation of central bank behavior with measures of
credibility. To the extent that we are able to apply reliable institutional information we can
also indirectly assess their role in influencing the credibility of the monetary authority. We

Experimental evidence (e.g., List 2006) suggests that reputation and the monitoring of quality are
complements. Our definition of credibility is, in effect, a quality assessment exercise, and reputation, that is,
the ability of a central bank to deliver the promised monetary policy outcome over time, seems consistent
with the stock-flow distinction made above.
3 Part of the difficulty is that the definition of credibility is not unique. The theoretical literature also views the
concept as akin to a central bank being bound by a rule and this raises the possibility of time inconsistency.
The definition adopted here is, admittedly, a simpler one. More recently, Geraats (2014) has raised further
doubts about the methodology used by Ball and Sheridan (2005).
2

2

focus on measures of inflation expectations, the mean reversion properties of inflation, and
movements in interest rates, money growth, and exchange rate movements. In addition we
will place some emphasis on whether credibility is particularly vulnerable during financial
crises. As Carney (2013), former Governor of the Bank of Canada, points out: “Financial
imbalances ultimately breed crises, and crises threaten price stability.” Crises, especially of
the financial variety, play a role in influencing the ability of a central bank to maintain price
stability. A monetary authority with a reputation for delivering on its promises will likely
have an easier time of it, as well as the flexibility to temporarily deviate from a rule, than
one with poorly established credibility.

Is credibility linked to improvements in

macroeconomic conditions? Is credibility in monetary policy also affected by other factors
such as the growth of private credit?
Clearly, credibility will also be influenced not only by how observed inflation behaves
over time but, by implication, according to how expectations of inflation are formed. As
argued above, expectations formation lies at the core of any definition of credibility. Of
course, as Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) point out that: “…the power of the
expectations channel of monetary policy is highly sensitive to the precise manner in which
expectations are formed…” As a result, there is the possibility that our definition concerns
how well central banks have achieved their target as opposed to how their actions are
reflected in changing inflation expectations.4 It is for this reason that we are careful to
argue that, as imperfect as our measure may be, we strive to assess credibility on the basis
of how monetary policy actions and regimes over time are reflected in some proxy for
inflation expectations.5 A study that relies on a shorter time span than the century or more
of data used in this paper would be able to rely on more direct measures of inflationary
expectations but at the expense of investigating the role of credibility over far fewer policy
regimes.
Central banks can, at least for our purposes, be thought of as institutions responsible for
price stability and economic stabilization which, for simplicity, we will refer to as monetary
Indeed Lars Svensson, our discussant, drew attention to the useful distinction between inflation target
achievement and credibility. For example, he argues that the Riksbank’s performance in achieving it inflation
target since the mid-1990s is not good (in contrast to the Canadian experience) but that the central bank’s
target has been credible based on market-based expectations. As stressed later our measure need not be
equivalent to some publicly announced inflation target.
5 In fact, we consider several proxies as discussed below.
4

3

stability, as well as having possibly a role in ensuring financial stability. Traditionally,
financial stability meant serving as a lender of last resort (LOLR) to the commercial
banking system and protecting the payments mechanism. The concept has recently been
extended to include the prevention of contagion from the non-bank financial sector and
heading off asset price booms before they can burst.
A complication arises when one attempts to understand how these twin responsibilities
are, institutionally, linked to each other. The separation can be formal, as in the case of the
European Central Bank, or the Bank of England prior to the recent global financial crisis, or
informal as when central banks choose to focus on one activity at the expense of the other.
Reinhart and Rogoff (2013) posit that the U.S. Federal Reserve is a case in point.
However, theirs is a revisionist view of the financial stability task assigned to the Fed.
Responsibility for financial stability did not apply to non-member banks. Moreover, there
was no formal mechanism which would permit the Fed to intervene in what we now call
shadow banking. In other words, there was insufficient institutional flexibility to permit
intervention in the financial system that might prove necessary in response to financial
innovations. Legislation tended to define the circumstances under which the central bank
intervened and, when it did not do so, politicians reacted by placing additional limits on the
Fed’s room to maneuver in financial sector interventions. Finally, whereas the Fed’s
creation did away with seasonality in interest rate movements (e.g., see Mankiw and Miron
1991), certainly a contribution to financial stability, central banks more generally were not
created to manage asset booms and busts.
Instead, the Fed was led to focus on monetary stability after World War II. Next, we
have central banks where there is clear recognition that the twin responsibilities of the
central bank for monetary and financial stability overlap. Arguably, most central banks
were of this variety, at least until 2007 or so. Consequently, the mandate of the central
bank, its autonomy with respect to the government, the governance of the institution, to
name but three important determinants, also provide clues about how a central bank is
able to manage its credibility over time.
Finally, the type of central bank will also dictate which instruments are at its disposal
and how many are likely to be deployed at any given time. Presumably, central banks
where monetary and financial stability are both integral to the conduct of policy rely on
4

more instruments than a monetary authority where stabilization policies are effectively
divorced from financial stability concerns. Ultimately, however, the scope of the LOLR
function (see Table 1) is critical. A central bank that is statutorily prohibited from
intervening under certain circumstances (e.g., the Fed and the ECB) is likely to have
different consequences for financial stability than a monetary authority which is prepared
to intervene on a broad scale. Therefore, the credibility and reputation of the central bank
will be dictated by a more complex set of factors which, for brevity, we will refer to as
institutionally driven.
In an historical study it is unclear how we should define the benchmark against which
inflation deviates from some expected value. Accordingly, we consider a number of
approaches. For example, we apply statistical break tests to determine breaks in the
inflation rate. This permits us to evaluate one indicator of deviations of realized inflation
from some expectation, namely deviations from a statistically estimated trend inflation
rate.
Yet another strategy consists in comparing monetary policy performance against
examples when, with the hindsight of history, policies are thought to have been delivered
credibly and the reputation of the central bank was considered to be stellar. Historical
examples from Germany or Switzerland, the US during the Great Moderation from
approximately 1986 to 2007, or the period since certain central banks adopted and
maintained numerical inflation targets beginning in the mid 1990s, readily come to mind.
The implication then is that an evaluation of central bank credibility and reputation is
enhanced by narratives of central bank actions through time.
Next, we ask how the hypothesized credibility indicator reacts to the past history of
inflation, various proxies for economic growth performance, or the output gap, the stage
and shape of particular business cycle events (i.e., recessions versus recoveries, their size
and shape; see, for example, Bordo and Haubrich 2010) as well as other variables such as
wars, financial crises and financial market conditions. We also aim to empirically establish
whether credibility behaves asymmetrically over time.
An historical perspective also enables us to deal with another under-emphasized
element of central bank performance, namely whether deflationary periods, or the threat of
deflation, also influences central bank credibility. Burdekin and Siklos (2004a), based on a
5

cross-section of countries covering a long span of time, have shown that macroeconomic
shocks are strikingly different between inflationary and deflationary samples. We can also
draw upon the rich examples of the consequences of deflation covered by several other
authors (e.g., also see Burdekin and Siklos 2004). The upshot is that there is potentially an
asymmetry that could further contribute to introducing non-linearity in the behavior of
central bank reputation over time.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a brief narrative
exploration of the nature and evolution of credibility through time and across a select
number of countries.6 We then provide some theoretical underpinnings for the proposed
empirical exercise aimed at evaluating how central bank credibility and reputation have
evolved over time.7 Next, we provide a brief description of the data and discuss some
methodological considerations. Section 4 discusses our main findings. Section 5 concludes.
Briefly, we find credibility changes over time are frequent and can be sizeable. For
example, there is robust evidence that the Gold Standard improves central bank credibility.
Similarly, in the post World War II era, central bank independence reliably improved
credibility. Finally, there is some evidence that financial crises damage central bank
credibility. However, the gap between observed and the central bank’s inflation goal must
be fairly large for this to happen. Hence, credibility is significantly affected according to
whether the shock can be associated with policy errors. Bernanke (2013, p. 23), for
example, has acknowledged that such errors can play an important role in explaining the
severity of the most recent ‘global’ financial crisis. Moreover, institutional factors (i.e., the
quality of governance) can play an important role in mitigating reputational loss. Lastly,
credibility shocks are dependent on the type of monetary policy regime in place.
2. Credibility and Reputation Through the Ages

The history of central bank credibility is tied up with the history of policy regimes.
Consider, for example, the classical gold standard as a rule based on the commitment to
maintain the official peg. Central banks (independent of the fiscal authorities) in many of
the advanced countries of Europe adhered to this rule from 1880 to 1914. According to the
6
7

An Annex presents detailed Narratives on the historical evolution of 11 advanced country central banks.
Some technical details are mainly relegated to an Appendix.

6

rule temporary suspension was allowed during a wartime emergency or a serious financial
crisis. In such situations central banks issued paper money to help finance the
government’s fiscal deficit. Once the emergency ended the central bank was required to
restore convertibility to gold at the prewar official parity. If it did this it would ensure its
credibility and allow it to use its seigniorage to finance a future war (Bordo and Kydland
1995). Credible adherence to the gold standard rule allowed central banks to have some
leeway to conduct stabilization policies within the gold points (Bordo and MacDonald
2012). It also insured that it could conduct lender of last resort actions without
engendering capital flight (Eichengreen 1997). The history of the pre 1914 gold standard
shows how important countries, especially Britain, France and Germany, had credible
regimes (see the Annex for examples from other countries with successes; e.g., Sweden
and the United States, and failures; e.g., Italy’s inability to deliver credible regimes). Many
other peripheral countries tried to gain it but were less successful (Bordo and Schwartz
1996). 8
World War I ended the classical gold standard and, after the war, many countries tried
to rebuild the prewar system. Restoring the prewar parity after massive wartime inflation
and changes in the political economy (suffrage) delayed the restoration of the gold
standard and the standard that was established – the fragile gold exchange standard – had
less credibility. Britain returned to gold at the prewar parity in 1925 but at an overvalued
parity which continually threatened its adherence. The U.S. never left gold but the newly
established Federal Reserve went through a lengthy learning period to become a fully
functioning member of the central banking club (Meltzer 2001). France went through a
period of high inflation and its central bank lost much of its credibility in a scandal.
Germany went through a hyperinflation fueled by the Reichsbank. By 1926 the gold
exchange standard was up and running and its short-lived success depended upon the
reputations of Benjamin Strong, Montagu Norman, Emile Moreau and Hjalmar Schacht.
8 Not everyone supports the view that rules implicit in regimes of the gold standard variety can generate
credibility. Ferguson and Schularik (2008) suggest that in peripheral (i.e., less developed) economies there
was no credibility bonus in adhering to a policy rule of the gold standard variety. Nevertheless, this view
downplays the fact that credibility and reputation are inter-connected. Hence, even if the peripheral countries
intended to generate credibility, theirs is an attempt to operate under rules governed by weak central
banking institutions.

7

Despite their efforts the system collapsed during the Great Depression. In its aftermath
central bankers were blamed for the Depression and central banks lost their independence
and became virtual appendages of the fiscal authorities. Academics still debate not only if
too much authority was invested in central banks but whether a series of policy mistakes
by governments, and other public institutions, combined to create the perfect storm
resulting in the greatest economic slump of the 20th century (e.g., Ahamed 2009, Meltzer
2010).
While the rules versus discretion debate concerning the conduct of monetary policy has
a long history, and is likely to dominate discussions of central bank credibility and
reputation, the institutional approach evaluates performance through the prism of the
mandate of the central bank. Indeed, evaluations of central bank performance according to
how autonomous and accountable they are, continues to pre-occupy academics and policy
makers. While there exists a fairly broad consensus that central bank independence and
accountability are essential ingredients in maintaining credibility and reputation (e.g., see
Waller 2011), it is equally clear that there are serious reservations about our ability to
objectively make the link between central bank mandates and inflation performance or the
success of a particular monetary policy regime (e.g., see Parkin 2012, Cargill 2013). Matters
become still more complicated when attempts are made to link central bank mandates with
inflation prior to the 1950s (e.g., Dehay and Levy 2000).9
Regardless of one’s view about the importance of central bank autonomy in explaining
monetary policy performance central banks have become far more talkative over time and
place a premium on their ability to communicate with the public. In this regard we may
trace the origins of this phase in the evolution of central banks to the late 1950s when, then
Governor of the Bank of Canada, James Coyne, was the target of heavy criticism, in both the
press as well as from government officials, for speaking out in public on matters beyond
the usual remit of monetary policy. Not only did Coyne view speeches and other reports
published by the Bank of Canada as devices to explain monetary policy to the public but as
a tool to underpin the central bank’s credibility and reputation (Siklos 2010, and Powell
Interestingly, Japan (low inflation and, until the 1990s, not an autonomous central bank) poses a problem
for institutional hypotheses of central bank performance in more recent times, and also appears to be atypical
of the central bank independence – low inflation nexus in the interwar era.
9

8

2009). This sentiment would be echoed a little later by Karl Blessing, President of the
Bundesbank from 1958 to 1969, who argued: “A central bank which never fights, which at
times of economic tension never raises its voice…that central bank will be viewed with
mistrust.” (Marsh 1992, pp. 256-57) Therefore, whereas central banks were hampered by
their unwillingness or inability to express their views or influence expectations via public
pronouncements, the spread of transparency especially since the late 1990s has changed
rather dramatically (e.g., see Siklos 2002, Dincer and Eichengreen 2007). Central banks are
no longer shy about discussing matters beyond purely monetary policy questions.
In the 1950s, the Federal Reserve gained its independence and began following gold
standard orthodoxy dedicated to price stability. Few other central banks, with the
exception of the Bundesbank, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) and the Bank of Canada (BoC),
followed suit. In Canada, policy makers suspended their participation in the Bretton Woods
system for much of the 1950s. This allowed the BoC to regain its monetary independence
although Canada’s economic fortunes were increasingly linked to economic developments
faced by its largest trading partner, the U.S. A crisis dented the reputation of the BoC in the
late 1950s but it would be restored following important institutional reforms and with the
return to the Bretton Woods fold (Siklos 2010). The theme linking independence to
credibility and the role of the policy regime in dictating central bank behavior is a recurring
one throughout the 20th century (Siklos 2002).
In the U.S. the return to monetary orthodoxy rested on the reputation of William
McChesney Martin after the 1951 Fed-Treasury Accord restored the Fed’s independence to
conduct monetary policy. The regained central bank credibility was, however, short lived.
In the 1960s central banks (with the exception of the Bundesbank and the SNB) began
following Keynesian policies to maintain full employment at the expense of higher inflation.
The subsequent Great Inflation destroyed any vestiges of credibility as well as the
reputations of central bankers such as Arthur Burns (Bordo and Orphanides 2013). Paul
Volcker’s adoption of a monetarist style tight monetary policy in 1979 broke the back of
inflationary expectations at the expense of a deep recession in the U.S. Previously, inflation
had drifted upward in a seemingly permanent fashion (e.g., see Goodfriend and King 2013,
and De Long 1997) and it appears that only a form of ‘shock therapy’ could restore lower
long-run inflationary expectations (e.g., see Levin and Taylor 2013).
9

Similar strategies were followed in Canada, the UK, Japan and other countries (see the
Annex) so that by the mid-1980s the Great Moderation restored price stability in the
advanced countries along with the reputations of central bankers. However, in all of these
instances (with the possible exception of Switzerland), credibility did not exist in the
immediate postwar. It had to be earned at an economic price over time. Indeed, the lower
the credibility of policies, the more adverse the economic costs are. This relationship has
been understood for some time (e.g., Fellner 1976, Haberler 1980). The commitment to
rules focused on low inflation helped to restore central bank credibility (e.g., see Levin and
Taylor 2013 and Goodfriend 1986). What helped these central banks to succeed was that
new policies were built on the reputation of their institutions. In Germany, the Bundesbank
(DBB) gained credibility and a sterling reputation in the postwar period. The DBB was
founded in 1948 with the express mandate to pursue price stability. This mandate was a
reaction to the disastrous experience of its predecessor, the Reichsbank, in generating a
hyperinflation in the 1920s.
Canada, like the US example under Volcker, offers another example of the trade-off
between credibility and the costs of reducing inflation, occasionally referred to as the
sacrifice ratio. Following years of inflation rates that were persistently higher than those in
the US, the Canadian government, in cooperation with the Bank of Canada, adopted
inflation targeting. In spite of the joint declaration to aim for low and stable inflation the
recession of the early 1990s was among the sharpest in Canadian history (e.g., see Cross
and Bergevin 2012). It led some to suggest that Canada, as a result of the tight monetary
policy that helped influence inflationary expectations delivered a “Great Canadian Slump”
(Fortin 1996). The Bank of Canada replied that supply side factors played a much greater
role than critics of monetary policy allowed (Freedman and Macklem 1998). The Canadian
example also highlights a recurring theme, namely the difficulty of identifying the
proximate source of economic downturns, particularly severe ones, and the extent to which
central banks ought to have anticipated these and calibrated their policies to mitigate the
costs of a transition in adopting a new policy regime.10

The adoption of inflation targeting was spurred by the record of monetary policy in the 1970s and 1980s.
See Crow (2002) for a first-hand account by the Bank of Canada Governor at the time.
10

10

In Germany the DBB gained credibility and a sterling reputation in the postwar period.
In the next 50 years the DBB had the best track record of any advanced country in
maintaining low inflation (Beyer et. al. 2013). Indeed during the Great Inflation, core
inflation in West Germany increased only a fraction of that of the US and UK. Unlike central
banks in other advanced country, the DBB did not accommodate the oil price shocks of the
1970s. This record of credible adherence to low inflation gave the DBB a very strong
reputation which the ECB, founded in 1999, tried to emulate. The Swiss National Bank also
followed a policy like Germany’s from its origin in 1907 and had one of the best inflation
fighting track records of any central bank in the twentieth century (Bordo and James 2007)
( for other countries see the Annex).
The fact that central banks, mainly in Anglo-Saxon countries, appear to attach relatively
more weight to the statutory relationship between central banks and governments
suggests that certain cultural factors might also be in play (e.g., Eijffinger and De Haan
1996, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Schleifer 2008). Moreover, if cultural factors also
impact business cycles, at least in some parts of the world (e.g., see Altug and Canova
2013), then there exists another avenue through which the central bank’s credibility and
reputation can be altered.
The series of financial crises that have, since 2007, gripped the advanced economies
especially led to massive discretionary intervention in financial markets by central banks
around the world. Many of the actions mixed monetary with fiscal policy and appeared to
violate central bank independence. The changes in the legislative and regulatory landscape
that followed have expanded the role of central banks. Time will tell if their credibility to
maintain low inflation will survive. However, unlike earlier episodes in the monetary
history of the last century or so, it is the fear of deflation and depression that has fueled
central banks’ responses. It is, therefore, worth contemplating whether the ability of
central banks to ease policies by historically unheard of amounts, without signs that
inflation expectations are becoming unanchored, is a sign of the triumph of central bank
credibility and the strength of their reputation (also see Borio and Filardo 2004).
Has the industrial world, in particular, adopted a ‘culture of stability’ that seemingly
explains Germany’s and Switzerland’s success in avoiding the Great Inflation of the 1970s
and 1980s? (e.g., see Beyer et. al. 2013). As Bernanke (2013, p. 63) notes: “People get used
11

to what they see.” And the industrial world has experienced low and stable inflation rates
for approximately two decades. The implication of Bernanke’s comment is that low and
stable observed inflation rates give meaning to the concept of price stability which, as
former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan (1996, p. 1) remarks: “…obtains when economic
agents no longer take account of the prospective changes in the general price level in their
economic decision-making.”
Alternatively, central bank credibility may have suffered recently, based on
expectations about what central banks can and cannot do, because the public does not
believe the current policy is compatible with the reliance on numerical objectives for
evaluating the performance of monetary policy. It may be that inflation expectations are no
longer a sufficient guide of policy credibility. By the same token, changes in the
responsibilities central banks are faced with also raise questions about the reputation of
these institutions and whether they have become overburdened with responsibilities that
are bound to conflict with each other (e.g., see Siklos 2014).
3. Quantifying Credibility

3.1 The Taylor Rule, Credibility, and Policy Regimes
Since Taylor’s (1993) celebrated article many discussions about policy rules revolve
around an expression of the following kind:
it      2  t  3yt   i ,t

(1.1)

where it is the central bank’s policy rate,  is the natural real interest rate,  t is an indicator
of the inflation gap, yt is the output gap. The inflation gap can either be the difference
between realized and expected or forecasted inflation, or represented by some deviation
from an explicit inflation objective. In Taylor’s original formulation,  is set at 2%, as is the
inflation objective, while 2 ,3 were each calibrated to equal ½. Since that time many
central banks have adopted a 2% inflation objective, generally for the medium-term (i.e., a
2 to 3 year horizon). Instead of an explicit numerical objective a model-based estimate of
the central bank’s implicit inflation objective can be used to generate  since central banks,

12

generally, are not expected to meet the stated objective on an annual basis let alone at
quarterly or monthly frequencies.
The output gap, yt , defined as deviations of observed real GDP ( yt ) from potential
output ( yt* ), is likely unobserved given lags in obtaining economy-wide output data (i.e.,
real GDP). Consequently, many empirical applications resort to yt 1 instead of relying on the
contemporaneous output gap.11 Note that (1.1) assumes that    is time-invariant. If
inflation drifts over time, as was the case during the Great Inflation of the 1970s and 1980s
(e.g., see Goodfriend and King 2013), then the intercept of the Taylor rule would also
change over time with consequences for central bank credibility.
Arguably, a big challenge with equation (1.1) is estimating potential or trend output.
Several techniques are available. While the Hodrick-Prescott filter is probably the most
widely used method there is no agreement on which method is best (e.g., see Dupasquier,
Guay, and St-Amant 1999, van Norden and Orphanides 2002, and Mishkin 2007).12
If the hallmark of good policy making involves setting today’s policy instrument in a
forward-looking manner then it is preferable to replace  t and yt 1 with their expected
values (e.g., Et t 1 , Et yt 1 ), whether these are model generated or rely on published
forecasts. Woodford (2003) demonstrates that some history dependence is required to
implement policy in a stable fashion. As a result, central banks generally do not always
adjust their policy instrument according to equation (1.1). Instead, policy rate changes may
be ‘smoothed’ over time. One way to introduce this feature into the reaction function is by
adding a lagged dependent variable (i.e., it 1 ). 13 Another limitation of Taylor’s original
formulation, and many of its variants, stems from the role of the policy rate at or near the
zero lower bound (ZLB). For example, simulations by Chung et al. (2012) reveal that very
Alternatively, one can replace the output gap with an unemployment rate gap. There is the additional
difficulty, in this connection, stemming from the fact that central banks may not make policy decisions on a
monthly or quarterly basis. The U.S. Federal Reserve, for example, renders decisions 8 times a year.
12 Borio (2013) argues in favor of an output gap concept that incorporates financial asset prices. With few
exceptions, however, such data are not available for a long span of time nor is it immediately clear whether
financial assets were important prior to, say, the 1980s in influencing the output gap. Likely, a more
significant influence on changes in potential output are recessions. Also, see Haltmaier (2012).
13 Rudebusch (2006) casts doubts on the interest rate smoothing hypothesis because interest rate changes
are unpredictable, among other reasons. In contrast, Goodhart (1999) posits several plausible reasons in
support of the interest rate smoothing phenomenon, including the unwillingness of central banks to be seen
as frequently enacting policy reversals. Also, see Sack and Wieland (2000), and Rudebusch (2002).
11

13

low inflation objectives (viz., below 2%) frequently lead to the ZLB being reached.
Consequently, either the central bank reacts more aggressively to the output gap when the
policy rate is low or it reduces the policy rate to zero more quickly than any standard
Taylor rule might recommend.
It is not an exaggeration to state that central banks through the decades have followed
some type of ‘rule’, explicit or not, since most central banks have always been created,
among other tasks to be carried out (e.g., an exchange rate, economic activity or
employment objective, banker for the State, supervisory tasks, supporting the economic
policies of government, to name a few), to maintain some form of price stability. Also, the
instruments of policy used by a large number of central banks around the world have
ranged over the decades from setting interest rates, influencing the price of gold, liquidity
enhancing and credit easing measures, setting objectives for the exchange rate and money
growth. The fact that one resorts to a post 1990s framework to examine central bank
performance in previous decades simply means that allowances should be made for
deviations from such rules. They do not, however, invalidate their use. After all, Taylor
(1993, 1998) demonstrated the usefulness of his rule for the Fed using historical data for a
period when few would have characterized monetary policy as acting in a rule-like manner.
While it is true that focus on Taylor rules masks the fact that central banks over time have
deployed different policy instruments, the formulations we develop below do not ignore
other factors, such as money (or credit) aggregates in potentially influencing financial
conditions.14
Kozicki and Tinsley (2009) explicitly demonstrate that a formulation such as (1.1) is
consistent with a several policy strategies.15 Hence, describing change in central bank
Reinhart and Rogoff (2013) point out that the Fed, like a few other central banks, have seen their mandate
evolve over time, from financial stability to price stability, and back again to financial stability. Consequently,
they favor a greater role for credit aggregates in the conduct of monetary policy, a point repeatedly made by
the BIS in recent years. Nevertheless, their analysis underestimates the connection between price stability
and financial stability as well as equating financial stability with bank stability. There is no allowance made
for the role of shadow banking nor does the Federal Reserve Act explicitly define what financial stability
means.
15 Their formulation is expressed in terms of an unemployment gap in part because they are interested in U.S.
monetary policy during the 1970s through the late 1990s. Data restrictions as well as comparability with
most of the relevant literature, including Orphanides’ (2003) historical analysis of policy rules, make it
impractical, in our study, to rely on the unemployment rate. Instead, we begin with a rule expressed in terms
of an output gap.
14

14

credibility over time in these terms is possible because central banks have different views
about the various natural rates in the Taylor rule (inflation, output, and the real interest
rate), as well as different attitudes about how aggressively to react to inflation and output
gap shocks (i.e., the size of 1 ,2 ). Moreover, with some exceptions, even if central banks
are clear about the primary instrument of policy used to control inflation they have also
always reserved the right to resort to using other instruments at their disposal. It is only
very recently that many central banks have become sufficiently transparent to allow clear
identification of the instruments of policy actually used.
It seems reasonable then, if we are interested in evaluating central bank credibility and
reputation, to focus our attention on how expected inflation evolves over time when
derived from alternative formulations of equation (1.1), conditioned on a chosen monetary
policy instrument. Since we can allow estimates of expected inflation to evolve for both
short-term economic reasons (e.g., an economic shock of some kind), as well as
institutional reasons (e.g., a change in the degree of central bank independence), this serves
as the starting point for our estimates of central bank credibility over time. As Kahn (2012)
argues: “The Taylor rule can be seen as part of a broader movement in which commitment
(and therefore credibility), transparency, and independence, replaced a culture of
discretion, “mystique,” and occasional political influence.”
We begin with the case where interest rates are not smoothed and equation (1.1)
augmented by a ‘speed limit’ term (e.g., see Woodford 2003) that corrects for measurement
type errors in specification via the addition of an output growth term. Next, strong
persistence in the policy rate is accounted for by permitting dynamic adjustment of the
policy rate. This yields a version of (1.1) which can be written as follows

it   1,t   2,t Et t 1   3,t (Et yt 1  yt* )   4,t yt   5,t it 1   6,t (it 1  t )  t  t

(1.2)

Adapting the result from Kozicki and Tinsley (2009), the implied inflation target is
derived as

t 

( 2,t

 1,t
  6,t  1)

15

(1.3)

When an intermediate monetary target is in place we rely on a Quantity Theory type
formulation that sets money growth ( mt ), in both realized and equilibrium terms,
according to either realized or the effective inflation target, the growth rate of the economy
and velocity movements ( vt ).
Kozicki and Tinsley (2009) then demonstrate that the effective inflation target can be
shown to be (also, see Orphanides 2003)16
 t  mt  yt  vt

(1.4)

Finally, we consider the case of a small open economy that contemplates combining
interest rate and exchange rate instruments in the manner of Ball (1999) so that the policy
rule is expressed as an adapted version of equation (1.1) written as follows:

it  (1  )et  t   t  2 t  3yt   i ,t

(1.5)

where et is the nominal exchange rate (i.e., the domestic price of foreign currency). Under a
floating exchange rate regime,   1 , so we are left with an expression of the form of
equation (1.1). Next, if domestic and foreign inflation rates are related to each other via an
(uncovered) interest rate parity relation the effective inflation target is reminiscent of
equation (1.3), but adapted to capture the trade-off between an interest rate and an
exchange rate response so that we obtain the following expression for the implied inflation
target

t 

( 2,t

 1,t
  6,t   7,t  1)

(1.6)

As a result, this formulation of the policy rule has the distinct advantage that it does not rely on
unobservable output gap measures. See, for example, Friedman (1968) and Orphanides (2003). Nevertheless,
the specification does require taking a stand on how best to measure the money supply. The formal
expression is still as in equation (1.3) except that, in equation (1.2), Et xt 1 replaces Et  t 1 and Et yt 1 replaces
yt . In other words, parameters  3,t and  4,t are affected. xt is a proxy for the nominal output growth gap
16

obtained via Okun’s Law (e.g., see Ball et. al. 2013). The difficulty is that Okun’s Law requires data for the
unemployment rate in order to estimate the relevant gap measure and this series is likely unavailable for
several countries and samples in our dataset. Instead, we proxy xt by estimating  t 1  0.454 yt 1 . The
0.454 value is obtained for the U.S. from Ball et.al. (2013) and is equivalent to the value used in Kozicki and
Tinsley (2009). For the other countries in the data set we also rely on estimates in Ball et. al. (2013).

16

where  7,t is obtained from a variant of equation (1.2) augmented by adding a term
capturing the expected depreciation of the nominal exchange rate. The upshot is that not all
shocks require an immediate response of the policy instrument to maintain credibility.17
Indeed, as long as the central bank communicates clearly (i.e., there is adequate
transparency)18, some changes in the inflation and the output gap will elicit a response
such as when the economic shock is of the aggregate demand variety while other types of
shocks, namely aggregate supply shocks, are responded to in a ‘balanced’ fashion. Both of
these actions should be reflected in the ability of the central bank to ‘anchor’ inflation
expectations.
We can now define credibility. In the simplest terms a central bank is deemed credible
when it delivers, subject to a random error, the implied inflation rate objective conditional
on the monetary regime in place. Of course, as previously noted, there may well be
economic and institutional reasons why the credibility of the central bank may be affected.
Consequently, we write

( it   it )2  θΖit + i ( i ,t 1   i ,t 1 )2  uit

(1.7)

Where the dependent variable is our indicator of credibility, θZ t is the product of a
vector of coefficients, θ , and Ζ represents economic and institutional variables that can
explain departures from the effective inflation target (see the following section). Finally, as
suggested earlier, credibility may be persistent because inflation tends to be persistent
over time (e.g., Burdekin and Siklos 1999). The subscript i identifies the country in
question. Equation (1.7), therefore, is estimated as a panel.19 Since we are also interested in
asymmetries that have consequences for central bank credibility we consider separately a
Indeed, as a result we do not interpret what central banks have done as if they followed an optimal control
(OC) policy. Orphanides and Williams (2011) demonstrate an OC policy does not deliver better outcomes
unless the information possessed by the authorities is superlative. Since this is unlikely, even in the data rich
environment we live in, and almost certainly a low probability event in earlier decades, our approach is more
akin to the ‘robust’ monetary policy type of approach in the presence of significant impairments in
information.
18 Clarity and transparency need not, of course, go hand in hand (e.g., see Siklos 2003).
19 Space limitations prevent the extensive reporting of the sensitivity of our results to sub-sample selection.
See, however, Bordo and Siklos (2014) for additional evidence which corroborates the conclusions discussed
below. We consider a variety of samples based on historical evidence dating the start and end of monetary
policy regimes, the length of time the various central banks in our study have been in existence, as well as
limitations due to the availability of certain institutional data (e.g., index of central bank independence or
transparency).
17

17

version of equation (1.7) for what we term low inflation and deflation environments. Low
inflation is arbitrarily defined as CPI inflation below 1.5% while deflation, of course,
obtains when inflation is negative.20
Note that credibility is independent of the level of inflation. Credibility is also
independent of whether or not the central bank has other targets (e.g., money growth,
exchange rate). Recall that, for reasons previously discussed, our interpretation of
credibility is focused on inflation performance relative to some (implicit) inflation
objective. Of course, the latter may well be indirectly influenced by performance in relation
to other objectives or targets the central bank may pursue which are likely also impacted
by institutional considerations. We return to this issue in the empirical section where we
allow for the possibility that past inflation shocks can also impact credibility.
There exist, potentially, several questions that can be raised about specification (1.7).
First, if there are any lags in obtaining and processing information then it is not clear that
credibility

will

involve

the

differential

between

observed

inflation

and

the

contemporaneously implied inflation target. While inflation rates are observed fairly
quickly it may well take some time to observe the effective inflation target.21 Of course, to
some extent, the appropriateness of equation (1.7) is dependent on the sampling frequency
being used. At the annual frequency, which is used in this study, the foregoing specification
seems sensible.
There is no reason for the relationship between credibility and its determinants to be
linear. For example, there may well be a threshold beyond which there is a loss of
credibility whereas there might also exist a ‘band of indifference’ within which there is no
appreciable loss of credibility. An alternative, commonly found the literature on policy
rules and the objective function of central banks, is to assume that the loss of credibility
rises with the size of the deviation from the inflation goal. A simple specification that meets
this requirement is to express credibility as the squared differential between observed and
Some judgment is involved when selecting the threshold for low inflation. However, even in the modern era
where 2% inflation targets are common, the choice of a 1.5% threshold seems a reasonable one.
21 In principle observing the inflation target is easier in a conventional inflation targeting (IT) regime. Recall,
however, that the implied inflation target, as defined here, need not to be the same as the numerically
announced inflation target. All modern IT regimes are sufficiently flexible in that they are permitted to avoid
missing the target from time to time as long as departures are publicly explained. Whether these departures
separately influence credibility is, of course, another matter.
20

18

the Fed’s inflation goal. Hence, the dependent variable is expressed as in equation (1.7).22
However, as will be seen below, other alternatives are also considered.
As noted previously, it is not always known a priori whether a central bank relies
primarily on one instrument over another. Hence, estimates of (1.3) and (1.6) may well be
implausible. As will be demonstrated below this means that there is some value in
censoring ‘outliers’ based on estimates of (1.7).
3.2 Challenges in Measuring Credibility Over A Long Time Span
Obviously, there are a number of complications when dealing with historical data
especially when the span of time exceeds over a century of data. In no particular order of
importance one might include significant changes in the quality, scope and availability of
time series useful for the kind of macroeconomic analysis in place. Consequently, the
evidence marshaled below is cross-checked with additional narrative evidence about the
evolution of central bank credibility over time.
An additional illustration of the desirability of blending the time series econometric
approach with what is known from economic history emerges when evidence that a change
in the monetary policy regime is found. If such an event is associated with, say, a sudden
loss of credibility then our estimates should compare favorably with historical depictions
of a policy regime change. Econometrically, these could be identified from structural break
tests. Of course, structural breaks come in many forms. For example, it is interesting to
examine the connection between financial crises and changes in central bank reputation
and credibility. The global financial crisis of 2008-9 has been said to rest on the
ineffectiveness of financial regulation and supervision by the Fed and other regulators, on
the Fed keeping policy rates too low to fight the prospect of deflation, and on the
inattention of central bankers to the possible link between low inflation and asset price
booms leading to financial sector instability.23

Indeed, if credibility is only a function of whether observed and the notional inflation objective are different
from each other, so that we set θZit = 0 , and uit ~ N(0, iu2 ) , then credibility can be interpreted as observed
inflation and the effective inflation objective being attracted to each other in the sense of being cointegrated.
We do not, however, investigate this possibility here.
23 Bernanke (2013, p. 23) admits as much. “…the Federal Reserve failed [to] …adequately perform its function
as lender of last resort…”.
22

19

As the foregoing discussion indicates the lender of last resort (LOLR) function of
central banks is critical. Long dormant as the growth in the financial sector provided
adequate liquidity until the loss of confidence in 2007-2008, the re-emergence of the LOLR
role of central banks was ushered in by market failures in key financial markets. Finally, the
combination of statistical testing and the narrative approach should also reduce the
likelihood of identifying too many breaks.24
4. Data and Methodological Considerations

Our empirical investigation consists of a time series analysis of 10 central banks around
the world.25 They are: Canada, France, Japan, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland,
the U.K. and the U.S. We rely on annual data going back to when central banks were
established. Table 1 provides information about the year when the central banks in our
sample were created as well as a brief description of the proximate reason for their
creation. It is interesting to note that, of the central banks surveyed, not all were created to
fulfill the lender of last resort mandate. Indeed, other than to assist with the consequences
of war finance, monetary stability is the other major proximate explanation for the creation
of many central banks around the world. Since their formation central banks, and central
banking more generally, have seen a broadening of their functions while shouldering ever
greater responsibilities for economic stabilization.
For several countries in our sample (e.g., Japan, Norway, the U.K., Sweden) we can rely
on over a century of data. For other countries (e.g., the U.S.) annual data span almost a
century of data. There is a rich historical narrative history to draw on to identify policy
regimes, exchange rate regimes, the dating and identification of crises (e.g., see Bordo,
Eichengreen, et. al. 2001, Reinhart and Rogoff 2009, Bordo and Orphanides 2013, Singleton
2012, James 2012, just to name a few). Moreover, thanks to efforts made by several central
banks to greatly improve historical data sources (e.g., Norway) there are ample
macroeconomic and financial data. In other cases (e.g., Canada and the U.S.) there is a long
In a sense this was the aim of Perron’s (1989) seminal contribution to the literature on the time series
properties of macroeconomic data. Hence, not all shifts in time series are permanent (i.e., level or intercept
shifts). Indeed, some breaks simply alter the trend in a time series.
25 Narratives were written for all of these central banks except Japan. The narratives also include the Reserve
Bank of Australia and New Zealand.
24

20

tradition of collecting historical time series and making them publicly available. To these
sources must be added the sources of data the authors and their collaborators, as well as
others,

have

compiled

over

the

years.

(https://www.globalfinancialdata.com/index.html)

Finally,
is

Global

another

Financial

source

of

Data

long-term

macroeconomic and financial data, especially for countries in Europe and Asia where
publicly available historical time series are more difficult to obtain.
Prior to econometric estimation three preliminary steps are followed. First, either
based on statistical testing or using the narrative approach, we must identify policy
regimes. Since we estimate a central bank’s inflation objective under the assumption that
the same policy instrument is used throughout the estimated sample, it is inevitable that
we end up adopting a counterfactual approach, at least for a portion of the sample in
question. Consequently, one may view this approach as asking whether some monetary
regimes are more credible than others over time. In a second step, equation (1.2), or its
variants, are estimated to obtain the key parameters of interest, namely  2,t ,  6,t ,and  7,t .
Finally, we can obtain estimates of the implicit inflation target,  t , for each central bank.
Notice that the parameters and the inflation objective are time-varying as are the estimates
of the real policy rates. There exist, of course, a variety of techniques to generate such
estimates. As discussed in the results section we also combine several proxies to improve
the robustness of our estimates.
Credibility and, by implication, reputation might also be determined by governance
structures that define the relationship between the central bank and government, including
central bank independence. In this case we can resort to data originally constructed by
Cukierman (1992), updated by Siklos (2002), with more recent data also available from the
IMF (e.g., see Arnone and Romelli 2012, and Arnone et. al. 2009). However, these data are
only available since the 1950s.
5. Empirical Evidence

5.1 Panel Estimates
Relying on the notion that the average of forecasts delivers superior performance
relative to individual forecasts our estimates of expected inflation are based on mean
21

forecasts generated from three different models.26 First, we evaluate the three years ahead
mean inflation rate, that is, Et t 1  ( t 1   t 2   t 3 ) / 3 . Next, we estimate an AR(1) model
for observed inflation and let the data select up as many breaks based on a series of
econometrically determined constraints.27
Finally, following Stock and Watson (2007) we estimate an integrated moving
average model of order 1 (i.e., an IMA(1,1)) in the change in inflation as this has been
shown to be a reliable inflation forecasting model in a wide variety of circumstances. In a
twist on the usual approach, however, the IMA(1,1) model is separately estimated for each
sub-sample obtained from the analysis of breaks in the inflation process using an AR(1)
model. This approach provides us with additional insights into the changing role of
permanent versus transitory shocks influencing the behavior of inflation since the time the
central banks in this study were founded.28
As with the proxy for expected inflation, the output gap measure used below is the
mean of several proxies. They are: an H-P filter with the standard smoothing parameter
(i.e., 100 in the case of annual data), two other versions of an H-P filter estimated with a 20
year window and changing end-points (one fixing the end-point at the beginning of the
sample, the other fixing it at the end of the sample) and, finally, deviations from a linear
trend applied to the logarithm of potential real GDP allowing for break-points beginning
around the time of the Great Depression, one that starts at the time of the first oil price
shock of the 1970s, and a final one at the end of the sample to capture the early stages of
Obviously in a study that looks at credibility for roughly a century of data we are unable to construct a data
set consisting of private sector, central bank or survey data that covers the entire span of the history of the
Fed or, for that matter, any of the other central banks in our study. We also considered a fourth models,
namely the difference between the yield on a long-term government bond and a ten year (moving) average of
inflation (e.g., see Bordo and Dewald 2001). However, as the results were unaffected we did not include them
in computing the final estimate of inflation expectations.
27 This involves implementing the Bai-Perron (1998) test where the maximum number of breaks we restrict
is set according to the rule T/25, where T is the number of available observations. In this manner we restrict
the maximum number of structural breaks to, at most, 4 per century of data. The breaks are globally
determined and a degrees of freedom adjustment is also applied. The samples are ‘trimmed’ using a 10% rule
meaning that breaks will be located in 80% of the sample excluding the first and last 10% of the sample. It is
well-known that these choices in the estimation of breaks will impact their frequency and location. This is
another reason for cross-checking the choice of breaks with the historical evidence.
28 The samples are defined so that the year a structural break is found in the Bai-Perron test is the last
observation of each sub-sample. Additional robustness tests were conducted when the sub-samples were
short (e.g., less than 15 years in duration). Stock and Watson (2007) also indicate that permitting some time
variation in this kind of model improves the forecasting performance of this model.
26

22

the so-called Global Financial Crisis.29 The difficulties in estimating the output gap have
been widely discussed. Admittedly, the task of estimating an indicator of economic slack is
made even more difficult when a century of data is examined. However, as pointed out in
Goodfriend and King (2013), if the output gap properly measures aggregate economic slack
then it should be negatively correlated with future real GDP growth. 30 This seems to be the
case for the proxy generated here, at least beginning around the mid-1920s (results not
shown).
Next, we consider the institutional determinants of credibility. As discussed previously,
our benchmark measure of credibility is evaluated as the squared deviation from a central
bank’s inflation objective. Other measures were considered, including distinguishing
between instances when observed inflation is above as opposed to being below the central
bank’s inflation goal. We then consider some hypothesized institutional determinants at
our disposal. Accordingly, Z it , the vector of institutional determinants of credibility is
specified as follows:
Z it  [Goldit , Mit , loansit , debtit ,OILit ,CRISISit ,CBIit ,ERRit ]

where Gold is a dummy variable that identifies when country i was on the Gold standard,
Mit is the growth rate of a broad monetary aggregate, loans represents the ratio of bank

credit to GDP, and debt is the ratio of sovereign debt to GDP. Other controls include a
dummy variable for the oil price shocks of the 1970s, CRISIS are dummy variables to
capture various financial crises (banking, currency, stock market and/or sovereign debt of
the domestic or external varieties), CBI is an index of central bank independence while ERR
is a dummy indicative of the type of exchange rate regime in place.31
An obvious concern, among others, is that some of the determinants of credibility
may be endogenous, reflecting both the impact of past credibility and, in turn, influencing
future central bank credibility. This concern is considerably mitigated under the
circumstances either because lags are used, the persistence properties of credibility are
The break for the Depression begins in 1930 and is defined as an intercept break, the other two are slope
breaks which begin in 1974 (oil price shocks) and 2006 (global financial crisis).
30 A positive output gap signifies real GDP is above potential or trend real GDP. If the economy stabilizes
around the trend over time then observed real GDP should eventually fall towards trend. Hence, a positive
output gap should be associated with lower future real GDP growth.
31 Data are only available since the 1950s for CBI and mid 1940s for ERR.
29

23

recognized, and the economic determinants listed above are likely to influence credibility
instead of the other way around. Equation (1.7) is estimated using GLS in a panel setting.32
Given the wide-ranging inflation experiences of the 10 countries in our sample (see below)
we apply cross-section weights as well as estimate heteroskedasticity-consistent standard
errors.33
Figure 1 provides a summary description of the inflation history of the 10 countries
in the sample. The boxplots allow easy visualization of the differences between mean and
median inflation rates, identification of outliers, and the range of inflationary experiences
in each country. One immediately notices that outliers tend to be positive not negative.
That is, high inflation rates are far more likely to have been experienced than high rates of
deflation. As a result, it is not surprising that median inflation rates (the bar inside the box)
are always below mean inflation rates. For the most part, however, the differences between
the two are small. Indeed, both mean and median inflation rates through time have tended
to be less than 5%. The box, which provides an indication of the range of inflation rates
between the first and third quartiles (i.e., 75% of the distribution of inflation rates) tends to
be rather narrow. This suggests that while variations in inflation rates throughout history
have been large the vast majority of the range of inflationary experience in the 10 countries
examined here has been relatively small. Nevertheless, it is notable that negative inflation
rates have occurred in all countries during the course of their experience with central
banking. We return to this issue below (see Figure 3). Even if one excludes outliers from
the analysis (see below) double digit inflation rates are not uncommon with the exception

With the limited number of instruments we also estimate the same specification using GMM. Typically, we
use lagged values of the variables shown above although a few additional variables (e.g., lagged inflation,
money growth) are also candidates. The conclusions discussed below hold when instrumental variable
techniques are applied but the results, perhaps unsurprisingly, can be highly sensitive to the choice of
instruments. Our metric for whether the instruments are adequate is the Stock-Yogo test (e.g., see Stock and
Yogo 2005). Essentially, a linear regression of the variable suspected of being endogenous on the collection of
instruments must yield an F-test statistic of at least 10, as a rule of thumb. In practice more formal tests were
used to assess the weakness of the chosen instruments.
33 It is possible that some of the determinants (e.g., the CRISIS dummies) interact with others (e.g., debt to
GDP ratio). Therefore, we also consider interaction terms. However, as none of the main conclusions were
affected, we omit interaction terms in the specifications presented below. See, however, Bordo and Siklos
(2014) who include interaction terms.
32

24

of Germany, Switzerland, and the USA.34 Similarly, Japan does not stand out when it comes
to experience with deflation. Indeed, the deflation profile for Japan looks similar to that of
Norway’s and Sweden’s.
Not shown are some data that pertain to the performance of the inflation
expectations data compared to observed inflation. We find that the higher is observed
inflation the potential for forecast errors also rises. Hence, as one would expect, it is more
difficult to forecast high inflation rates than when inflation is low. Consequently, one
expects that it is relatively easier to anchor low inflation rates. To the extent that these
expectations errors contribute to changing credibility the data suggest considerable scope
for central bank credibility to change over time.35
Figure 2 plots instances when inflation rates are low or negative. Recent events
make clear that central bankers are just as concerned with low positive inflation rates as
they are about the prospect of deflation. While the choice of a threshold between low and
some acceptable inflation rate is admittedly ad hoc we have chosen to define low inflation
as observed inflation rates below 1.5%. Deflations tend to be observed before World War II
and this includes Japan. Indeed, by historical standards the recent two decades or so
encounter with deflation is rather mild relative to the pre World War II experience. Indeed,
negative inflation rates, though not unheard after 1950, are dwarfed by examples from
before World War II, most notably when the Gold Standard was operational. However, for
the U.S., where we have independent evidence of recessions versus expansions (i.e., the
NBER business cycle chronology), the stylized facts do not appear to suggest that low
inflation or deflation are strongly correlated with recessions. Canada is another country
where we also have an NBER style recession indicator (Cross and Bergevin 2012). Once
again, there is no obvious visual relationship between low inflation, deflation, and
recessions.
Next, we move on to an analysis of the determinants of credibility based on
estimates of equation (1.7). The results are summarized in Table 2 as well as in Figures 3
Note that data for Germany excludes certain periods because the data are incomplete or, in the case of
Germany’s experience with hyperinflation, would not provide any useful insights about credibility under such
extreme conditions.
35 Recall that the expectations proxy is partially based on estimates of structural breaks in inflation
performance. The Appendix provides a list of the estimated break-point dates.
34

25

and 4. To economize on space, Table 2 shows the estimated panel coefficients for the vector
Zit described above. Although fixed effects were added in virtually every case (test statistics
for the redundancy of fixed effects are also provided) these are not shown. Estimates are
shown for two samples and four cases. The choice of samples is partially dictated by data
availability, as in the indicators of central bank independence and exchange rate regime
type, as well as the earlier observation that the behavior of inflation rates before World
War II appears different from the period since that conflict ended.
The three cases considered are also meant to control for the potential impact that
outliers might have on the results. For example, if credibility is particularly vulnerable
when inflation rates are very large, and such events are also associated with financial
crises, then trimming the data set to exclude outliers should provide additional insights
into the factors that drive credibility. Consequently, the trimmed estimates exclude
deflations that exceed -5% as well as inflation rates of more than 15%.36 Next, we consider
a variant of equation (1.7) where deviations from the central bank’s implicit inflation
objective are not squared but, instead, we separately examine positive versus negative
deviations from the model-based inflation targets used to proxy the time-varying inflation
objective. Finally, since our definition of credibility is independent of the level of inflation,
we also consider a version of equation (1.7) augmented with a variable which asks whether
credibility is affected by the interaction of inflation expectations surprises (i.e., the
difference between observed and expected inflation – not the central bank’s inflation
objective) and a dummy variable that identifies positive inflation shocks (i.e., instances
where the change in observed inflation is positive). A statistically significant response
would indicate yet another avenue through which there are asymmetric effects on
credibility. In particular, we can determine whether positive inflation shocks, combined
with the size of the forecast error, contribute an additional and, presumably, negative effect
on credibility.
Table 2 shows the coefficient estimates for the variables in Zit as well as a few
summary statistics while Figure 3 graphically displays the estimates of the persistence of
credibility in the 10 countries considered (i.e., the coefficient i ). We find that if an interest
36

The appendix provides information about the impact on sample size from the exclusion of ‘outliers’.

26

rate instrument is used the Gold Standard period reliably improves central bank credibility
since the negative sign suggests that the squared gap between observed and goal inflation
becomes smaller. Perhaps more interesting is the finding that when a financial crisis is
present this reduces credibility with the effect significantly larger in the post-war era.
Notice, however, that the effect disappears when we trim the distribution of inflation rates
as defined above. It appears, therefore, that a financial crisis together with a bad inflation
outcome contributes to significantly erode central bank credibility.37 Otherwise, there is no
separate statistically significant impact of financial crises on central bank credibility. There
is also some evidence that oil price shocks negatively impact credibility. This is not
surprising since, if such events reflect a rise in observed inflation even when the central
bank’s inflation objective remains unchanged.38 A reading of the international response to
the oil prices shocks of the 1970s (see Bordo and Orphanides 2013) seems consistent with
the view of a loss of credibility as a result of the oil shock of the 1970s.
Finally, if we examine the determinants of credibility since the 1950s, we find that
central bank independence does indeed improve credibility. However, this result only
obtains when we rely on the trimmed data. Consequently, central bank independence does
not help when there are episodes of unusually high inflation rates. There is also a little bit
of evidence that the impact of autonomy is asymmetric with the effect more pronounced
when inflation is below the monetary authority’s implicit inflation objective than when
observed inflation is relatively higher than the goal set by the central banks.
Turning to the case of a money supply target we find more muted evidence of the
credibility-inducing benefits of the Gold standard. In addition, the impact of the
determinants in Zit appears to be relatively more asymmetric in nature when the money
supply is targeted than when an interest rate instrument is assumed. For example, we find
that rises in private sector credit and government debt to GDP ratios reduce credibility but
only when we consider episodes where inflation is below the central bank’s implicit
inflation objective. Similarly, central bank independence improves credibility but,
As previously noted, we have several proxies for financial crises depending on their source. Although we
experimented with each measure separately the most reliable results are obtained when financial crises are
aggregated. Hence, in what follows, the financial crisis dummy refers to the sum of all types of financial crises
defined earlier.
38 We also experimented with a time series of oil prices going back to the mid-19th century but this did not
improve the results.
37

27

interestingly, the impact is relatively larger when inflation exceeds the central bank’s goal
than vice-versa. Finally, in contrast with the case where an interest rate instrument is used,
financial crises appear to only weakly impact credibility and again only when inflation is
above target.
Part C of Table 2 considers the case of the exchange rate instrument. The Gold
Standard once again is a device that enhances central bank credibility while central bank
independence is also seen to consistently raise credibility. Oil price shocks also appear to
have a negative effect on credibility as do financial crises. Unlike the other two instruments
considered, rising equity returns help raise central bank credibility. Somewhat
counterintuitively there is solid evidence that higher government debt to GDP ratios
improve credibility. Whether this reflects an expectation that central banks will not allow
such a development to raise their inflation objective we cannot say. Nevertheless, it is
worth adding that the coefficients are economically small and are easily dwarfed, for
example, by the impact of central bank independence on credibility.
Figure 3 stacks the coefficient estimates of the lagged dependent variable in (1.7)
which serves as an indicator of credibility persistence. Although there is no sign or size
restriction on the parameter of interest, if the maximum value in absolute terms is close to
one while the minimum value is zero then the vertical axis is defined such that it ranges
between zero and ten. To identify the coefficient estimate for each country one simply
needs to subtract a particular value shown in the figure less its value in the bar
immediately below. 39 Not surprisingly, there is less persistence when all data are
considered than when we trim the inflation data to exclude large inflation and deflation
rates. Nevertheless, cross-country differences are most noticeable for the full sample than
when the post-war data are separately considered. Next, it appears that persistence is
sensitive according to whether we proxy credibility as in equation (1.7) or by separately
examining positive versus negative values of the difference between inflation and the
central bank’s objective for inflation. Also, the total amount of persistence is roughly the
same regardless whether the chosen instrument of monetary policy is an interest rate, a
growth rate in the money supply or the exchange rate. To be sure, there are noticeable
For example, in part A of the Figure, the top of the first bar indicates 4.5, the second 4.0. Hence, the estimate
of credibility persistence for the Fed for the full sample (1914-2008 in the Fed’s case) is 4.5-4.0=0.5.
39

28

cross-country differences. These are seen by looking at the height of each bar in Figure 3.
Nevertheless, the most robust estimates are ones obtained when the data are trimmed.
Overall then, to obtain a clear picture of the determinants of credibility it is advisable to
trim the data. The only caveat is that if one seeks confirmation that the interaction of
financial crises with historically high inflation or deflation rates reduces credibility then it
is necessary to use all the available data at our disposal (see Table 2).
Finally, Figure 4 uses a bar chart to display the coefficient indicating how the
interaction of a positive inflation shock (i.e., a dummy equal to 1 when the change of
inflation is positive) and forecast errors impact central bank credibility. 40 With the
exception of Germany, positive shocks do indeed reduce credibility defined as in equation
(1.7). Note, however, that the credibility impact is sensitive not only to the chosen sample
but to the chosen monetary policy instrument. For example, in Switzerland’s case, the
reduction in credibility following an inflation shock is considerably larger when an interest
rate instrument is assumed. In the case of Norway, the impact on credibility is much larger
when an exchange rate instrument is assumed. As far as Germany is concerned one can
only assume that positive inflation shocks improve credibility if the public is convinced that
the central bank will react appropriately to prevent persistent rises in inflation. Of course,
we have no way of knowing whether this is the only hypothesis consistent with the data
other than to rely on the historical experience of the Bundesbank. Even if the estimates
coefficients are relatively small compared to the ones found statistically significant in Table
2 there is some evidence that the level of inflation, particularly when it is rising, does have
an independent influence on central bank credibility.
5.2

Select

Individual

Country

Evidence

Ideally, we would have liked to discuss every country in the sample but space limitations
prevent us from doing so. We note, however, that in addition to the evidence presented
below the evidence, the case of Japan suggests that the patterns of the gain or loss of
credibility mirrors the experience of most of the other countries considered below,since
the early to mid 1990s, there has been a persistent loss of credibility for the Bank of Japan.
Complete estimates are relegated to the appendix. Note that the addition of this variable did not alter the
conclusions based on Table 2. We also considered other variants such as adding the level of inflation, and the
change in observed inflation. Generally speaking, the conclusions are similar to the ones described below.
40

29

Indeed, when an interest rate instrument is assumed to be used to conduct monetary policy
there is evidence of rising credibility losses until the end of the sample (2008). Rolling
estimates point in the same direction though the most notable negative shock to credibility
takes place in the early 1990s. Nevertheless, large credibility losses have taken place
earlier in the Bank of Japan’s history such as shortly after the end of World War II and
during the brief but significant surge in the 1970s especially following the first oil shock of
that decade.
5.2.1

United States

We begin with a description of some broad stylized facts. Figure 5A plots observed CPI
inflation since the creation of the Fed together with our estimate of expected inflation. In
this manner we identified four breaks: in 1924, 1933, 1973, and 1982. An ex post historical
analysis suggests that the location of these breaks appear sensible. The first break occurs
after the deflation of the early 1920s and when the Fed became more activist; the second
break takes place when the monetary authorities implemented a more comprehensive
response to the Great Depression. The break in 1973 is, of course, associated with the first
oil price shock while the break in 1982 can be explained by the Volcker disinflation policy.
One hopes, of course, that inflation expectations track observed inflation. Nevertheless,
there are gaps that occasionally persist over several years. This is particularly noticeable
during the period of the Great Inflation (also see Bordo and Orphanides 2013) of the 1960s
and 1970s. Another observation, also commonly encountered in the more recent literature
on the behavior of inflation forecasts, is that inflation is more volatile than its expectation.
As a result, expectation errors are short-lived but typically far greater, for example, before
World War II than say during the period of the Great Moderation from the mid- 1980s until
the end of the available sample.
Figure 6A indicates the years when the U.S. faced an environment of low inflation and
deflation. Approximately a quarter of the Fed’s existence is associated with low or negative
inflation with episodes of low inflation a post-World War II phenomenon while deflation is
more typical of the pre-1940s macroeconomic experience. Moreover, based on the NBER
chronology, no one to one association between low inflation or deflation and recessions is
found. This view is heavily skewed by the events of the Great Depression.
30

Figures 7A(i) and (ii) plot two different versions of our measure of central bank
credibility (i.e., the left hand side of equation (1.7)). The recursive estimates are based on
equation (1.3) estimates of  t   t . Since the weight of the last observation declines under
the recursive scheme it is conceivable that our proxy for central bank credibility will too
readily fluctuate with observed inflation as we approach the end of the available sample.
Therefore, we also consider a measure of credibility based on rolling estimates of  t using
a 20 year window for the calculations. The solid lines in Figure XXX plot the recursive
estimates while the vertical bars represent the rolling estimates.
When the instrument of monetary policy is assumed to be an interest rate we observe
that our measure of credibility, no matter how it is estimated, is fairly close to zero during
much of the Fed’s history. This indicates that observed inflation and the Fed’s inflation goal
are fairly closely matched. Nevertheless, there are notable exceptions to this rule. The first
takes place during the second half of the 1930s. This is the period when the Fed was
attempting a return to a more ‘normal’ monetary policy following the Great Depression.
Combined with an overly restrictive fiscal policy, in hindsight, these events combined to
negatively impact the Fed’s credibility. The next substantial period of reduced Fed
credibility takes place during the second half of the 1960s, that is, when, again looking
back, the Fed lost the battle against inflation with the consequent loss of reputation under
Arthur Burns who went on to lament the high inflation in The Anguish of Central Banking
(1979). The final episode of credibility loss takes place during the early 1980s. This period
overlaps, of course, with the wrenching disinflation of the early 1980s. As Volcker himself
later noted (see Silber 2012), the Fed had little credibility at the time of the temporary
switch from interest rate to reserves targeting. Rising credibility would come later and
benefit Volcker’s successors, Alan Greenspan and Ben Bernanke. The Great Moderation is
seen, therefore, as a period of high Fed credibility.
The story is much the same when we assume the Fed operates with a money growth
instrument. The precise years when the Fed loses credibility in a significant way do not, of
course, exactly match those of the interest rate instrument case but they come close. One
interesting departure of sorts is that the money growth instrument case reveals a
significant loss of credibility during the mid 1920s no doubt the culmination of the residual
31

effects of the deflation of the early 1920s and perhaps even reflects attempts by the
Congress, through the so-called Stabilization Bills, to require the Fed to target the price
level rather than adhere strictly to the gold standard(e.g., see Siklos 2002). It is also
difficult to argue that the loss of credibility shown in the late 1980s and early 1990s can be
explained by residual effects of the Volcker era. The fed funds rate was, by then, the
principal instrument of policy. What the result suggests then is that, had a money growth
instrument been used, observed inflation would have been permitted to rise substantially
above the Fed’s inflation goal. Once again, a retrospective analysis suggests that the
confluence of two events, namely the severe recession of the early 1990s may well have
also contributed to reducing the Fed’s credibility under the circumstances.
5.2.2

United Kingdom

Data limitations prevent us from examining the credibility record of the Bank of
England since its inception.41 As is the case for most of the advanced economies in our
dataset, the UK experiences relatively volatile inflation prior to World War II. The post
WWII period is notable for a steady rise in inflation which reaches 20% by the early 1970s
in part as a result of the first oil price shocks as well as other macroeconomic problems that
were accumulating prior to the Thatcher years. Thereafter there is a steady fall in inflation
with inflation relatively low and stable especially once the inflation targeting regime is in
place. Our estimates of expected inflation appear to be unable to capture the volatile
movements of prices prior to WWII whereas, in the postwar period, expected inflation
appears to be persistently above observed inflation. These observations will impact our
estimates of the Bank of England’s credibility. Not shown in the Figure are the five
estimated breaks in the inflation process. These were found in 1908, 1922, 1936, 1963, and
1977. Some of the breaks are associated with financial stresses related to currency crises,
or the sharp deflation in the aftermath of World War I while the most recent breaks are
associated with the impact of macroeconomic policies in the UK as well as the oil price
shocks.

We are, however, able to conduct a variety of tests on inflation for the full history of the Bank. Unless
otherwise stated our conclusions for the post 1870s period are unchanged. Space limitations prevent a fuller
discussion here.
41

32

Figure 6B plots years of low inflation and deflation in the UK. Although most of the
episodes we identify take place before WWII there are a few years of low inflation in the
postwar era. It is also notable that deflationary episodes are persistent particularly during
the years before 1897 when deflationary shocks to the global gold market prevailed.
Finally, Figure 7B displays our estimates of credibility for each one of the three
instruments. The results across the various instruments are broadly comparable.
Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that while observed inflation is often lower than the
Bank of England’s inflation objective, as derived from our estimated models, the reverse is
true beginning in the 1940s. Moreover, whereas there is little persistence in the estimates
of credibility before the 1930s credibility losses are persistent and rise throughout much of
the post WWII era, that is, until the end of the sample when the Bank of England’s inflation
objective and observed inflation become closely matched. It is tempting, but cannot be
proven, that the adoption of inflation targets contributes to this result. Finally, rollingbased estimates support the inferences based on the recursive estimates.
5.2.3

Germany

Figure 5C plots inflation and our proxy for expected inflation for Germany. Note that the
gap is dictated by gaps in the data due to the two World Wars as well as the deliberate
omission of the hyperinflation of the early 1920s. It is also worth bearing in mind that
inflation is likely to be affected, as is the credibility of the Bundesbank by the various
phases towards the adoption of the euro in 2001. 42 Although inflation is volatile in the pre
1910 era, at least compared with inflation in the post WWII period, the record of low
German inflation is clearly visible. As a result, and paralleling the results for the other cases
examined in this paper, our proxy for expected inflation does a poorer job of matching
observed inflation when inflation is volatile than when volatility is low. A time series
analysis of breaks in inflation dates these as follows: 1896, 1914, 1970, and 1984. One of
the breaks is clearly associated with the start of World War I and is found at the end of the
first sample (i.e., before the gap in the data),the 1896 break occurs at the inflexion point
between gold deflation and inflation. The 1970 break can be explained by the collapse of
the Bretton Woods System. The 1984 break does not appear to be directly associated with
The estimates presented in the Figures for Germany rely on separate pre and post gap models of German
inflation. We also estimated credibility for the ‘full’ sample but our conclusions were largely unaffected.
42

33

economic events. Also of interest is that the usual finding of oil price shocks influencing the
behavior of inflation is not evident in the German data.
Figure 6C shows the years when inflation was low or deflation emerged. Actual periods
of deflation generally take place in the late 19th century associated with the vagaries of the
gold standard and there is considerable persistence in deflation during this period. At the
other end of the sample, Germany unlike many other economies examined in this paper
experiences persistently low inflation right up to and after the adoption of the euro. Indeed,
Germany’s record of low and stable inflation is quite noticeable in the Figure.
Finally, Figure 7C displays our estimates of credibility in Germany. In spite of the
deflation that persists throughout the late 19th century, differences between the
Reichsbank’s inflation objective and observed inflation are small and do not persist. With
few exceptions this result holds regardless of the instrument assumed to be used. Note,
however, that there are more volatile changes in credibility when an exchange rate
instrument is assumed. Indeed, as World War I approaches there are sharp differences
between inflation and the central bank’s objective especially when the rolling estimates are
considered.
Turning to the post WWII era, one’s assumption about the instrument of monetary
policy used has considerable impact on our interpretation of Bundesbank credibility.
Hence, when an interest rate instrument is operative, there are fairly large swings in
credibility especially around the time of the two oil price shocks. In contrast, when a money
growth instrument is employed, the type of instrument actually used by the central bank,
observed inflation is found to be considerably lower than the Bundesbank’s inflation
objective particularly around the time of German reunification (i.e., 1989). It is conceivable
then that while the public may have expected inflation to rise the German central bank held
its inflation ‘target’. This is consistent with the narrative in Beyer et al ( 2013). By the
beginning of the first decade of the 2000s observed and targeted inflation closely match
each other.
6

Conclusions
This paper seeks to determine how central bank credibility and reputation have

changed over time in a cross-section of central banks around the world. Theory links
34

credibility with how well the central bank is able to anchor inflation expectations relative
to some implicit target over time that is allowed to change over time. In addition, there are
institutional factors that also impact a central bank’s credibility.
We find credibility changes over time are frequent and can be significant. Second,
the frequency with which the world economy experiences economic and financial crises,
institutional factors (i.e., the quality of governance) plays an important role in preventing a
loss of credibility. Third, institutional factors affect credibility. For example, the Gold
Standard improves credibility as does central bank independence. Finally, credibility is
significantly affected according to whether the shock can be associated with policy errors.
Bernanke (2013, p. 23), for example, has acknowledged that such errors can, for example,
an important role in explaining the severity of the most recent ‘global’ financial crisis.
Our interest in credibility in central banking goes beyond the analysis of the experience
of individual countries. Indeed, as is clear, for example, from the spread of inflation
targeting as the monetary policy regime of choice in several countries beginning in the
1990s, or the linking of economies through pegged or managed exchange rate regimes,
spillover effects can also play a role. Alternatively, changes in central bank credibility may
contain an element of contagion. For example, a policy regime change in a core economy
(e.g., the U.S.) may influence economic outcomes elsewhere. Consequently, there is scope
for credibility effects to be imported from or exported to other economies over time.
Changes in policy regimes may also occur via a simple demonstration effect not associated
with any fundamental economic factors but simply because they appear to work elsewhere.
One example often used to underscore this point is the Volcker era at the Fed (e.g., see
Silber 2012). Another is the dominant position of the Bank of England in the classical gold
standard (Bordo 1981). Empirically, it is certainly of interest to explore these issues.
However, space constraints prevent us from directly addressing the relevant implications.
This is left for future research.

35

References
Ahamed, L. (2009), Lords of Finance (New York: The Penguin Press).
Altug, S., and F. Canova (2013), “Do Institutions and Culture Matter for Business
Cycles?”, working paper, European University Institute, March.
Arnone, M., and D. Romelli (2012), “Dynamic Central Bank Independence Indices and
Inflation Rates: A New Empirical Explanation”, Paolo Baffi Centre Research Paper No.
2012-118.
Arnone, M., B. Laurens, S. Segolato, and J-F. Sommer (2009), “Central Bank Autonomy:
Lessons from Global Trends”, IMF Staff Papers 56 (2):263-296.
Bai, J., and P. Perron (1998), “Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple
Strcutural Changes”, Econometrica 66 (January): 47-78.
Ball, L,. D. Leigh, and P. Loungani (2013), “Okun’s Law: Fit at Fifty?”, NBER working
paper 18688, January.
Bernanke, B. (2013), “The Federal Reserve and the Financial Crisis” (Princeton, N.J.:
Pricenton University Press).
Beyer, A., V. Gaspar, C. Gerbeding, and O. Issing (2013), “Opting Out of the Great
Inflation: German Monetary Policy After the Break Down of Bretton Woods”, in M.D.
Bordo and A. Orphanides (Eds.), The Great Inflation: The Modern Rebirth of Central
Banking (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Blinder, A. S. (1999), Central Banking in Theory and Practice (Cambridge, Mass.: The
MIT Press).
Blinder, A., and J. Rudd (2013), “The Supply-Shock Explanation of the Great Stagflation
Revisited”, in M.D. Bordo and A. Orphanides (Eds), The Great Inflation: The Modern
Rebirth of Central Banking (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Bordo, M.D. and A. Orphanides (2013), The Great Inflation: The Modern Rebirth of
Central Banking (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Bordo, M.D., and R. MacDonald (2012), Credibility and the International Monetary
Regime. New York: Cambridge University Press
Bordo, M.D., and J. Haubrich (2010), “Credit Crises, Money and Contractions: An
Historical View”, Journal of Monetary Economics 57: 1-18.
Bordo M.D., B. Eichengreen, D. Klingebiel and M. Soledad Martinez –Peria ( 2001) ‘Is
the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy. April.
36

Bordo, M.D. and A.J. Schwartz (1996), “The Operation of the Specie Standard: Evidence
for Core and Peripheral Countries, 1880-1990” in Barry Eichengreen and Bordo,
Michael and Finn Kydland (1995), “The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in
Exploration”, Explorations in Economic History 32: 422-464.
Bordo, M.D. (1981), The Classical Gold Standard: Some Lessons For Today” Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review.
Borio, C. (2013), “Rethinking Potential Output: Embedding Information About the
Financial Cycle”, BIS working paper 404, February.
Borio, C., and A.J. Filardo (2004), “Looking Back at the International Deflation Record”,
North American Journal of Economics and Finance 15 (December): 287-311.
Braga de Macedo, J. , Historical Perspectives on the Gold Standard: Portugal and the
World (London: Routledge).
Burdekin, R.C.K., and P.L. Siklos, Eds. (2004), Deflation: Current and Historical
Perspectives (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Burdekin, R.C.K., and P.L. Siklos (2004a), “Fears of Deflation and the Role of Monetary
Policy: Some Lessons and An Overview”, in Burdekin, R.C.K., and P.L. Siklos, Eds.,
Deflation: Current and Historical Perspectives (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press), pp. 1-27.
Burdekin, R. and Siklos, P. (1999), ‘Exchange Rate Regimes and Shifts in Inflation
Persistence: Does Nothing Else Matter?’, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 31,
May, pp. 234–247.
Brunner, K. (1983), “The Pragmatic and Intellectual Tradition of Monetary
Policymaking.” In Lessons of Monetary Experiences from the 1970s (Karl
Brunner, ed.).
Burns, A. (1979), The Anguish of Central Banking, Per Jacobsson Lecture, September.
Cargill, T. (2013), “A Critical Assessment of Measures of Central Bank Independence”,
Economic Inquiry 51 (January): 260-72.
Chung, H., J-P. Laforte, D. Reifschneider, and J. Williams (2012), “Have We
Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?”, Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 44 (February): 47-82.
Cross, P., and P. Bergevin (2012), “Turning Points in Business Cycles in Canada Since
1926”, C.D. Howe Commentary No. 366, October.
Crow, J. (2002), Making Money (Toronto: John Wiley & Sons).
37

Cukierman, A. (1986), “Central Bank Behavior and Credibility: Some Recent
Theoretical Developments”, Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (May): 517.
Cukierman, A. (1992), Central Bank Strategy, Credibility and Independence: Theory and
Evidence (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
De Long, B. (1997), “America’s Peacetime Inflation: the 1970s”, in Reducing Inflation:
Motivation and Strategy, Edited by C.D. Romer and D.H. Romer (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press),
Dehay, E., and N. Levy (2000), “L’independenance des banques centrales pendant
l’entre-deux guerres et ses effects sur l’inflation et la croissance”, working paper,
Universite de Paris X-Nanterre.
Dincer, N. and B. Eichengreen (2007), “Central Bank Transparency: Where, Why, and
With
What
Effects?”,
NBER
working
paper
13003,
March,
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13003
Dreher, A., J.E. Sturm, and J. de Haan (2998), “Does High Inflation Cause Central
Bankers to Lose Their Job? Evidence Based on a New Data Set”, European Journal of
Political Economy 24 (December): 778-87.
Dupasquier, C., A. Guay, and P. St-Amant (1999), “A Survey of Alternative
Methodologies for Estimating Potential Output and the Ouput Gap”, Journal of
Macroeconomics 21 (Summer): 577-595.
Eijffinger, S., and J. De Haan (1996), The Political-Economy of Central Bank
Independence”, Special Papers in International Economics, Prineton University, no. 19,
May.
Eggertsson, G., and M. Woodford (2003), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
Optimal Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34: 139-211.
Eichengreen, B. (1997), “ The Gold Standard Since Alec Ford” in Barry Eichengreen and
Marc Flandreau ( eds) The Gold Standard in Theory and Practice. Second Edition.
London: Routledge.
Fellner, William (1976), Towards a Reconstruction of Macroeconomics : Problems of
Theory and Policy (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute).
Ferguson, N., and M. Schularik (2008), “The ‘Thin Film of Gold’: Monetary Policy Rules
and Policy Credibility in Developing Countries”, NBER working paper 13918, April.

38

Fortin, P. (1996), “The Great Canadian Slump”, Canadian Journal of Economics 29
(November): 761-787.
Freedman, C. and T. Macklem (1998), “A Comment on the ‘The Great Canadian Slump’”,
Canadian Journal of Economics 31 (August): 646-65.
Friedman, M. (1968),”The Role of Monetary Policy”, American Economic Review 58
(March):
1-17.
Goodfriend, M. (1986), “Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking”, Journal of
Monetary Economics 17 (January): 63-92.
Goodfriend, M., and R. King (2013), “The Great Inflation Drift”, in M.D. Bordo and A.
Orhanides (Eds), The Great Inflation: The Modern Rebirth of Central Banking (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press).
Goodhart, C.A.E. (1999), “Central Bankers and Uncertainty”, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin (February): 102-121.
Greenspan, A. (1996), “Opening Remarks”, in Achieving Price Stability, A Symposium
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August.
Haberler, Gottfried (1980), “Notes on Rational and Irrational Expectations”, reprint
111, American Enterprise Institute (March).
Haltmaier, J. (2012), “Do Recessions Affect Potential Output?” Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 1066,
December.
Kahn, G. (2012), “Estimated Rules for Monetary Policy”, Economic Review, Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Fall5-29.
Killian, L. (2009), “Oil Price Shocks, Monetary Policy and Staglflation”, in Inflation in an
Era of Relative Price Shocks, edited by R. Fry, C. Jones and C. Kent (Sydney: Reserve
Bank fo New Zealand), pp. 60-84.
Kozicki, S., and P.A. Tinsley (2009), “Perhaps the 1970s FOMC Did What it Said it Did”,
Journal of Monetary Economics 56: 842-855.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Schleifer (2008), “The Economic Consequences
of Legal Origins”, Journal of Economic Literature 46 (2): 285-332.
Levin, A., and J. Taylor (2013), “Falling Behind the Curve: A Positive Anlysis of StopStart Monetary Policies and the Great Inflation”, in M.D. Bordo and A. Orphanides
39

(Eds.), The Great Inflation: The Modern Rebirth of Central Banking (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press).
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Jeffrey Miron (1991), “Should the Fed Smooth Interest Rates?
The Case of Seasonal Monetary Policy”, Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy 34
(Spring): 41-69.
Mauro, P., R. Romeu, A. Binder, and A. Zaman (2013), “A Modern History of Fiscal
Prudence and Profligacy”, IMF working paper 13/05, January.
Meltzer, Allan (2001), A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913-1951 (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press).
Mishkin, F. (2007), “Estimating Potential Output”, speech given at the Conference on
Price Measurement for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, Texas,
available
from
http://www.c.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20070524a.htm.
Mishkin, F. (2005), “The Inflation Targeting Debate”, John Kusczcak Memorial Lecture,
Bank of Canada, May.
Orphanides, A. (2003), “The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation." Journal of
Monetary Economics, 50(3), 633-663.
Orphanides, A. and S. van Norden (2002), “The Unreliability of Output Gap Estimates in
Real-Time”, Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (November): 569-583.
Orphanides, A. and J. Williams (2011), “Monetary Policy Mistakes and the Evolution of
Inflation Expectations”, working paper, June.
Parkin, M. (2012), “Central Bank Laws and Monetary Policy Outcomes: A Three Decade
Perspective”, available from http://ideas.repec.org/p/uwo/epuwoc/20131.html.
Perron, P. (1989), “The Great Crash, the Oil Price Shock, and the Unit Root Hypothesis”,
Econometrica 57 (November): 1361-1401.
Pesaran, H., T. Schurmann, and S.M. Weiner (2004), “Modelling Regional
Interdependencies Using a Global Error-Correcting Macroeconometric Model”, Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics 22: 129-162.
Powell, J. (2009), The Bank of Canada of James Elliot Coyne (Montreal and Kingston:
McGill-Queen’s University Press).
Reinhart, C., and K. Rogoff (2013), “Shifting Mandates: The Federal Reserve’s First
Centennial”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 103 (May): 48-54.
40

Romer, C. (2013), “Comments”, in M.D. Bordo and A. Orphanides (Eds), The Great
Inflation: The Modern Rebirth of Central Banking (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Rudebusch, G. (2006), “Monetary Policy Inertia: Fact or Fiction?” International Journal
of Central Banking, December, pp. 85-135.
Rudebusch, G. (2002), “Term Structure Evidence on Interest Rate Smoothing and
Monetary Policy Inertia”, Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (September): 1161-1187.
Sack, B., and V. Wieland (2000), “Interest-Rate Smoothing and Optimal Monetary
Policy: A Review of Recent Empirical Evidence”, Journal of Economics and Business 52
(January-April): 205-228.
Siklos, P.L. (2002), The Changing Face of Central Banking (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press).
Siklos, P.L. (2003), “Assessing the Impact of Changes in Transparency and
Accountability at the Bank of Canada”, Canadian Public Policy 29 (September): 279299.
Siklos, P.L. (2008), “No Single Definition of Central Bank Independence is Right for All
Countries”, European Journal of Political Economy 24: 802-816.
Siklos, P.L. (2010), “Revisiting the Coyne Affair: A Singular Event that Changed the
Course of Canadian Monetary History”, Canadian Journal of Economics 43 (3): 9941015.
Siklos, P.L. (2014), “Communications Challenges for Multi-Tasking Central Banks:
Evidence and Implications”, International Finance 17 (Spring): 77-98.
Silber, W.L. (2012), Volcker (New York: Bloomsbury Press).
Stock, J.H.. and M.W. Watson (2007), “Why Has US Inflation Become Harder to
Forecast?”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (February).
Stock, J., and M. Yogo (2005), “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regressions”,
in Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas
Rothenberg, D.W.K. Andrews and J.H. Stock, Eds. (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press).
Taylor, J. (1998), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules”, in J. Taylor (Ed.),
Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 314-341.
Taylor, J. (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39, December, pp. 195-214.
41

Waller, C. (2011), “Independence and Accountability: Why the Fed is a Well-Designed
Central Bank”, Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (Sept/Oct): 293-301.
Woodford, M. (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

42

Table 1 The Origins of Ten Central Banks
Year
Country
1668 Sweden
1694 UK
1800 France

Name
Bank of the Estates of
the Realm. Forerunner
of the Riksbank
Bank of England
Banque de France

1816 Norway

Bank of Norway

1876 Germany

Reichsbank. Forerunner
of Bundesbank

1882 Japan

Bank of Japan

1893 Italy

Banca d’Italia

1907 Switzerland

Swiss National Bank

1913 USA

Federal Reserve System

1934 Canada

Bank of Canada

Motivation
Finance war
Finance war
Manage public debt, generate
seignorage
Economic crisis in Denmark
prompts monetary reform
Consolidation of previous
note issuing authorities
following unification
Part of modernization of Meiji
regime
Consolidation of previous
note issuing authorities
following unification
Elimination of note issuing
competition
Creation of lender of last
resort and other banking
related functions
Lender of last resort

Sources: Siklos (2002) and updated from individual central bank websites
accessible through the BIS’s Central bank hub, http://www.bis.org/cbanks.htm.

43

Table 2 Panel Regression Estimates of the Determinants of Credibility
A. Interest Rate Instrument
1871-2008
Ind.
Variables
Gold Standard
Money
growth
Loans to GDP
ratio
Debt to GDP
ratio
Equity returns
Oil price
shocks
Financial
Crises
Central Bank
Independence
Exchange rate
regime
Summary
Statistics
Adjusted R2
F-statistic
p-value

1950-2008

Coeff.

s.e.

-57.57†

28.04

2.71

2.73

5.47

-1.16

1.74

-0.52

1871-2008 T

1950-2008 T

1871-2008
+ve
Coeff.
s.e.

1871-2008 ve
Coeff.
s.e.

1950-2008
+ve
Coeff.
s.e.

1950-2008 ve
Coeff.
s.e.

Coeff.

s.e.

Coeff.

s.e.

Coeff.

s.e.

NA

NA

-5.14‡

5.69

NA

NA

-3.67†

1.55

-2.40‡

1.49

6.27

0.57‡

0.32

0.18

0.22

0.20*

0.06

0.18*

0.06

0.07

0.06

-0.04

0.05

-0.58

1.32

-0.19

0.27

-0.36

0.23

0.02

0.02

0.06*

0.02

0.06*

0.02

0.08*

0.02

0.71

0.56

0.79

-0.00

0.08

-0.05

0.12

-0.02

0.02

-0.02

0.01

-0.07*

0.01

-0.07*

0.02

0.60

0.56

0.79

0.69

-0.07

0.07

-0.09

0.08

-0.01

0.01

-0.01

0.01

-0.01

0.01

-0.00

0.01

35.27

71.30

-3.99

9.20

0.33

5.23

-0.00

0.76

2.22†

0.94

0.96

1.29

4.68*

0.97

3.58†

1.61

30.31†
NA

16.69
NA

52.13‡

32.05

0.40
NA

1.33
NA

1.17

1.57

0.55‡
NA

0.31
NA

0.29
NA

0.32
NA

0.44

0.46

0.10

0.34

-18.75

14.03

-1.01†

0.52†

-2.71

1.98

-1.29*

1.93

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA
-0.33

0.08*

-0.39

0.12

NA

NA
11.79†

5.50

1.47

0.69

NA

NA

NA

0.10

0.11

0.11

0.48

0.43

0.44

0.49

0.46

4.54

3.46

3.46

14.28

36.69

39.39

30.06

25.37

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

44

NA

B. Money Supply Growth Instrument
1871-2008
Ind.
Variables
Gold Standard
Money
growth
Loans to GDP
ratio
Debt to GDP
ratio
Equity returns
Oil price
shocks
Financial
Crises
Central Bank
Independence
Exchange rate
regime
Summary
Statistics
Adjusted R2
F-statistic
p-value

Coeff.

s.e.

1950-2008

1871-2008 T

1950-2008 T
Coeff.

s.e.

NA

NA

Coeff.

s.e.

Coeff.

s.e.

NA

NA

-2.75

2.88

1871-2008 ve
Coeff.
s.e.

1950-2008
+ve
Coeff.
s.e.

1950-2008 ve
Coeff.
s.e.

-3.76*

1.22

-4.08*

1.36

NA

NA

NA

NA

0.16

0.35*

0.09

0.31*

0.09

0.08‡

0.05

0.20*

0.05

-1.28

1.20

-0.64

0.23

-0.69*

0.24

-0.51*

0.14

-0.52*

0.14

0.09

0.08

0.12

-0.02

0.01

-0.02†

0.01

-0.02

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.02

-0.04†

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

4.66

2.93

0.40

0.50

0.94

0.97

2.13†

1.09

0.07

1.95

0.30

1.94

0.69

0.86

1.57

1.02

1.15*
NA

0.46
NA

0.68
NA

0.44
NA

0.24

0.34

0.32

0.34

5.99

5.00

-9.48*

3.60

-3.03‡

1.68

NA

NA

NA

NA
-0.07

0.18

0.02

0.17

8.97

37.76

7.43‡

4.24

7.95

8.99

0.08

0.14

0.09

24.82

16.81

6.33

14.62

-1.24

1.34

-0.34

1.00

-6.31

11.89

0.09

-0.67

0.83

-1.08

1.48

-0.03

46.56

56.83

53.59

36.17

46.08
NA

29.18
NA

126.46

135.55

-78.97

62.69

NA

NA
65.33

1871-2008
+ve
Coeff.
s.e.

63.70

0.03

0.51

0.06

0.06

0.60

0.66

0.39

0.38

0.44

0.44

2.98

2.35

29.51

26.68

20.39

21.25

24.32

24.32

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

45

C.

Exchange Rate Instrument
1871-2008

Ind.
Variables
Gold Standard
Money
growth
Loans to GDP
ratio
Debt to GDP
ratio
Equity returns
Oil price
shocks
Financial
Crises
Central Bank
Independence
Exchange rate
regime
Summary
Statistics
Adjusted R2
F-statistic
p-value

Coeff.

s.e.

1950-2008

1871-2008 T

1950-2008 T
Coeff.

s.e.

NA

NA

Coeff.

s.e.

Coeff.

s.e.

NA

NA

-12.16†

6.26

-25.23

25.72

2.18

1.68

-1.26

1.11

0.54†

0.26

0.49

0.40

0.66

-1.20*

0.38

-0.14

0.54

-0.25

0.32

-1.86*

0.40

-0.11

0.31

0.33

0.30

0.22

-0.11*

-17.08

20.54

52.18*

18.25

29.83*
NA

11.18
NA

7.68

10.07

-4.80†

2.35

NA

1871-2008 ve
Coeff.
s.e.

1950-2008
+ve
Coeff.
s.e.
NA

NA

1950-2008 ve
Coeff.
s.e.
NA

NA

-5.13*

1.77

-5.78*

1.06

0.38

0.14*

0.04

0.11*

0.04

0.01

0.03

0.03

0.04

-0.36

0.48

-0.01

0.02

0.31*

0.11

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.02

0.08

-0.29†

0.13

-0.02

0.02

-0.01

0.01

-0.09*

0.02

-0.08*

0.02

0.04

-0.15*

0.05

-0.00

0.01

-0.00

0.01

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.01

10.53†

4.47

21.31*

7.90

-0.17

1.53

-3.95*

1.34

3.97*

0.70

6.06*

1.18

1.83

1.64

2.90

2.06

0.91*
NA

0.35
NA

0.70*
NA

0.26
NA

0.41

0.33

0.55†

0.23

-4.59*

1.55

-3.37*

1.73

-3.81‡

2.05

NA

NA

NA

NA
-0.17*

0.08

-0.33*

0.11

NA
1.83

1871-2008
+ve
Coeff.
s.e.

1.40

0.13

0.81

0.09

0.02

0.49

0.53

0.55

0.55

0.71

0.73

4.08

1.35

24.95

19.63

58.20

54.83

69.67

70.97

0.00

0.12

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

46

Figure 1 The Anatomy of Inflation in 10 Countries
CANADA
16%

FRANCE
30%

8%

ITALY
28%
24%

6%

20%

12%

GERMANY

4%
16%
2%

8%
0%

12%

0%

4%

4%
0%

-4%

30%
25%

20%
15%
10%
5%

-4%

-20%

-6%

-30%

NORWAY

25%

8%

-2%

-10%

-4%

30%

20%

10%

0%

JAPAN

-8%

-8%

SWEDEN

-12%

SWITZERLAND

0%
-5%

UNITED KINGDOM

20%

25%

30%

15%

20%

20%

10%

15%

10%

5%

10%

0%

0%

5%

-10%

-5%

0%

-20%

-10%

-5%

-30%

UNITED STATES
20%
16%
12%

20%

8%

15%
4%

10%
5%
0%
-5%

0%
-4%

47

-8%
-12%

48

-4%

-12%

-10

-15

-20

CPI inflation < 1.5%

Years of Low Inflation and Deflatio n: Swit zerland

-20%
-16%
-16%

-25%
-20%
-20%
-30
-10%

-30%
-24%
-24%
-35
-12%

-25

1883
1886
1888
1893
1896
1901
1909
1914
1921
1924
1926
1929
1931
1950
1954
1958
1986
1988
1993
1995
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008

1959

1953

1949

1934

1932

1930

1927

1922

1913

1909

1905

1902

1900

1898

-4%

1896

-3%

CPI inflation < 1.5%

-2%

1894

2008

Years of Low Inflation and Deflation: Germany
2%

Years of Low Inflation and Deflatio n: Italy

0%

0%

-2%

-8%

-5%
-10%
-30%

-12%
-35%

5%
4%
4%
5

Years of Low Inflation and Deflation:United Kingdom
2%

0%
0%
0%
0

-5

0%

1914
1921
1922
1924
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1936
1938
1939
1940
1949
1952
1953
1954
1955
1960
1961
1962
1964
1986
2008
2010

-8%
CPI inflation < 1.5%

2003

2001

1998

1996

1987

1960

1954

1913

1911

1907

1903

1901

1896

-1%

1870
1875
1878
1880
1884
1886
1889
1892
1895
1899
1901
1903
1905
1908
1911
1922
1925
1927
1929
1931
1933
1938
1943
1946
2001

2007

2005

2003

2001

1998

1996

1987

1978

1960

1956

-12%

1954

-8%

1950

-4%

1946

Years of Low Inflation and Deflation: Sweden

1893

-7%

1939

-6%

-28%
1888

-24%

-2.5%

1935

-2.0%

1933

-8%

1886

0.0%

1884

-4%

1931

0.5%

1882

1%

1929

Years of Low Inflation and Deflation: France

1927

0%

1879

-20%

1877

2001

1956

1949

1931

1913

1908

1904

1900

1896

1892

1.0%

1925

-15%
1888

2%

1922

-10%
1884

4%

1920

-5%
1879

Years of Low Inflation and Deflation: Canada

1874

1.5%

1908

Years of Low Inflation and Deflatio n:Norway
1868

-16%

1862

-12%

-1.0%

1857

-1.5%

1850

193
4
193
6
193
8
194
4
194
9
195
2
195
3
195
4
195
5
195
9
196
1
197
0
199
4
199
7
199
8
200
1
200
8

-0.5%

1875
1877
1879
1883
1885
1887
1893
1896
1901
1903
1909
1911
1921
1923
1925
1927
1929
1931
1933
1935
1943
1945
1948
1950
1959
1998
2000
2005

2004

1960

1947

1933

1929

1923

1909

1902

1895

1891

1884

1878

1870

1863

1857

1848

1841

1834

1826

1821

1816

Figure 2 Years of Low Inflation and Deflation
5%

Years of Low Inflation and Deflation: Japan

-5%

0%

-4%
-10%

-6%
-15%

-20%

-25%

Years of Low Inflation and Deflation: United States

-2%

-4%

-6%

-8%

Figure 3 The Persistence of Credibility
A. Interest Rate Instrument
Positive-Negative
All data
Trimmed
5.2

4.9
4.5

4.4

4.0

3.9

3.9

3.5

2.9
3.3
3.1

0.9
0.5
0.4

France
Sweden

4.1
3.5

3.6

3.6

2.9

2.8

2.5
2.1

1.7

1.7

1.8

1.8

1.0
0.6

0.9

1.0

1.1

1.1

0.4

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.5

Germany
Switzerland

49

19
50
-2

00
8

-v

+v
e

e

2.1

e

2.0

00
8

00
8
19
50
-2
Canada
Norway

4.2
3.5

1.9

00
8

0.7
0.0

0

00
8

1.9

1.2

0.8
0.1

18
71
-2

1.8

2.7

19
50
-2

1

1.4
1.7

5.0

3.2

+v
e

1.4

2.4

3.9
3.2

3.4

00
8

2.2
1.6

2.5

00
8

2

2.9

2.4

4.2
3.5

18
71
-2

2.9

3.1
2.4
2.7

5.1
4.6

18
71
-2

3.6

3.4
2.9

3

18
71
-2

4

4.6

5.6

4.8

5.3

5.2

-v

5

00
8

All data

19
50
-2

6

Positive-Negative
Postwar data

Italy
United Kingdom

Japan
USA

B. Money Growth Instrument
All data

Trimmed
5.8

5

5.5

5.4

5.4

4.5

4.5

4.4
3.8
3.6

4

4.0
3.5

3.5

4.1

4.1
3.6

4.1

3.5

3.5

3.5

2.6

2.9

2.6

1.3

2.5

2.4
2.0
1.9

1.8

1.7
1.3

1.1
0.4

0.4

-v

e

00
8

Germany
Switzerland

C. Exchange Rate Instrument

0.8
0.4

+v
00
8

France
Sweden

1.3

e

0.8

0.1

19
50
-2

00
8

18
71
-2

19
50
-2

0.9

18
71
-2

0.0

19
50
-2

0.1

00
8

0.8

0.1
0.4

00
8

0.8

Italy
United Kingdom

Positive-Negative
All data

7

All data

2.2

1.9

1.6

1.5

2.5

2.1
2.4

2.2

0.4

e

1.7

0.9

00
8

4.6

-v

1.5
1.0

18
71
-2

4.6

00
8

2.4

Canada
Norway

Japan
USA

Positive-Negative
Postwar data

Trimmed

6

6.1

4.9

Canada
Norway

0.6

France
Sweden

3.0

2.8

2.7
2.3

2.1

2.0
1.3

2.0
1.4
1.1

Germany
Switzerland

50

1.2

1.0

0.6

0.6

0.5

-v
e

0.7

3.7
4.1
3.9

00
8

0.6

1.3

4.1
3.4

e

18
71
-2
00
8

0

19
50
-2
00
8

0.6

1.4

5.0

19
50
-2

1.1

1.9

5.0

+v

1.3
1.0

2.4

2.0

5.8

3.2

-v
e

2.2
1.4

2.5

5.7

3.5

3.5

2.9

00
8

1.9

3.5

3.2

e

2.3

3.1

3.7

18
71
-2

2.4
2.8

3.9
3.3

+v

3.3

3.9
4.3
4.1

4.5
3.7

4.0

19
50
-2
00
8

3.8

4.3
3.5
3.2

18
71
-2
00
8

4

5.2

4.8

00
8

4.8

19
50
-2

5.2

00
8

5.1

5.4

18
71
-2

5

1

5.4

e

1.9

2.8

2.8

2.0

2

5.4

+v

2

3

5.8

19
50
-2

3.0
2.7

2.7

0

5.8

3.2

3.1

1

3.7
3.3

18
71
-2

3

3.7

3.6

Positive-Negative
Postwar data

00
8

6

Positive-Negative
All data

Italy
United Kingdom

Japan

Figure 4 Inflation Shocks and Credibility
Full sample: interest rate instrument

Post WWII: interest rate instrument

2.5
2.0

4

3.4

3

2.03
1.86

2
1.5

2.1

2.0
1.5

1

0.7

0.5

0.4

0.0

0

1.0

-0.2

0.80
0.59

0.5

0.65

0.59

0.55

-1

0.47

0.36

-2

0.22

-2.2

Full sample: money growth instrument

U.
S.
A.

Post WWII: money growth instrument

2.4

4
3.1

2.10

3

2.0

2.2

2.0

2

1.6

1

0.7

1.0

0.8

0.6

1.2

0.4

0.2

0

0.84

0.8

0.72

0.63

0.4

0.31

-1
0.40

0.36

-2

0.25

-2.2

0.07

0.04

Full sample: exchange rate instrument

A.
S.
U.

K.
U.

la
nd

en

itz

er

ed
Sw

Post WWII: exchange rate instrument

3.0

10
2.40

8.3

5
2.4
1.1

2.0
1.71
1.23

0.73

0.2

0.73

0.58

0.56

0.5

1.5

1.4

-5

1.05

1.0

1.4

0.8

0

1.5

-10

-9.1

0.26

51

itz

A.
S.

K.
U.

U.

er

la
nd

en

Sw

ed
Sw

rw
ay

No

pa
n

Ita
ly

Ja

Ge
r

m
an
y

e
an
c
Fr

Ca
na
da

A.
S.
U.

K.
U.

itz

er

la
nd

en

Sw

ed
Sw

rw
ay

No

pa
n

Ita
ly

Ja

Ge
r

an
c
Fr

m
an
y

-15
e

0.0
Ca
na
da

Sw

rw
ay

No

pa
n
Ja

Ita
ly

Ge

rm
an
y

e
Fr
an
c

Ca
na
da

U.

S.

A.

K.
U.

er

la
nd

en
ed
Sw

itz

Sw

rw
ay

No

pa
n
Ja

Ita
ly

rm
an
y

Ge

Fr
an
c

e

-3

Ca
na
da

0.0

2.5

U.
K.

pa
n
No
rw
ay
Sw
ed
en
Sw
itz
er
la
nd

Ja

It a
ly

e
rm
an
y
Ge

Fr
an
c

Ca
na
da

U.
S.
A.

U.
K.

pa
n
No
rw
ay
Sw
ed
en
Sw
itz
er
la
nd

Ja

It a
ly

Ge

Fr
an
c

e
rm
an
y

-3

Ca
na
da

0.0

Figure 5A Inflation and Expected Inflation in the U.S. Since the Fed’s Creation
OBSERVED and EXPECTED INFLATION: United States
20%
16%
12%
8%
4%
0%
-4%
-8%
-12%
1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

Expectations

1980

1990

2000

2010

Observed

Figure 5B Inflation and Expected Inflation in the U.K. Since 1870
30%
20%
1-3% inflation range
V
V
V

10%
0%
-10%
-20%
-30%
-40%
1875

1900

1925

1950

Observed

52

Expectations

1975

2000

Figure 5C Inflation and Expected Inflation in Germany Since 1871
OBSERVED and EXPECTED INFLATION: Germany
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%
-8%
1875

1900

1925

1950

Expectations

53

Observed

1975

2000

Figure 6A Low and Deflationary Periods in the U.S. Since the Fed’s Creation
Years of Low Inflation and Deflation: United States
2%
0%

CPI inflation < 1.5%

-2%
-4%
-6%
-8%
-10%

1914
1921
1922
1924
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1936
1938
1939
1940
1949
1952
1953
1954
1955
1960
1961
1962
1964
1986
2008
2010

-12%

Figure 6B Low and Deflationary Periods in the U.K.
Years of Low Inflation and Deflation: United Kingdom
5
0

-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35
1870
1875
1878
1880
1884
1886
1889
1892
1895
1899
1901
1903
1905
1908
1911
1922
1925
1927
1929
1931
1933
1938
1943
1946
2001

CPI inflation < 1.5%

-5

54

Figure 6C Low and Deflationary Periods in Germany
Years of Low Inflation and Deflation: Germany
2%
1%
0%
-1%
-2%
-3%
-4%
-5%
-6%

55

2006

2002

1999

1997

1988

1986

1959

1953

1912

1908

1904

1902

1898

1894

1892

1887

1885

1883

1881

1878

1876

1874

-7%

Figure 7A The Fed’s Credibility Over Time: Recursive and Rolling Estimates
Estimates of Federal Reserve Credibility: Interest Rate Instrument
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-10%
-20%
-30%
1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Excludes 'outlier: 1929
Rolling-based estimates

recursive-based estimates

Estimates of Federal Reserve Credibility: Money Growth Instrument
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-10%
-20%
-30%
1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Excludes 'outliers: 1953, 1968, 1991
Rolling-based estimates

56

Recursive-based estimates

2000

Figure 7B The Bank of England’s Credibility Over Time: Recursive and Rolling
Estimates
Es tima tes of Bank of Engla nd Credibility: Interes t Rate Instrument
30%

Credibility indicator

20%

10%

0%

-10%

-20%

-30%
1875

1900

1925

Rolling-based estimates

1950

1975

2000

Recursive-based estimates

Es tima tes of Ba nk of Engla nd Credibility: Money Growth Ins trument
30%

Credibility indicator

20%
10%
0%
-10%
-20%
-30%
-40%
1875

1900

1925
Rolling-based

1950

1975

2000

Recursive-based

Es timates of Bank of Engla nd Credibility: Exchnage Rate Instrument
30

Credibility indicator

20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
1875

1900

1925
Rolling-based

57

1950

1975

Recursive-based

2000

Figure 7C The Reichsbank’s and the Bundesbank’s Credibility Over Time:
Recursive and Rolling Estimates
Estimates of Reichsbank & Bundesbank Credibility: Interest Rate Instrument
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
-5%
-10%
-15%
1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

Excludes 'outliers': 1991, 2001 (rolling), 1990 (recursive)
Rolling-based
Recursive-based
Estimates of Reichsbank & Bundesbank Credibility: Money Growth Instrument
5.0%
2.5%
0.0%
-2.5%
-5.0%
-7.5%
-10.0%
-12.5%
1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

Excludes 'outliers': 1973, 1994 (rolling)
Rolling-based

Recursive-based

Estimates of Reichsbank & Bundesbank Credibility: Exchange Rate Instrument
20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

-5%

-10%
1900

1925

1950

1975

Excludes 'outliers': 1990 (roll), 1993-1997 (recursive)
Rolling-based

58

Recursive-based

2000

Narratives
1. Sweden: The Riksbank
The Sveriges Riksbank was founded in 1668 making it the world’s oldest central bank.
Like the Bank of England it was set up to provide government finance, then evolving over
time as a bankers bank. In the nineteenth century, Sweden joined the gold standard in 1873
.Sweden maintained gold convertibility and had price stability (with alternating periods of
inflation and deflation) reflecting strong credibility until 1914. The Riksbank followed the
rules of the game as well as most other countries (Jonung 1984). The Riksbank also acted
as a lender of last resort in allaying financial crises in 1873 and 1907.
During World War I, although Sweden was neutral, she abandoned gold convertibility
de facto until 1921. During the war, Sweden had high inflation reflecting gold inflows from
the belligerents purchasing its commodities. Like the UK, Sweden followed a costly
deflation to return de facto to the gold standard at the original parity in 1922, de jure 1924.
The deflation contributed to a serious banking crisis in 1920 which the Riksbank handled
well as a LLR. Prices declined through the 1920s. After the UK left gold in 1931 Sweden
followed suit but the Riksbank began following the unorthodox policy of stabilizing the
price level( following a price level rule) and maintaining stable prices throughout the
1930s ( Berg and Jonung 1999).
During World War II Sweden left the gold standard and like many countries imposed
extensive exchange rate and price controls in the face of the large supply shocks it faced
from the heavy demand for its resources by both the Germans and the Allies (Fregert and
Jonung 2008). Sweden emerged from the war with ongoing inflation. Sweden, like many
other European countries had an overvalued exchange rate in terms of dollars and it
followed the UK in devaluing the krona in 1949.
Sweden joined the Bretton Woods system in 1951. Like the experience of other
countries prices were relatively stable and the economy boomed. Sweden, following the
war kept extensive capital and exchange controls and used the central bank to implement
credit policy—the allocating of credit by non market means. Like other countries the
Riksbank was subservient to the Treasury.

59

After the collapse of Bretton Woods, Sweden followed an inflationary Keynesian full
employment policy. It also accommodated both OPEC oil price shocks. In the face of these
supply shocks and the inflationary response to them, Sweden was forced to devalue several
times. According to Fregert and Jonung (2008) “the nominal anchor in the form of an ex
ante fixed exchange rate for the krona quickly lost its ability to anchor long-run
expectations ex post…the policy rule from the mid 1970s to the early 1990s has been
characterized as a full employment policy rule accompanied by a wage price spiral caused
by the use of devaluation to accommodate wage increases “ page 16.
In the mid 1980s Sweden adopted a fixed exchange rate to the DM as an irrevocable
nominal anchor. Adhering to this policy, once the DBB tightened monetary policy in 1991
led to a serious currency crisis /banking crisis in the fall of 1992 accompanied by a
recession with high unemployment. This led the Riksbank to abandon the peg.
In January 1993, after switching to floating exchange rates, the Riksbank adopted an
explicit inflation target at 2% (bounded on either side by 1%) to be enforced after January
1995. This policy led to the greatest improvement in inflation credibility in a century
measured by the length of wage contract (Fregert and Jonung 2008). The Riksbank began
following a flexible inflation targeting regime—allowing supply shocks to affect inflation in
the short-run and limiting fluctuations in the output gap. The Riksbank became
independent in 1999. Sweden followed the Maastricht criteria of low inflation, fiscal
deficits and debt ratios but stayed out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM). Sweden
decided in a referendum in 1992 to not join the euro area when it would start in 1999 and
has stayed out ever since. Based on the length of long-term contracts, Fregert and Jonung
(2008) find that Sweden had credible inflation regimes in the Classical gold standard era,
during Bretton Woods and during the inflation targeting regimes and possibly in the 1930s
price stability rule period. They see the 1940s, 70s and 80s as unstable regimes.
2. United Kingdom: Bank of England
The Bank of England was founded in 1694. It was a private chartered joint stock bank
with a public function. It was designed to aid the British government in placing its debt. In
exchange for being the government’s financier it was given the right to issue bank notes
and to take on other private banking functions. Over time it evolved into a banker’s bank,
60

taking deposits from the nascent commercial banks because of its important position. The
Bank’s charter required that it keep its notes convertible into gold at the official price of L
3.17s 9d per ounce of gold. By maintaining gold convertibility, the Bank gained credibility
early on.
The Bank had operational independence but not goal independence, ie its main goal
was to stay on the gold standard but it had control of its main policy tool—Bank Rate ( the
discount rate)-- and the government could monitor its performance since its charter was
subject to periodic renewal.
The gold standard rule that the Bank followed in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries was a contingent rule, in the sense that in times of emergency, such as major
wars, the Bank could request permission from the Treasury to temporarily suspend
convertibility and issue inconvertible bank notes, as was indeed the case during the
Napoleonic wars, during which the Bank suspended convertibility in 1797 and restored it
after hostilities had ceased, in 1821. Inflation reached a peak of 10% per year in 1810 and
then declined to its prewar level by the time of Resumption. These actions ensured the
Bank’s credibility (Bordo and Kydland 1995).
During the nineteenth century the Bank evolved into a lender of last resort in the face
of banking panics. In many crises, beginning in 1825 and ending in the Overend Gurney
crisis of 1866 the Bank lent too little and too late. By the Baring crisis of 1890 the Bank
finally learned to follow Bagehot’s (1873) Responsibility Doctrine to subsume its private
interest to its public responsibility (Bordo 1990). This also enhanced its credibility.
During the heyday of the Classical gold standard 1880-1914 the Bank generally
followed the “rules of the game” using its main policy tool, Bank rate, to speed up the
adjustment to balance of payments disequilibria. On occasion, to make Bank Rate effective,
the Bank used open market operations and gold devices. (Bordo 1981). Because of its
credibility the Bank had considerable flexibility to achieve goals other than convertibility,
i.e to smooth interest rates, output and prices ( Bordo and MacDonald 2005).
World War I in August 1914 led to de facto suspension of the gold standard but not de
jure until 1918. The Bank of England became an engine of inflation by freely discounting
short term Treasury bills at a low pegged interest rate to aid the Treasury in its war
finance. For a year after hostilities ceased, prices kept rising, at close to 200% in total. The
61

British monetary authorities expressed a strong interest in restoring the gold standard at
the original parity as soon as possible in the Cunliffe report of 1918. Resumption would
require politically unpopular deflation. The Bank engaged in tight money beginning in 1919
and the UK returned to gold at $4.866 in April 1925. Many argue that sterling was
overvalued by at least 10%. This overvaluation in one of the key reserve currencies, along
with other flaws, meant that the reestablished gold exchange standard would prove to be
not as durable as the classical gold standard but it was as credible , at least until 1931(
Bordo and Macdonald ( 2002)
The gold exchange standard broke down in 1931 because of its major flaws of
maladjustment, illiquidity and lack of confidence. Under a heavy speculative attack in
summer 1931 the UK left the gold standard. The UK’s experience with deflation and
depression was much less than other countries like the US that had continued to stay on
gold (Eichengreen 1992). After Britain had left gold, devalued and floated sterling the Bank
embarked on a reflationary policy through the 1930s.
During the Second World War the Bank again became an engine of inflation and
subsumed its independence to the Treasury. This led to a period of high inflation which
carried through into the 1950s. The Bank was nationalized in 1945 and officially lost
whatever independence it had. The UK became part of the Bretton Woods system in 1946
but did not achieve current account convertibility until December 1958. The 1950s and 60s
was a period of stop go monetary policy. Like in the interwar, sterling was overvalued and
the UK ran persistent balance of payments deficits, often culminating in currency crises,
ended by international rescues. Once the balance of payment constraint was relaxed the
monetary and fiscal authorities would stimulate the economy leading to a run up of prices
and another sterling crisis. The stop go pattern ended after the Devaluation of 1967 which
also ended sterling’s role as a reserve currency (Bordo 1993).
During the 1950s and 60s it was widely believed in the UK that monetary policy was
impotent as described in The Radcliffe Committee Report of 1960. Radcliffe advocated the
use of credit allocation policy and fiscal policy rather than monetary policy to maintain full
employment (Capie 2010).
After the Bretton Woods system broke down between 1971 and 1973, sterling floated
and without an external nominal anchor the UK entered the Great Inflation reaching
62

inflation rates over 20% and a total loss of credibility in the later 1970s. The Treasury,
which controlled monetary policy, believed inflation was caused by non monetary, cost
push forces and advocated the use of incomes policies rather than tight money to allay it
(Dicicio and Nelson 2013).
The high inflation rate produced a major currency crisis necessitating an IMF rescue in
1976. The inflation spiral was finally ended in 1980 when Margaret Thatcher came to
power. Thatcher and her advisor Alan Walters adopted monetarist orthodoxy and greatly
reduced money growth, liberalized the financial system, and removed capital controls. This
led to a serious recession in 1980-81 but by the mid 1980s the policy broke the back of
inflation and inflation expectations as was occurring at the same time in the U.S. Like the
US, this was the beginning of a period of low inflation, later called the Great Moderation.
However unlike the Volcker Fed, the Bank of England did not have independence. That did
not occur until 1998 when it achieved operational but not goal independence from the
Treasury. The UK Treasury and the Bank in the 1980s and 19990s had the primary goal of
low inflation and, following New Zealand’s example, began formal inflation targeting in
1992. Since then the UK has generally had low inflation and anchored inflationary
expectations.
3. France: Banque de France
The Banque de France was founded in 1803 by Napoleon Bonaparte to restore France
to monetary discipline after decades of instability and high inflation. France returned to
bimetallic specie convertibility and the Banque was a successful guardian of the Bimetallic
system until 1878 when France switched to the gold standard. Specie convertibility was
maintained until 1914 with two interruptions: in 1848-1850 following the overthrow of
the July monarchy and 1870-1873 following the Franco German War. France adhered
credibly to the specie standard as a contingent rule (Bordo and Kydland 1995) and like the
UK and Germany maintained price stability. The Banque de France did not follow “the rules
of the game” as closely as did the Bank of England and rarely varied its discount rate but its
unconventional (credit rationing) policies did not threaten its credibility (Bordo and
MacDonald 2005). The Banque de France also learned to be an effective lender of last

63

resort in allaying financial crises in 1882 and 1889 (White 2007, Hautcoeur, Riva and
White 2014).
France left the gold standard during World War I and like the other belligerents, the
BdF became an engine of inflation, freely absorbing the government’s debt and maintaining
a low interest peg. France had a higher inflation rate than Britain and the U.S .during the
war (at well over 200%). After the war, the BdF and the Treasury favored returning to its
prewar parity but the inflation and debt overhangs were so high that it would have taken a
massive deflationary policy to achieve it (Bordo and Hautcoeur 2007). More importantly a
struggle between the left and the right on how to reduce the debt and restore fiscal balance
prevented any action. The BdF continued absorbing the government’s debt and inflation
mounted until 1926. In 1925 the Banque’s reputation was tarnished in a scandal for
falsifying its statement of its circulation leading to the fall of the incumbent government
(Johnson 1997). By 1926 France had a serious currency crisis which was resolved by
Poincare arranging a political deal to restore fiscal balance, aided by international loans.
France returned to gold de facto with an 80% devaluation of the franc. Thereafter until
1936 the BdF followed a very conservative, hard franc policy to keep France on the gold
standard. During the Great Depression France stayed on the gold standard after Britain and
the US had departed. It was able to do this because until 1934 the franc was undervalued.
In the next two years France, like the other members of the gold bloc faced increasing
competitive pressure from the devalued sterling and dollar blocs culminating in a currency
crisis in 1936. To prevent a disorderly devaluation, France, the US and Britain signed the
Tripartite agreement under which the three countries coordinated intervention in their
currencies to smooth the franc’s descent (Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2014 chapter 3).
In sum, in stark contrast to the pre 1914 gold standard, the BdF’s credibility was generally
at a low level.
During World War II, occupied France had high inflation which continued after the war.
At war’s end in 1945, The Banque was nationalized losing its independence. In the early
postwar period the BdF followed an inflationary policy to spur economic growth and
maintain social stability. The Banque used credit rationing policies rather than the
conventional tools of monetary policy. Such policies continued through much of the next

64

three decades. According to Monnet (2013) the pursuit of such policies did not in general
achieve worse countercyclical outcomes than would be the case with conventional tools.
France joined the Bretton Woods system in 1946. In the face of high inflation, parity
was suspended in 1948, then restored following a devaluation in 1949. The experience was
repeated in 1957 and 1958. Important fiscal reforms were instituted in 1958 which
allowed France to declare current account convertibility in December 1958. In early 1960 a
currency reform created the New Franc worth 100 old francs. The BdF maintained
relatively low inflation in the 1960s and in 1963-64 President DeGaulle and Jacques Rueff
began campaigning to convert the Bretton Woods gold dollar exchange standard into a
pure gold standard. Until 1967 France continually challenged US hegemony and
undermined the Bretton Woods system (Bordo, Simard and White 1995).
In spring 1968 political unrest led to a currency crisis which despite an international
rescue, ended with another devaluation of the franc. After the collapse of the Bretton
Woods system France’s participation in the “Snake in the Tunnel” exchange rate
arrangement was unsuccessful because of France’s high inflation rate relative to Germany’s
. Like many other countries, France had high inflation in the 1970s. Despite the BdF’s
adoption of monetary targeting, it accommodated the oil price shocks. France joined the
European Monetary System in 1979 as a credibility enhancing mechanism but the franc
still remained weak relative to the deutschemark. In 1983 France adopted the “franc fort”
policy with tight monetary policy by the BdF. Subsequent disinflation restored some
credibility. However it was short lived as the EMS crisis in 1992 ended with France’s exit
and devaluation of the franc. France signed the Maastricht Treaty in 1992. The Banque was
granted independence in 1993 and became fully committed to price stability. For the next
six years until EMU and the creation of the euro in 1999, the Banque followed a credible
policy of low inflation.
4. Norway: Norges Bank
The Norges Bank was founded in 1816 when Norway was made independent from
Denmark. The Nineteenth century, after the end of the Napoleonic Wars, was one of price
stability for Norway as was the case in the other Scandinavian countries. Norway was on a

65

silver standard until 1873 when it joined the gold standard. Norway was also part of the
Scandinavian Monetary Union from 1875.
Prices tended toward long run price stability because of adherence to a specie based
nominal anchor. However prices were not perfectly stable from year to year reflecting
global demand and supply shocks to specie and the operation of the price specie flow
mechanism. Like the other Scandinavian central banks, the Norges Bank continued to have
credibility for low inflation in the years preceding World War I (Eitrihem,Qvigstad and
Steie 2006)
Like the other Scandinavian countries, Norway left the gold standard during World War
I and had high inflation reflecting the belligerents demand for its goods and services. After
the war Central bank Governor Rygg vigorously pursued a deflationary policy to restore
the exchange rate to its original parity in 1928. The drastic deflation in the 1920s was
associated with high unemployment and falling output. Like Sweden and other countries
Norway left the gold standard after Britain did in September 1931. The Norges Bank then
pursued an expansionary policy in the 1930s.
During World War II Norway was occupied by the Germans. As in the case of other
occupied countries, the central bank used the inflation tax to provide revenue to be
transferred to the occupiers. The inflation was accompanied by extensive controls and
hence was repressed.
After the War Norway joined the Bretton Woods System in 1946. The next two and a
half decades were periods of rapid economic growth (partly fueled by Marshall Plan aid)
and low inflation. Norway left Bretton Woods in 1971 and the 1970s and 80s was a period
of high inflation associated with expansionary monetary and fiscal policy dedicated to
maintain full employment. The Norges Bank, like other central banks in this era believed in
the Phillips curve tradeoff between unemployment and inflation. As a consequence of these
inflationary policies and continued adherence to fixed exchange rates Norway had periodic
devaluations. Like Sweden, the Norges Bank was involved in the government’s credit
allocation policies which were accompanied by extensive controls on financial markets
(Eitriheim and Oksendal 2013)
Liberalization of the financial sector was lifted in 1984 which contributed to a real
estate boom, fueled by expansionary monetary policy. The boom ended with tighter
66

monetary policy in 1986. The legacy of the collapse of the real estate boom and the buildup
in bad assets in the commercial banks was a banking crisis in 1991 when the Norges bank
served as an effective lender of last resort (Steigum 2009).
A major policy reform occurred in 1986, The Norges Bank became dedicated to price
stability as its main goal. The Norges Bank received operational independence in 1985. The
reforms and new policies were successful in reducing inflation and the Norges Bank gained
credibility. This was strengthened when the Bank began targeting inflation in 2001. Since
the late 1980s the Norges Bank has been very successful at keeping inflation low and price
expectations well anchored (Qvigstad 2013).
5. Germany: Reichsbank/Bundesbank
The Reichsbank was founded in 1876 shortly after the Franco Prussian War, German
reunification and Germany’s joining the gold standard. The Reichsbank had private
ownership but public management (Singleton 2008). It had operational independence
within the confines of the gold standard. It was established to unify the currency, preserve
gold convertibility, act as a central bank (to use its discount rate to provide liquidity for the
money market based on bankers acceptances) and be a lender of last resort.
The Reichsbank was successful in maintaining the gold standard until World War I and
it generally followed the rules of the game (Bordo and Eschweiler 1994). It also was a
successful lender of last resort in the financial crises of 1901 and 1907. Thus the
Reichsbank had considerable credibility and the German price level was well anchored.
Germany abandoned gold convertibility at the start of World War I and the Reichsbank
became part of the government. It freely discounted government paper at a low interest
rate peg, becoming a major engine of inflation. After defeat in 1918 the Reichsbank under
its President Havenstein continued to be an engine of inflation which became
hyperinflation by 1923. The basic problem was an impossible fiscal impasse in which the
Weimar government could not raise the tax revenues needed to pay for reparations and
postwar reconstruction and other expenses so it resorted to the printing press. By 1923 the
Reichsbank lost its credibility and the German mark became worthless. In the Currency
Reform of 1923, Havenstein was succeeded by Hjalmar Schacht as President of the
Reichsbank. In 1924 the Reichsmark was created, fiscal balance was restored with the aid
67

of massive foreign loans, and the currency was pegged again to gold at a vastly devalued
rate from its prewar parity. For 7 years Germany had price stability and credibility was
restored (Bordo and MacDonald 2002). Schacht cooperated with Montagu Norman
(Governor of the Bank of England), Emile Moreau (Governor of the Banque de France, and
Benjamin Strong (Governor of the Federal Reserve bank of New York) to maintain the Gold
Exchange Standard (Ahmed 2010).
The Great Depression, which began in the US, spread quickly to Germany, which had
borrowed heavily in the US and quickly lost access to the foreign capital inflows needed to
service reparations. Germany had as serious a contraction and deflation as the US. The
Reichsbank, following gold standard orthodoxy maintained a tight monetary policy making
things worse (Eichengreen 1992). The Creditanstalt crisis in Vienna in May 1931, which led
to a bailout by the Austrian National Bank and government, provoked a run on the
Austrian schilling, a freeze on foreign deposits and the imposition of exchange controls(
which de facto removed Austria from the gold standard).The banking crisis then spread to
Germany in July 1931. The German government bailed out most of the commercial banks,
froze foreign deposits and like Austria imposed exchange controls and de facto left gold.
The German financial crisis and the Depression contributed greatly to the victory of
National Socialism in the elections of 1933. Under Hitler, the Reichsbank became the
government’s bank and greatly helped finance rearmament and then World War II. The
Bank instituted a panoply of internal and external controls. World War II led to high (and
suppressed) inflation which continued after defeat.
After the war, the allies established the Deutsches Lander Bank, which like the early
Federal Reserve was a loose federation of regional banks coordinated by a Board. The BdL
was dedicated to preserving the value of the currency (both external and internal). It was
made independent from the Federal Government. The Currency Reform of 1948 ended
inflation and created a new currency, the Deutschemark. The BdL based on the stability
culture of postwar Germany focused primarily on price stability and led Germany into a
pattern of low inflation. (Beyer et al 2013).
The BdL was superseded by the Bundesbank (DBB), established by the Federal
Government of Germany in 1958. Like its predecessor it was dedicated overall to
maintaining the value of the DMark. Under the Bretton Woods System the DBB faced a
68

conflict between maintaining the dollar peg and internal price level stability since under a
pegged exchange rate the money supply becomes endogenous. In the Bretton Woods era ,
West Germany ,because of its rapid productivity growth and high growth rate, kept running
current account surpluses which would lead to dollar inflows , which unless they were
sterilized would lead to faster money growth and inflation. In response to the inflationary
pressure Germany imposed controls on capital inflows and revalued the DM in 1961 and
1969 (Bordo 1993). Once the Bretton Woods system broke down between 1971 and 1973,
The DBB began to focus on maintaining the internal value of the DM. Its attempts to
maintain price stability were not successful with the first Oil Price shock in 1973 when
inflation rose to 8% per year. In 1974 the DBB adopted monetary growth targeting to
gradually reduce inflation. The monetary targeting framework was supposed to both
control inflation and influence inflation expectations. The DBB roughly followed monetarist
doctrine in targeting Central Bank Money (similar to M3) and gradually reducing its
targets, but it often missed its targets. According to Beyer, et al 2013) although the DBB
missed its targets, it always explained the misses and hence followed pragmatic
monetarism. The DBB’s policy did succeed in making Germany’s inflation rate (along with
Switzerland) by far the lowest among the advanced countries during the Great Inflation.
The experience of low inflation and the fact that Germany did not accommodate the second
oil price shock in 1978/79 gave the DBB very high credibility before the 1980s, in sharp
contrast to the US and UK .The DBB kept following money targeting until the advent of the
Euro in 1999. The DBBs monetary targeting approach and its credibility for low inflation
were incorporated into the European Central Bank as its two pillar strategy.
6. Italy: Banca d’Italia
Italy was unified in 1861 but the Banca d’Italia was not founded until 1893. Italy had
competing banks of issue for its first three decades which meant that it was difficult to
create a uniform national currency or to conduct national monetary policy Fratianni and
Spinelli( 1997). Italy initially adhered to the bimetallic standard until 1883 when it joined
the gold standard. It also was a member of the Latin Monetary Union. Italy had a chequered
specie adherence and inflation record until the end of the nineteenth century. Lax fiscal and
monetary discipline, initially consequent upon war with Austria, led it to abandon specie
69

from May 1861 to March 1883, float its exchange rate and issue inconvertible fiat money,
and then return to the gold standard from 1883 to June 1893. It again left gold and floated
from 1893 to 1902 (Bordo and Schwartz 1996). Thereafter although Italy did not join the
gold standard the Bd’I began following a conservative monetary policy which kept the lira
close to its de facto parity and the government greatly reduced its fiscal deficits so that Italy
shadowed the gold standard (Tattara 2000).
During World War I, along with other belligerents, The Banca d’Italia served as an
engine of inflation, which peaked at 44% in 1917. Shortly after the war ended, Mussolini
came to power in 1922 and the central bank lost its autonomy to the Treasury and inflation
continued. In the late 1920s the monetary authorities followed a tight monetary policy to
produce a strong lira and Italy joined the gold exchange standard in 1928. Like other gold
bloc countries Italy stayed on gold until 1935 which imposed deflationary pressure on the
Italian economy. The lira was devalued in 1936 and Italy adopted a fiscally dominant
inflationary policy which culminated in very high inflation, peaking at 90% per year in
1944 (Fratianni and Spinelli 1997).
After its defeat in World War II, Italy was plagued by high inflation and deep recession.
The B d’I began a stabilization policy in 1947. Italy joined the Bretton Woods system in
1946 and the Bd’I was successful for a number of years in maintaining the official peg,
leading to current account convertibility in 1960. However expansionary financial policy
inconsistent with the peg, led to a currency crisis in 1964 which was resolved with an
international rescue package (Yeager 1976). Italy adhered to Bretton Woods until it
collapsed in 1971. In the 1970s, Italy returned to a fiscally dominant regime, with high and
variable inflation, a serious currency crisis in 1976 requiring an IMF rescue and
conditionality and unsuccessful adherence to the European “snake in the tunnel
“arrangement.
Italy joined the EMS in 1979 as an inflation disciplining device (Giavazzi and Pagano
(1991). although its inflation rate remained one of Europe’s highest, and it was forced to
exit the ERM in the currency crisis of 1992. Italy signed the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, and
by 1999 its inflation rate, debt to GDP ratio and fiscal deficit sufficiently to allow it to join
the euro. The Banca d’Italia became operationally independent in 1992 but never formally
adopted an inflation target before it was absorbed into the ECB.
70

In sum, with a few exceptional episodes, the Banca d’Italia’s credibility for low inflation
was not stellar before joining the euro. Indeed Italy was a strong advocate for EMU because
it would have an externally imposed nominal anchor to give it such credibility.
7. Switzerland: The Swiss National Bank (SNB)
The Swiss National Bank was founded in 1907. Unlike the earlier European National
Banks of Issue established in the nineteenth century or earlier, the SNB was set up to
adhere to the monetary standard and to provide financial stability. Switzerland was on gold
since 1878 but was still a member of the Latin Monetary Union and in the nineteenth
century had issues with depreciated Italian silver coins and with its currency being weaker
than the French Franc (Bordo and James 2007). Like the Federal Reserve the SNB was to
follow the real doctrine and freely discount eligible real bills from the Swiss commercial
banks.
Like other European countries, Switzerland left the gold standard in 1914 and had high
(internationaly driven) inflation in the war although she was not a belligerent.
Following the War the SNB followed a deflationary policy to restore gold, de facto in
1924 and de jure 1929. As an important banking center, Switzerland was exposed to the
crisis of the Great Depression. Several important banks faced stringency in 1931 and the
SNB provided liquidity support. Switzerland stayed on the gold standard, along with France
and the other gold bloc countries (Belgium, Netherlands and Poland) and began to suffer
competitive pressure after Britain and then the United States left gold and floated. Political
debate between advocates of devaluation and proponents of hard money only ended when
France left gold and Switzerland followed. Had Switzerland devalued earlier along with the
U.S., its real output would not have fallen nearly as much as it did (Bordo, Helbling and
James, 2007).
Switzerland remained neutral during World War II. After the war, Switzerland, like
Germany followed the stability culture and the SNB had an excellent track record at
keeping inflation low. Switzerland did not join the Bretton Woods System but the Swiss
franc was defined as a specified weight in gold so it had its own nominal anchor.
Switzerland like Germany because of its low inflation ran continuous balance of payments
surpluses which led to inflationary pressure. Unable to sterilize the dollar inflows,
71

Switzerland like Germany imposed capital controls (taxes on foreign deposits). As the
Great Inflation progressed and the weak dollar became more of a problem, Switzerland
joined the other European countries and allowed the SF to float in 1973. Like the DBB, the
SNB followed a monetary targeting strategy with the monetary base as a target (Rich 1997)
and the SNB was as successful as the DBB in keeping its inflation rate lower than other
advanced countries. The SNB’s credible track record for low inflation combined with
Switzerland’s efficient banking sector (and secrecy laws) made the SF a key haven for
capital flows from the rest of Europe and the less developed world. The inflows put upward
pressure on the SF and made it difficult for the SNB to hit its monetary base target so that
in 1978 it had to temporarily suspend its target. The SNB was generally able to hit its target
until 1986, after which external shocks put upward pressure on the SF, on money supply
and prices. Forcing Switzerland to abandon its base control strategy and to shift to inflation
targeting in 1999 while still monitoring monetary aggregates as predictors of future
inflationary pressure (SNB 2007). The SNB has maintained credibility for low inflation and
has anchored inflation expectations for much of its history.
8. Australia: The Commonwealth Bank of Australia/The Reserve Bank of
Australia
Although the RBA dates from 1959 central banking actually began with the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) in 1912. The CBA was publicly owned but
operated much like a conventional commercial bank (Gollan 1968). The original concept
stemmed from boom and bust cycles due to Australia’s position as a commodity producer
and the purpose of the new bank was to act as a backstop of sorts in the event of bank
failures, a common occurrence in the 19th century. From the outset there was considerable
discussion about the independence of the CBA. Politicians felt that the CBA ought to be
independent of political interference as it sought to deepen financial markets and spur
economic development not act as a too of the politicians (e.g., Bell 2004). A common
development across many of the central banks covered by our narratives is that, during
major wars, the monetary authorities became, if they not already, subservient to the
Treasury. The CBA was no exception (e.g., see Swan 1940). However, it is also true that war

72

finance provided an opportunity for the institutional development of the monetary
authority, especially as a ‘restraining influence’ (Bell 2004, p.9) on government finance.
Like its counterparts elsewhere in the Dominions, the CBA was affected by the Great
Depression and, when the Gold Standard ended in 1931, the CBA was given authority over
the exchange rate. Moreover, just as in Canada, the subject of conflict between the
Governor and the central bank became an important topic of reform. While a crisis on the
same level as the Coyne Affair in Canada did not take place, the government in the early
1950s eventually introduced a dispute resolution mechanism designed to defuse tension
and avoid damaging the government. It is interesting that Australian politicians of the time
understood that conflict would likely first damage a sitting government and not the central
bank. In contrast, politicians in Canada would not understand the consequences of conflict
with the central until after the Coyne Affair erupted (e.g., see Siklos 2002). Just as with
Canada there has never been a conflict serious enough to appeal to the legislation to
resolve any dispute.
Initially, as in the case of New Zealand and Canada, the remit of the central bank did not
contradict the goal of price stability (i.e., the stability of the currency) but there was a clear
requirement to support economic growth as well. By the 1970s the oil price shocks were
producing higher inflation rates while the abandonment of the Bretton Woods exchange
rate system, together with interest rate ceilings and heavy handed banking regulation
promoted the growth of the non-bank financial sector. By the late 1970s and into the early
1980s, a financial deregulation phase was being initiated culminating with the float of the
dollar in December 1983. Through the use of open market operations and the ban on
funding any government budget deficit the RBA was able to influence interest rates and
autonomously set the stance of monetary policy.
The 1980s would eventually bring the start of major changes in the role of the RBA.
Paul Keating, who became Treasurer in 1983, was determined to fight inflation. At the RBA
this led to sharp rises in the policy rate, called the cash rate, reaching a peak of over 18% by
the end of 1985. In addition, the RBA intervened regularly in foreign exchange markets to
prevent the dollar from falling too quickly since this was deemed to be unhelpful (RBA
1987). Adding to the difficulties faced by monetary policy, especially during the late 1980s,
were rapidly rising housing prices and a large current account deficit. However, at the same
73

time inflation rates began to drop quickly and, in the space of roughly six years went from
near double-digit rate of change to around 2% by 1992.
In spite of an improved inflation record the RBA entered the 1990s with low credibility.
It had been unable to counter the effects of boom and busts in the 1980s, there was no clear
policy framework, supported incomes control policies, and was not seen as independent of
government influence. The policy of gradualism, implicit in how monetary policy was
delivered, lost favor.
By 1993, shortly after New Zealand, Canada, and the UK did the same, the RBA adopted
an inflation target as an anchor of policy. However, in an important departure from the
practice elsewhere of declaring an inflation target range with the aim of achieving the midpoint of the target over a specified horizon, the RBA chose to adopt a narrow range of 23%, on average, over the cycle. Part of the reason was that, as did the RBNZ and the BoC,
there was sufficient uncertainty about whether the target would be reached to adopt as
flexible an approach as was feasible under the circumstances. By the mid-1990s a new
government ushered in some modifications in the inflation targeting policy by requiring
that the Treasurer and the RBA Governor agree on the inflation targeting strategy. The
resulting Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy has become a fixture of monetary
policy making since that time (Grenville 1996).
Inflation has been low and stable since the mid-1990s in Australia and there are no
indications that the monetary policy strategy will change. Unlike many other central banks
Australia did not experience a recession following the GFC of 2008-9. However, the
commodity price boom, together with an asset price boom, primarily in he housing sector,
made life difficult for the RBA. Policy rates were raised and lowered relatively gradually
through the crisis and in response to the housing price boom but the RBA never flirted with
the ZLB. Nevertheless, while the economic problems Australia has faced for decades,
namely boom and bust cycles in commodity and asset prices, remain the RBA has now
achieved an enviable record of low and stable inflation thanks to inflation targeting (e.g, see
Stevens 2003), its independence is not in doubt, and its committee-based decision making
structure is consistent with best practice in monetary policy making.
9. United States: Federal Reserve
74

The Federal Reserve was established in 1913 to act as a lender of last resort and to
preserve the gold standard. The U.S. hadn’t had a central bank since the demise of the
Second Bank of the United States in 1836. The U.S. had been on a specie standard
(bimetallism before 1873, gold thereafter) standard throughout the nineteenth century
with the exception of the Greenback paper money floating exchange rate episode from
1862 to 1879. Under the gold standard, the U.S. had long-run price stability (alternating
periods of rising and falling prices driven by the vagaries of the gold standard). The U.S’s
inflation credibility was nearly as good (with the exception of the Free Silver threat in the
early 1990s) as the advanced countries of Europe which had central banks (seen in longterm interest rate spreads on gold bonds Bordo and Rockoff 1996). The main problem in
the U.S. was financial instability manifest in frequent banking panics (1837, 1857, 1873,
1884, 1993 and 1907) in the absence of a true lender of last resort.
The panic of 1907 was the event that broke the camel’s back leading to the movement
for monetary reform. The prototype for a US central bank was contained in the Warburg
Plan of 1910—a loose federal system of regional central banks, each modeled after the
Reichsbank in Germany to be coordinated by a Board in Washington. The Reserve banks
would use their discount rates to freely accommodate banker’s acceptances and act as a
lender of last resort. The Federal Reserve System founded in 1913 took on many of the
aspects of the original Warburg Plan with a much stronger federal government presence in
the Federal Reserve Board (Bordo and Wheelock 2013).
World War I broke out just before the Fed was to open its doors leaving the U.S. as one
of the few countries still on the gold standard (with the exception of a gold embargo 19171919). Gold inflows from the belligerents’ purchases of US goods fueled inflation which was
aggravated after the US joined the war in April 1917 when the Fed began financing the US
Treasury’s bond issues at a low pegged interest rate. By wars end the US price level had
increased close to 100%, (the lowest rate of the belligerents).
After the war the Fed began sharply raising its discount rate in 1919 after its gold
reserves were threatened by continued high inflation. This led to a serious but short-lived
recession and deflation from 1920-21. The period 1921 to 1929 was characterized by mild
deflation and rapid economic growth punctuated by two mild recessions. Friedman and
Schwartz (1963) and Meltzer (2003) gave the Fed high marks for attenuating the
75

recessions, preventing banking panics and preserving price stability. The 1920s can be
regarded as a period of high Federal Reserve credibility.
The Great Contraction, 1929 -33 can be attributed to several failures of US monetary
policy. These include loose monetary policy in 1927 to aid the UK in its struggles to stay on
the gold exchange standard which may have fueled asset booms in housing and later stocks
(Bordo and Landon Lane 2013); Fed tightening in early 1928 to stem the stock market
boom which contributed to a downturn in August 1929 followed by the stock market crash
of October; c) the failure to act as lender of last resort and prevent four banking panics
from October 1930 to March 1933. This policy failure contributed greatly to an
unprecedented collapse in money supply, real output and prices. The massive (over 30%)
decline in prices led to a major loss of credibility.
The Great Contraction ended in March 1933 and recovery followed quickly after the
incoming Roosevelt administration declared a one week banking holiday, exited the U.S.
from the gold standard , engaged in massive gold( and silver ) purchases and then devalued
the dollar by 60% a year later. Prices and real output rebounded rapidly from 1933 to
1937 , interrupted by a sharp recession 1937-38 which Friedman and Schwartz ( 1963)
attribute to the Fed’s doubling of reserve requirements in 1936 to absorb banks excess
reserves and the Treasury’s policy of sterilization of gold inflows.
The Federal Reserve system was reorganized in 1933 and 1935 and the Board of
Governors was given enlarged powers. However during the 1930s the Fed did not play a
very active role in monetary policy which had been taken over by the Treasury. From the
1930s onward the Fed began following a low interest rate policy to accommodate the
Treasury’s fiscal policies (Meltzer 2003). During World War II the Fed again became an
engine of inflation although prices did not rise as much as in World War I because of
extensive price controls. The interest rate pegs were kept after World War II and in the
1940s inflation became a problem leading the Fed to campaign to regain its independence
to raise its policy rates. This was achieved after a considerable struggle with the Treasury
and the Administration in the Federal Reserve Treasury Accord of 1951. The Fed tightened
policy in the early 50s and restored price stability. Under Chairman Martin the Fed
followed a policy of low inflation and the economy performed well through much of the

76

1950s and early 60s. During this period the US performed well in keeping inflation low as
the provider of the key currency of the Bretton Woods System .
The era of credible inflation ended after 1965 when, under pressure from the Johnson
administration the Fed began accommodating expansionary fiscal policies to support the
Vietnam War and the Great Society. This led to the beginning of the Great Inflation (1965 to
1982). The Fed also began following Keynesian doctrine (the Phillips Curve tradeoff) and
made achieving full employment (at the expense of inflation) its paramount policy goal. As
inflation and inflationary pressures mounted in the 1970s, several attempts by the Burn’s
FOMC to reduce inflation faltered when it led to recession and rising unemployment,
leading to a ratcheting up in inflation and inflation expectations (Bordo and Orphanides
2013). Accommodation of two oil price shocks also contributed to the run up in inflation.
By the late 1970s the Fed had lost considerable credibility for low inflation. This
culminated in a run on the dollar in 1978.
In 1979 President Carter appointed Paul Volcker as Chairman of the Fed with a
mandate to end inflation. Volcker followed a monetarist policy strategy, targeting non
borrowed reserves and letting interest rates be determined by market forces. Interest rates
rose to close to 20% by 1980. Volcker’s tight money policy triggered a sharp recession in
1979- 80. It was aggravated by the Carter administration imposing controls on credit card
expenditures. In reaction the Fed loosened policy in late 1980. Immediately inflation and
inflationary expectations rebounded. Several months later, with the support of the newly
elected President Reagan, Volcker reapplied the monetary brakes triggering a second
recession and this time it did not stop tightening despite the unemployment rate rising well
above 10% until inflation and inflation expectations abated in 1982. The Fed’s credibility
suffered after the first recession and only was regained after the second (more severe) Fed
induced downturn (Bordo,Erceg, Levin and Michaels 2007).
The Fed reestablished its credibility for low inflation by the mid 1980s seen in declines
in nominal interest rates, in the TIPs spread and in various measures of inflation
expectations. The 20 year episode of good economic performance is referred to as the Great
Moderation. Alan Greenspan took over as Fed Chairman in 1987. He quickly prevented a
major stock market crash from leading to a banking crisis and then followed the Volcker
approach to maintaining credibility for low inflation. This policy was put to the test by the
77

inflation scare of 1994 when rising long-term bond yields signaled a run up in inflationary
expectations. The Fed tightened sharply, raising real interest rates. And then when inflation
expectations eased, the Fed loosened, preventing a recession. (Goodfriend 1993).
The Great Moderation ended with the Financial Crisis of 2007-2008. Loose Federal
Reserve policy of keeping the Federal Funds rate well below the Taylor rule rate from 2003
to 2005, in an attempt to head off potential deflation, added fuel to a burgeoning real estate
boom which burst in 2006 triggering the crisis. (Taylor 2007, Bordo and Landon Lane 2013
b). The Fed reacted to the crisis by following aggressive monetary policy of cutting the FFR
in the fall of 2007, opening the discount window to many nonbank financial institutions
and non traditional markets and by a controversial bailout policy in fall 2008 ( bailing out
Bear Stearns, AIG and the GSEs ) and letting Lehman fail in October. That action triggered a
global financial crisis. The Fed reacted to the panic by cutting the FFR to zero and
instituting several unorthodox discount window facilities. These policies combined with
the Treasury’s TARP plan, stress tests and an inter central bank swap arrangement ended
the crisis. By late fall 2008 the Fed’s policy rate had hit the zero lower bound and with the
recession still on going, the Fed instituted its Quantitative Easing policy (QE1) -- the
purchase of long term Treasuries and mortgage backed securities. This unconventional
policy was followed in the next 4 years by three other packages in the face of an
unprecedented (after a financial crisis) slow recovery (Bordo and Haubrich 2012). These
policies have quadrupled the Fed’s balance sheet, and many argue could lead to a future
inflation policy. The Fed may have lost considerable credibility with the crisis and time will
tell if it regains its credibility for low inflation by how it exits from QE.
10. Canada: Bank of Canada
The Bank of Canada was created in 1935. Two historic events during the 1930s were
influential in the formation of the central bank. The first, of course, was the Great
Depression. The second event was the end of the Gold Standard. Unlike the United States to
the south Canada saw no bank failures in the 1930s. Neither did the country experience a
surge in inflation when the link to gold was suspended. Indeed, part of the impetus for the
creation of the Bank of Canada was the fear of deflation (e.g., Burdekin and Siklos 2004). An
equally strong motive for the creation of a central bank was a political one. The MacMillan
78

Commission, a royal commission struck in 1993 to investigate the possibility of
establishing a central bank in Canada, returned a favorable, though narrow, majority report
after conducting hearings nationwide. As Bordo and Redish (1987, p. 415) note:
“Domestically, in an environment where traditional trust in the beneficial nature of the
market system was eroding and a spirit of nationalism was rising, political pressure was
mounting to halt the deflation which was frequently blamed on the concentrated banking
industry.”
Other political forces also contributed to the creation of the Bank of Canada. Canada had
no central bank that could be used to manage monetary policy, including the exchange rate.
Indeed, paralleling the creation of the Bank of Canada was the introduction of the Exchange
Fund Account in 1935 to “aid in the control and protection of the external position of the
Canadian monetary unit.” (Statutes of Canada 1935) The Bank, which officially began
operations in March 1935, was initially a private institution with stocks issued and
dividends paid out to shareholders up to a stated maximum. After the 1936 election,
however, the Bank was nationalized and, by 1938, the government acquired all of the
shares.
Around the time of the outbreak of World War II, Canada introduced exchange controls.
Price controls would also shortly thereafter be put in place. These were administered by
the Foreign Exchange Control Board, chaired by the Governor of the Bank of Canada. Wage
and price controls were also introduced and the war was financed by the issuance of a
series of Victory bonds. These long-term loans would create some difficulties for the Bank
of Canada during the second half of the 1950s (see below). More controversially, the
Governor of the Bank would also preside over the Industrial Development Bank, a vehicle
to spur economic growth and employment in the postwar era. The result was to effectively
neutralize monetary policy as a stabilization tool to manage inflation (e.g., see Deutsch
1957).
The earliest days of the Bank in the postwar era were marked by the creation of a
market for short-term government debt as well as facilitate the development of a money
market. This was deemed vital given the contemporary trend toward greater government
involvement in the economy. An important feature of Bank of Canada policy in the early
years was the resort to moral suasion. The aim was to persuade the commercial banking
79

system to follow lending policies that suited the macroeconomic objectives of the central
bank. The highly concentrated nature of the Canadian banking system made such a policy
practical.
Once World War II ended high levels of government debt, the need to re-intermediate
the Canadian financial system following wartime controls, meant that the Bank needed to
prepare to intervene in the financial system to ensure a smooth exit from an era of forced
‘cheap money’. In addition, the postwar era would usher in the creation of the Bretton
Woods system of pegged exchange rates. Canada adopted the system but, in the early
1950s, became the first country to opt out of the exchange rate system. In spite of the heavy
criticism it faced, Canada adhered to a form of floating exchange rates until the early 1960s
when it returned to the Bretton Woods fold (e.g., see Helleiner 2006). In spite of the flexible
exchange rate regime the nominal exchange rate did not vary a great deal throughout most
of the decade. Unlike other parts of the world, capital remained mobile.
The decade of the 1950s was an eventful one for at least two other reasons. First, the
Bank of Canada arguably became the first central bank to adopt an interest rate instrument
to signal the stance of monetary policy (e.g., see Siklos 2010). Next, and perhaps most
importantly, the Bank experienced its first institutional crisis whose consequences are still
being felt to this day. Following the boom and bust period in the aftermath of the Korean
War the Canadian economy once again grew vary rapidly during the mid-1950s and the
Bank publicly worried about rising inflation. Through its encouragement of the
development of a nascent money market the Bank engineered successive increases in the
interest rate even as the Canadian and U.S. economies, the latter by far its largest trading
partner, were showing signs of an imminent and sharp slowdown. The Bank also faced the
soon to mature Victory bonds from the World War II era and the resulting shift in the
maturity structure of the government debt complicate matters as well.
James Coyne, who became the second Bank of Canada Governor in 1955, believed
strongly that the bank needed to be interventionist, especially in the control of inflation.
His policy of high interest rates at a time of rising unemployment created severe tension
with the government of the day led by Prime Minister John Diefenbaker. Publicly, doubts
about the correctness of the Bank’s monetary policy were also raised to unprecedented
levels. As one notable economist of the time opined (Gordon 1961, p. 15) the Bank “…has
80

its eye fixed on the moral wickedness of the slightest changes of inflation and is unmoved
by the patent facts of growing unemployment and stagnating national income.” By 1961 the
controversy reached a climax when the government introduced a motion declaring the post
of Governor vacant. The elected House of Commons passed the motion but the unelected
Senate, where Coyne found support, did not. Coyne, feeling vindicated, resigned. Regardless
of who was right or wrong during the crisis the BoC lost much of its credibility during the
Coyne years.
The resignation would, however, have lasting consequences on the Bank. Louis
Rasminsky, who took over as Governor, did so on the condition that a new Bank of Canada
Act contain a directive such that, in the event of a disagreement over policy issues, the
government was required to publicly explain its disagreement and the Governor would be
directed to implement the policy. Since the so-called Rasminsky directive was included in
the Bank of Canada Act, it has never been invoked. Indeed, it has proved to be the device
that guarantees the autonomy of the Bank from direct political interference. Indeed, the
Rasminsky era succeeded in re-establishing central bank credibility.
The period the 1960s was a time of fixed exchange rates with the Canadian dollar
pegged at US 92.5 cents. Relative economic peace came to an end with the two oil price
shocks of the 1970s. The resulting stagflation culminated in the Saskatoon Monetary
manifesto of then Governor Gerald Bouey, who advocated the adoption of monetary
targeting to buttress Bank of Canada credibility. At the time the Governor (Courchene
1976, p. 25) insisted that “Whatever else may need to be done to bring inflation under
control, it is absolutely essential to keep the rate of monetary expansion within reasonable
limits.” Termed the strategy of gradualism the objective of the policy was to bring down the
rate of money supply growth from an initial range of 10-15% per annum. The policy
succeeded in part because, as Bouey famously stated, “we didn’t abandon the monetary
aggregates, the abandoned us”. Once again the Bank suffered a loss of credibility when it
failed to control inflation.
The failure of monetary targeting, the end of the Bretton Woods era conspired to create
a void in monetary policy. There was no monetary anchor. As a result, pressure came from
several quarters to stem inflation with new tools. In 1987, during the course of the Hanson
Lecture Governor John Crowe argued that “monetary policy should be geared so as to
81

achieve a pace of monetary expansion that promotes price stability in the value of money.
This means pursuing a policy aimed at achieving and maintaining stable prices.” (Crowe
1988, p. 4) Shortly after New Zealand adopted inflation targeting (see below), the Bank,
with the tacit encouragement of the federal government, adopted inflation reduction
targets in 1991. However, the adoption of a new anchor of policy was not without
considerable controversy, somewhat reminiscent of the Coyne affair three decades earlier.
The issue was once again whether, in the pursuit of price stability, the Bank deliberately
engineered or made worse the recession of the early 1990s.
Canada’s inflation targeting regime began with goals to reduce inflation, first to 3% by
1992, and then to 2% by 1995. Inflation fell more quickly than anyone expected and a
target range of between 1 to 3%, with a 2% mid-point inflation target, was adopted. Since
that time the inflation target remit has been renewed every five years and inflation has
remained within the target range much of the time since then. The inflation targeting
regime has been in place for over two decades and is, arguably, a success story. Along with
the adoption of inflation targets was a commitment to a floating exchange rate and the
gradual expansion of the transparency of the Bank of Canada. Governor Gordon Thiessen
was largely responsible for these and other changes (e.g., see Laidler 1991, and Laidler and
Robson 1993).
The inflation targeting regime survived the global financial crisis but the regime has not
been left unscathed. While Canada escaped the worst of the GFC, the events of 2008-13
provide some fodder for the critics of the Bank. The recession of 2008-9 was short-lived
but among the sharpest of the post-war era (see Cross and Bergevin 2012). Even if the 2%
inflation target has proved to be a durable anchor, observed inflation has been below target
roughly half the time since 2005, including all of 2009 and 2013. Prior to 2005 CPI inflation
also remained below 2% between 1998 and early 2001. Conventional central banks
actions, via changes in a central bank policy rate, became less effective and appeared
inoperative once the zero lower bound was reached. Consequently, much of the advanced
world adopted unconventional monetary policies. The shift implies emphasis on policies
that impact the balance sheet of the central bank.
Canada remained in the eye of the storm that was creating havoc across the
industrialized economies. A sound banking system and little bubble-like activity in the
82

housing sector, meant that two direct channels that propagated the financial crisis in the
U.S. were absent in Canada. Nevertheless, the Bank of Canada could not avoid the
movement of policy rates toward the ZLB. Regardless, the accommodative monetary policy
stance still failed to dent the unease about negative spillovers from the deepening U.S.
recession; a phenomenon that was apparent throughout the industrial world.
Why, even if it Canada’s economy was relatively resilient to the sizeable adverse shocks
from abroad, could the Canadian economy not fully avoid a recession and the rapid fall in
inflation? These events appeared to contradict the intent of the inflation targeting regime
which relies crucially on a floating exchange rate regime believed to act as a shock
absorber. Consequently, the Bank once again was thrust at the forefront of monetary policy
actions when it unveiled its forward guidance policy in April 2009. The aim was convince
the public that the mid-point of the inflation target would not be abandoned and, to
underscore its determination to return inflation to its 2% goal, by stating that the policy
rate would remain at its ZLB for up to a year. Nevertheless, worried over the possibility
that inflationary expectations might become unanchored, the Bank raised the policy rate
prior to the expiry date of the CC policy. By some accounts (e.g., Siklos and Spence 2010)
the exit was credible. Of course, the CC strategy was modest, took place under crisis
conditions, and had a limited horizon.
While the BoC has been a leader in promoting the virtues of forward guidance, to good
effect, the central bank appears occasionally incapable of providing clarity about when the
economy might return to a state that calls for a more ‘normal’ monetary policy stance. For
example, in the April 2010 MPR, the BoC first sought to justify why monetary policy might
remain loose even after signs of inflation and a return to capacity might otherwise have led
markets to believe that the policy rate would rise. Unfortunately, the explanation was
predicated on an inflation rate below target at a time when observed inflation was above
target.
The Bank of Canada has the legal authority and flexibility to act as a lender of last resort
through the provision of emergency liquidity assistance or by conducting outright asset
purchases. Like other major central banks, the BoC responded to the crisis by significantly
extending its lending facilities and aggressively lowering the policy rate. After hitting the
zero lower bound on interest rates and worried that the expansionary macroeconomic
83

policies were not sufficient to spark a recovery in the real economy, the BoC used calendarbased conditional commitment to maintain the policy rate at the ZLB. Other major central
banks were more hesitant in making such commitments, and acted cautiously when they
did.
Despite some temporary failures to control inflation or anticipate deflation risks from
time to time inflation expectations remain firmly anchored at the 2% inflation target.
Hence, there is every reason to believe that the inflation targeting regime has been a
credible one.
11. New Zealand: The Reserve Bank of New Zealand
Like the Bank of Canada the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) was established in
1934 following the Great Depression. The RBNZ was not created to promote monetary
stability. Rather, unlike many other central banks, it was created to establish separate
monetary and banking systems between New Zealand and Australia (Hawke 1972). Since
commodity prices had considerable impact on the New Zealand economy it was believed
that a central bank, as was the case elsewhere, could be a vehicle to soften the blows of
large shifts in commodity prices. Of course, a vehicle to insulate the New Zealand economy
from foreign shocks was dependent on the type of exchange rate regime. Although the New
Zealand dollar’s was pegged to the pound sterling the government hoped that the creation
of a central bank would signal a form of independence from Australia in the financial and
economic realms e.g., see RBNZ 2007).
Paralleling the Canadian experience the RBNZ was two-thirds owned by private
shareholders but nationalization took place in 1936 when a labour government came into
power. New legislation would soon indicate that the government intended to use the RBNZ
as a tool to finance expansion of the public sector. There was no pretense of independence
from the Minister of Finance. During the first two decades or so of its existence the lack of
independence did not appear to matter much as the New Zealand economy grew rapidly
and unemployment remained low. Nevertheless, economic imbalances were building and
these are reflected in rising inflation rates and pressure on the exchange rate (e.g., see
RBNZ 2009). Therefore, there is little reason to believe that the RBNZ had much credibility
as it was unable to act autonomously.
84

The RBNZ went through World War II under an increasingly interventionist
government. Surging demand for its commodities to support the war effort, combined with
capital controls that would remain in place until the mid 1980s, as well as import
restrictions, meant that the government took near total control of the economy. The RBNZ
became a vehicle to help finance the war effort but the positive externalities of the war on
New Zealand’s economy also permitted the war debts to be repaid quickly following the
end of hostilities. The public was willing to put up with the necessary austerity measures to
assist with the effort at debt repayment. Price controls were also adopted.
When the rest of the world began to relax restrictions on the movement of capital and
reduce import tariffs during the 1950s, New Zealand took a different route. It sought to
protect its commodity exports, vital to national economic growth, but increasingly
restricted imports and other forms of direct economic controls on its citizens.
Unfortunately for New Zealand when the UK joined the European Economic Community in
1973, combined with the dying days of the Bretton Woods system, conspired to create an
economic shock (e.g., See Singleton et.al. 2006) that would eventually lead to major
economic and financial reforms.
From the oil price shocks of the 1970s through to the loss of large export markets New
Zealand’s economy began to experience stagflation on a major scale. When the continued
attempt to deal with the underlying pressures on New Zealand’s economy by resorting to
more direct controls, including wage and price controls, could no longer be sustained an
economic crisis erupted. Poor economic conditions were exacerbated by the autocratic
style of then Prime Minister Muldoon who was determined to avoid rising unemployment.
In the event, inflation soared from below 5% in the early 1970s to almost 20% by the early
1980s. There were also other forces that would contribute to creating unsustainable
tensions in the economy. Monetary policy was, during the 1970s, governed by a reserve
requirement scheme. In the meantime interest rates were gradually being liberalized while
the end of the Bretton Woods era brought a period where the New Zealand dollar was
pegged to a changing basket of currencies. This did not prevent several large devaluations
of the dollar followed by the adoption of a ‘crawling peg’ regime by the end of the decade of
the 1970s. A currency crisis erupted in 1984 and, together with an election that year,

85

brought in a new government. Once again it is difficult to speak of any RBNZ credibility as
its ability to conduct monetary policy was severely constrained.
In the years following the elections of 1984 landmark reforms were introduced that
affected all aspects of New Zealand’s economy. Perhaps the most significant reforms were
in the area of monetary policy. The RBNZ would eventually be made autonomous from
government and accountable for meeting an inflation target. May of the reforms were
introduced by the newly installed Finance Minister at the time, Roger Douglas. As part of
the program of reform the New Zealand dollar would float. The determination to maintain
the float is evident from the fact that the RBNZ did not intervene in foreign exchange
markets until 2007.
The changes in monetary policy were enshrined in the RBNZ Act of 1989. The focus of
monetary policy was the maintenance of price stability to be defined by an inflation target.
Henceforth, there would be a clear indicator by which the public and markets could assess
the credibility of the RBNZ. The target would be regularly revisited thanks to a Policy
Targets Agreement (PTA) which would have to be signed following each election as a signal
of the commitment of both the central bank and the government to maintain price stability.
Although initially the inflation target range included 0% subsequent assessments of the
conduct of monetary policy, together with the adoption of inflation targets elsewhere
which explicitly excluded the 0% value eventually produced a 1-3% target range that
survives to this day. Provisions were made in the legislation to bring the Governor to
account in case the targets were breached. This happened on at least two occasions but, in
both cases, the Governor was not removed and inflation eventually returned to target
although the RBNZ’s credibility was dented. Some of the difficulties lay in the manner in
which inflation is measured. For example, a rise in interest rates would filter through
mortgage rates and rents and these were incorporated into the CPI. Clearly, the
appropriate response was not to further raise interest rates unless inflation expectations
became unanchored. In large part for this reason the role of central bank communication
became central to RBNZ policy and the central bank became among the most transparent in
the world (e.g., see Siklos 2002, Dincer and Eichengreen 2007).
Two other events in the RBNZ’s history are noteworthy. Realizing that interest rate
changes and exchange rate changes are interrelated in a floating rate regime the RBNZ
86

publicized and, later, adopted a monetary conditions index (MCI) as a primary signal in
communicating the stance of monetary policy. Interestingly, the MCI has Canadian roots
although the BoC never adopted the MCI as an intermediate instrument of policy. When
markets became too focused on changes in the MCI this complicated the task of
communicating the policy intentions of the RBNZ and it was forced to abandon its usage
(e.g., see Siklos 2000). Second, in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98
followed by the Fed’s reaction to the bursting of the tech bubble in 2001 and the slow
tightening of monetary policy in the US during the early 2000s, the RBNZ began to
reconsider its ban on foreign exchange intervention. After some public consultations and
an international conference on the monetary and fiscal policy regime in mid-2007 RBNZ
2006), the RBNZ adopted foreign exchange intervention guidelines. In the event the RBNZ
only intervened a few times since the policy was adopted and the commitment to inflation
targeting and, for the floating exchange rate regime remains undiminished to this day.
There is no imminent sign that the inflation targeting regime will be reconsidered. It
remains a credible nominal anchor for monetary policy.

87

Narratives’ References
Allan Melktzer (2003) A History of the Federal Reserve Volume 1. University of Chicago
Press.
Andreas Beyer,Vitor Gaspar, Christina Gerberding and Otmar Issing, ( 2013), “ Opting Out
of the Great Inflation: German Monetary Policy after the Breakdown of Bretton Woods; in
Michael D. Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides (eds) The Great Inflation; The Rebirth of
Modern Central Banking. University of Chicago Press for the NBER
Barry Eichengreen (1992) Golden Fetters. Oxford University Press
Bell, S. (2004), Australia’s Money Mandarins (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Burdekin, R., and P.L. Siklos (2004), “Fears of Deflation and the Role of Monetary Policy:
Some Lessons and An Overview”, in R.C.K. Burdekin and P.L. Siklos (Eds), Deflation
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 1-30.
Carl Berg and Lars Jonung (1999) “Pioneering Price Level targeting: The Swedish
Experience 193-1937” Journal of Monetary Economics 43(3) :525-551
Courchene, T. (1976), Money, Inflation and the Bank of Canada: An Analysis of Canadian
Monetary Policy from 1970 to Early 1975 (Toronto: C.D. Howe Institute).
Cross, P., and P. Bergevin (2012), “Turning Points: Business Cycles in Canada since 1926”,
C.D. Howe Commentary No. 366, October.
Crow, J. (1988), “The Work of Canadian Monetary Policy”, Eric Hanson Memorial Lecture,
January, University of Alberta.
Deutsch, J. (1957), “The Canadian Treasury and Monetary Policy”, American Economic
Review 47 (May): 220-228.
Dincer, N.N., and B. Eichengreen (2007), “Central Bank Transparency: Where, Why, and
With What Effects?” NBER working paper 13003, March.
Eric Monnet (2013) “Monetary Policy without Interest Rates. Evidence from France’s
Golden age (1948-1973) Using a Narrative Approach” Banque de France (mimeo)
Erling Steigum (2009) “The Boom and Bust Cycle in Norway’ in Lars Jonung et al (2009)
The Great Financial Crisis in Finland and Sweden. Edward Elgar Publishers Nortthampton,
Mass pp 202-244
Eugene White (2007) “The Crash of 1882, Counterparty Risk, and the Bailout of the Paris
Bourse” NBER Working paper 12933
Forrest Capie (2010) The Bank of England 1950s to 1979. Cambridge University Press
Barry Eichegreen. (1992) Golden Fetters. Oxford University Press.
88

Franco Giavazzi and Michele Pagano (1991) “The Advantage of Tying One’s Hands:EMS
Discipline and Central bank Credibility” European Economic Review Vol 38, pp 303-330.
Georg Rich (1997) “Monetary Targets as a Policy Rule: Lessons from the Swiss Experience”
Journal of Monetary Economics 39(1) pp 113-141
Gollan, R. (1968) The Commonwealth Bank of Australia: Origins and Early History
(Canberra: ANU Press).
Gordon, H.Scott (1961a) The Economists Versus the Bank of Canada (Toronto: The Ryerson
Press).
Grenville, S. (1996), “Recent Development in Monetary Policy: Australia and Abroad”,
Australian Economic Review (1st Quarter): 29-39.
Guiseppe Tattara (2000) “Paper Money but a Gold Debt: Italy on the Gold Standard’
Explorations in Economic History, vol 40 pp 122-142
H.C. Johnson (1997) Gold, France and the Great Depression, 1919-1932. Yale University
Press
Hawke, G. (1973), Between Governments and Banks (Wellington: Reserve Bank of New
Zealand
Helleiner, E. (2006), Towards North American Monetary Union? A Political History of
Canada’s Exchange Rate Regime (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press).
Jan Qvigstad (2013) “On Institutions—Fundamentals of Confidence and Trust” Norgesbank
(mimeo)
John B. Taylor (2007) “Housing and Monetary Policy “ in Housing Finance and Monetary
Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
John Singleton (2011) Central Banking in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge University
Press
Klas Fregert and Lars Jonung (2008) “Inflation Targeting is a Success So Far: 100 Years of
Evidence from Swedish Contracts” Economics Open Access E Journal Vol 2 2008-31
Laidler, D.E.W. (1991), “How Shall We Govern the Governor?: A Critique of the Governance
of the Bank of Canada”, The Canada Round 1 (Toronto: C.D. Howe Institute).
Laidler, D.E.W., and W.P. Robson (1993) The Great Canadian Disinflation: The Economics
and Politics of Canadian Monetary Policy in Canada, 1988-93 (Toronto: C.D. Howe
Institute).
Lars Jonung (1984) “Swedish Experience Under the Classical Gold Standard:1873-1914” in
89

Leland Yeager (1976) International Monetary Relations; Theory, History and Policy.
Second Edition. Harper and row.
Liaquat Ahamed (2010) The Lords of Finance. Penquin Books
Marvin Goodfriend (1993) “Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem 19791992” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Quarterly Vol 79/1 Winter
Michael Bordo (1981) “The Classical Gold Standard: Some Lessons for Today” Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol 63, No.6 May.
Michael Bordo (1990) ‘The Lender of Last Resort: Alternative Views and Historical
Experience’ Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review March
Michael Bordo (1993) The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: An Historical
Overview” in Michael D. Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (eds) A Retrospective on the Bretton
Woods System. University of Chicago Press for the NBER.
Michael Bordo and Pierre L. Siklos (2014), “Central Bank Credibility, Reputation and
Inflation Targeting in Historical Perspective”, NBER working paper 20693, November.
Michael Bordo and Anna J Schwartz (1996) “The Operation of the Specie Standard:
Evidence for Core and Peripheral Countries, 1880-1990” in Barry Eichengreen and Jorge
Braga de Macedo ( eds) Historical Perspectives on the Gold Standard; Portugal and the
World. Routledge Publishers
Michael Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides (2013) The Great Inflation; The Rebirth of
Modern Central Banking. University of Chicago Press for the NBER
Michael Bordo and Bernhard Eschweiler (1994), “Rules, Discretion and Central Bank
Independence: The German Experience 1880-1989” in Pierre Sikos (ed) Varieties of
Monetary Reform: Lessons and Experience on the Road to Monetary Union. Boston, Kluwer
Academic Publishers
Michael Bordo and David Wheelock (2013) “The Promise and Performance of the Federal
Reserve as Lender of Last Resort 1914-1933’ in Michael D. Bordo and Will Roberds A
Return to Jekyll Island. Cambridge University Press
Michael Bordo and Finn Kydland (1995) “The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in
Exploration” Explorations in Economic History. October
Michael Bordo and Harold James (2007) “From 1907 to 1946: A Happy Childhood or a
Troubled Adolescence? in SNB. The Swiss National Bank 1907-2007. Neue Zurcher Zeitung
Michael Bordo and Hugh Rockoff (1996) “The Gold Standard as a Good Housekeeping Seal
of Approval” Journal of Economic History June
90

Michael Bordo and John Landon Lane (2013a) “Does Expansionary Monetary Policy Cause
Asset Price Booms: Some Historical and Empirical Evidence” NBER Working Paper 19585
October
Michael Bordo and John Landon Lane (2013b) “What Explains House Price Booms?: History
and Empirical Evidence” NBER Working paper 19584 October
Michael Bordo and Joseph Haubrich (2012) “Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries and
Financial Crises: Evidence from the American Record” NBER Working Paper 18194 une
Michael Bordo and Pierre Cyrille Hautcoeur (2007) “Why Didnt France Follow the British
Stabilization after World War I? European Review of Economic History, Vol 11, No.1. April,
pp 3-37
Michael Bordo and Ronald MacDonald (2002) “The Interwar Gold Exchabge Standard:
Credibility and Monetary Independence” Journal of International Money and Finance.
Michael Bordo and Ronald MacDonald (2005) “Interest Rate Interactions in the Classical
Gold Standard: 1880-1914; Was There Monetary Independence?” Journal of Monetary
Economics. March
Michael Bordo, Chris Erceg, Andrew Levin and Ryan Michaels (2007) “Three Great
American Disinflations” NBER Working Paper No. 12982 March
Michael Bordo, Dominique Simard and Eugene White (1995) “France and the Bretton
Woods International System” in Jaime Reis (ed) The History of International Monetary
Arrangements. MacMillan. London
Michael Bordo, Owen Humpage and Anna Schwartz (2014) Strained Relations: U.S.
Monetary Policy and Foreign Exchange Operations in the Twentieth Century. University of
Chicago Press (in press)
Michael Bordo, Thomas Helbling and Harold James (2007) “Swiss Exchange Rate Policy in
the 1930s. Was the Delay in Devaluation Too High a Price to Pay for Conservatism?” Open
Economies Review
Michael D Bordo and Angela Redish (1987), “Why Did the Bank of Canada Emerge in
1935?”, Journal of Economic History 47 (June): 405-17.
Michael D Bordo and Anna J Schwartz (eds) (1984) A Retrospective on the Classical Gold
Standard 1821 -1931. University of Chicago Press for the NBER pp 361 -404
Michele Fratianni and Franco Spinelli (1997) A Monetary History of Italy. Cambridge
University Press
Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz (1963) A Monetary History of the United States 1867
to 1960. Princeton University Press
91

New Zealand Treasury and Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2006), Testing Stabilization
Policy Limits in a Small Open Economy: Proceedings from a Macroeconomic Policy Forum
(Wellington: NZ Treasury).
Oyvind Eitrheim and Lars Oksendal (2013) “The Cost of the Post War Economic Order in
Norway: Reflections in Hindsight” Norges bank (mimeo)
Oyvind Eitrheim, Jan F. Quigstad and Oystein Bieltvedt Skeie (2006) “Price Stability has
Been the Historical Norm. What Distinguishes the Abnormal? Norgesbank (mimeo).Geraats.
P. (2014), “Monetary Policy Transparency”, in J. Foessbaeck and L. Oxelheim (Eds), Oxford
Handbook of Institutional and Economic Transparency (Oxford: Oxford University Press),
pp. 68-97.
Pierre Cyrille Hautcoeur, Angelo Riva and Eugene White (2014) “Can Moral Hazard Be
Avoided? The Banque De France and the Crisis of 1889” Journal of Monetary Economics
(forthcoming)
Reserve Bank of Australia (1987), Annual Report (Sydney: Reserve Bank of New Zealand).
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2007), The Reserve Bank and New Zealand’s Economic
History (wellington: Reserve Bank of New Zealand).
Riccardo DiCecio and Edward Nelson ( 2013) “ The Great Inflation in the United States and
the United Kingdom: Reconciling Policy Decisions and Data Outcomes’ in Michael Bordo
and Athanasios Orphanides (eds) ( 2013) The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern
Central Banking. University of Chicago Press for the NBER
Siklos, P.L. (2002), The Changing Face of Central Banking (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press).
Siklos, P.L. (2010) “Revisiting the Coyne Affair: A Singular Event that Changed the Course of
Canadian Monetary History”, Canadian Journal of Economics 43 (August): 994-1015.
Siklos, P.L. (2000) “Is the MCI a Useful Signal of Monetary Policy Conditions? An Empirical
Investigation”, International Finance 3 (November): 413-38.
Siklos, P.L., and A. Spence (2010), “Face-Off: Should the Bank of Canada Relase Its
Projections for the Interest Rate Path?”, C.D. Howe Backgrounder 134, October, available
from http://www.cdhowe.org/pdf/Backgrounder_134.pdf.
Siklos, P.L., and O. Karagedikli (2013), “A Bridge Too Far? RBNZ Communication, The
Forward Interest Rate Track, and the Exchange Rate” (with Özer Karagedikli) in Central
Bank Transparency, Decision-Making, and Governance: The Issues, Challenges, and Case
Studies (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press – 2013), pp. 273-310.
Singleton, J., with A. Grimes, G. Hawke and F. Holmes (2006), Innovation and Independence:
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand (Wellington: Auckland University Press).
92

SNB (2007) The Swiss National Bank 1907-2007. Neue Zurcher Zeitung Publishing
Statutes of Canada (2014), laws.justice.gc.ca/eng/.
Stevens, G. (2003), “Inflation Targeting: A Decade of Australian Experience”, Reserve Bank
of Australia Bulletin, April: 17-27.
Swan, T.W. (1940), “Australian War Finance and Banking Policy”, Economic Record 16
(June): 50-67.
Walter Bagehot (1873) Lombard Street. London

93

