                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    PATRONAGE POLITICS AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE WELFARE STATE:
            CONFEDERATE PENSIONS IN THE AMERICAN SOUTH

                                              Shari Eli
                                           Laura Salisbury

                                        Working Paper 20829
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20829


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




We thank Lee Alston, Gustavo Bobonis, Martha Bailey, Louis Cain, Karen Clay, Yosh Halberstam,
Gillian Hamilton, Ian Keay, Frank Lewis, Robert Margo, Edson Severnini, Allison Shertzer, and conference
participants at Queen's University and the Economic History Association for useful comments. We
also thank Tina Xu and Zvezdomir Todorov for excellent research assistance. This project received
funding from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada. All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Shari Eli and Laura Salisbury. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Patronage Politics and the Development of the Welfare State: Confederate Pensions in the
American South
Shari Eli and Laura Salisbury
NBER Working Paper No. 20829
January 2015
JEL No. H0,I38,N0,N41,N42

                                              ABSTRACT

Beginning in the 1880s, southern states introduced pensions for Confederate veterans and widows.
They continued to expand these programs through the 1920s, while states outside the region were
introducing cash transfer programs for workers, poor mothers, and the elderly. Using legislative documents,
application records for Confederate pensions, and county-level census and electoral data, we argue
that political considerations guided the enactment and distribution of these pensions. We show that
Confederate pensions programs were introduced and funded during years in which Democratic gubernatorial
candidates were threatened at the ballot box. Moreover, we offer evidence that pensions were disbursed
to counties in which these candidates had lost ground to candidates from alternative parties.


Shari Eli
University of Toronto
Department of Economics
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
shari.eli@utoronto.ca

Laura Salisbury
Department of Economics
York University
Vari Hall 1092
4700 Keele Street
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3
Canada
and NBER
lsalisbu@yorku.ca
1        Introduction

During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, U.S. states introduced cash transfer programs for the
needy. Such programs included Mothers’ Pensions for poor single parents, Workers’ Compensation
for men who became disabled on the job, and Old Age Pensions for the elderly. By the 1920s, most
states had passed aid legislation and begun administering cash transfers. The notable exception
was the South, which overwhelmingly failed to administer aid to mothers, workers, or the elderly,
even in rare cases when aid programs were approved by state legislatures.1 Instead, southern states
widely enacted and funded Confederate pension programs, which were modest income support
programs for Confederate veterans and widows. These programs were typically enacted during the
late 1880s and early 1890s, but southern state legislatures continued to expand them through the
1920s. Using newly compiled data on pension legislation, expenditures, and applications, we explore
the political factors that motivated southern states to introduce, fund, and disburse Confederate
pensions. As such, we offer new information on the development of the welfare state in the South.
        A major contribution of this paper is to provide the first cross-state accounting of the passage
and distribution of Confederate pensions. More broadly, this study offers new insight into the
economic history of income redistribution in the region. The leading explanation for southern
states’ reluctance to adopt the types of welfare programs typical to other parts of the county is
that the political process in the South was captured by white rural elites. Alston and Ferrie (1993;
1999) write that paternalism – in which workers trade loyalty to their employer for nonmarket goods
such as old-age assistance without an explicit contract – reduced turnover costs and increased work
effort in cotton agriculture. They argue that rural elites in the South actively blocked the adoption
of welfare programs because these programs would have disrupted the paternalistic employment
contracts they had with their workers. Moreover, southern politicians did not need to cater to
low income voters by enacting income redistribution programs because the Democratic party had
effectively quashed all political opposition, through measures taken to disenfranchise poor and black
voters [Kousser (1974), Margo (1990), Naidu (2012)].
        We argue that Confederate pension programs provide a bridge between the standard view of
the post-Reconstruction South and conventional economic models of income redistribution in a
democracy. Typically, the economic literature on income redistribution argues that voter pref-
    1
    Some southern states enacted legislation to provide Mothers’ Pensions but never actually awarded cash transfers
to poor mothers. For example, Arkansas passed a program in 1917 but never provided aid to the poor (source:
http://individual.utoronto.ca/shari eli/historymp.html).




                                                        2
erences matter in determining policy. The most basic model of redistributive policies is due to
Meltzer and Richards (1981) who argue that policy is determined by the median voter: high taxes
and redistributive programs emerge when the median voter becomes poorer relative to the mean.
Related literature, surveyed in Alesina and Giuliano (2009), suggests additional determinants of
popular preferences for redistribution, including expectations of future mobility, direct and indirect
preferences for inequality, and notions of “fairness.” Other work explores the use of public funds to
cater to specific voting groups.2 Cascio and Washington (2013) show that the Voting Rights Act
of 1965 increased the quantity of public funds disbursed to black communities, arguing that this
occurred because of politicians’ desire to court black voters. They argue that newly enfranchised
black voters were an attractive group to target because they were “both geographically identifiable
and tended to vote cohesively” (p. 5). What these accounts have in common is the idea that
redistributive policies are introduced specifically to cater to voters’ preferences.3
       We show that southern legislators did use a type of redistributive program – Confederate pen-
sions – to appeal to voters. In support of this argument, we offer evidence that southern states
introduced and funded these pensions during years when Democratic gubernatorial candidates were
threatened, and they distributed pensions to politically expedient counties. The fact that southern
states chose to redistribute income in the form of Confederate pensions, which were narrowly tai-
lored to whites who were inclined to support the Democrats and unlikely to work as farm laborers,
is highly consistent with the existing literature on southern politics during this period. However,
by demonstrating that southern Democrats responded to electoral pressure through patronage of
any kind (rather than solely through repressive measures), we offer a somewhat more nuanced
perspective on politics and the development of the welfare state in the region.
       In this paper, we compile new data on Confederate pension legislation, spending, and individual
   2
     See Scott (2000), Cox and McCubbins (1986), and Dixit and Londregan (1996) for theoretical discussions of the
use of income redistribution for political patronage.
   3
     There is a large literature on the political economy of income support programs in the United States during
the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Eli (2014) examines the distribution of Union Army pensions and finds that
larger pensions were awarded to veterans in contested congressional districts. Eli argues that the Republican party
used this program to buy veterans’ votes. Skocpol (1992) argues that the passage of Mothers’ Pensions, which were
state welfare programs for women with dependent children prior to 1935, were the result of the increasing ability of
women’s clubs, who were united across social class, to press for aid. Fishback and Kantor (1998) explore the adoption
of Workers’ Compensation Laws across states and show that employers and insurance companies, as opposed to just
employees, significantly gained from the law’s passage because they were able to pass the costs of higher post-accident
compensation on to workers by lowering wages. Workers benefitted because they had difficulty purchasing desired
levels of accident insurance in the period [Fishback and Kantor (1998), p. 3]. While there is ample evidence that
redistributive programs were used for political purposes during the 19th and early 20th centuries, this tendency seems
to have declined by the mid to late 20th century. Bailey and Duquette (2014) show that the distribution of funds for
War of Poverty programs during the Johnson administration was not politically motivated.




                                                          3
pension applications, which we combine with county-level census data and data on gubernatorial
election returns. We use these data to measure the effect of recent voting behavior – the share of the
gubernatorial vote going to Republican or third party candidates – on the probability of passing an
initial pension law, the percentage of state expenditures allocated to pensions, and the distribution
of pension funds within states. While other studies have discussed Confederate pension programs
in individual states,4 this is the first large, cross-state analysis of these programs. Moreover, it is
the first study to use a large sample of individual pension applications to explore the geography of
Confederate pension applications within states.
       We use the number of Confederate pension applications filed at the county-year level as our
primary measure of the allocation of pension funds within states. Because of the nature of the
application records we are using, we view the number of applications filed from a county in a given
year as a noisy measure of the number of applications from that county in that year that were
approved. Moreover, we have reason to believe that county officials directly influenced the number
of applications forwarded to state pension boards, which we will discuss in detail in a later section.
As such, an increase in applications from a given county likely reflects the Democrats’ desire to
patronize that county. We take steps to rule out alternative explanations for a correlation between
voting behavior and county-level application rates.
       We find that the states were most likely to pass initial Confederate pension laws after a guber-
natorial election in which there was a small spike in third party or Republican vote share. Similarly,
the fraction of state expenditures on Confederate pensions significantly increased after third party
or Republican gubernatorial candidates saw an increase in vote share. Within states, the number
of applications from a county increased after that county experienced an increase in votes to third
party or Republican candidates. Importantly, this finding is robust to controlling for county-level
economic indicators, which suggests that political patronage drives this result. Finally, we show
that, in Texas, pensions were less likely to be rejected in counties in which third party candidates
had done well in the most recent election. Taken together, we feel this is strong evidence that
southern Democrats used Confederate pensions to maintain power.
   4
    See Blanck and Millender (2000) and Rogers (1999) for a discussion of the program in Virginia; Green (2006) for
a discussion of Florida; Gorman (1999), Short (2006) and Young (1982) for a discussion of Georgia. Glasson (1918)
surveys the legislation surrounding Confederate pension programs in the South up to 1918.




                                                        4
2        Historical Background

2.1        Civil War Military Pensions

During the Civil War, the federal government passed the General Law of 1862 that allowed Union
Army veterans and their dependents to apply for pensions if their illnesses or injuries were shown
to be the result of their war experience. Beginning in 1890, Union Army veterans could receive
pensions for any illness or injury that left the veteran unable to undertake manual labor.5 By 1900,
95% of Union Army veterans were collecting benefits of a little over $12 per month on average, an
amount that is roughly equivalent to 50% of a farmer’s monthly earnings in the period. The receipt
of Union Army pensions has been shown to increase the likelihood of retirement [Costa (1995)],
to facilitate the movement of veterans to less crowded living arrangements [Costa (1997)], and to
decrease morbidity and mortality rates [Eli (2014)]. With regard to widows of Union Army soldiers,
the pension has been shown to lower the rate of remarriage by 25% [Salisbury (2014)]. Therefore,
the Union Army pension system – America’s first wide-scale entitlement program – had profound
demographic effects.
        Confederate veterans, however, were never allowed access to pensions from the federal govern-
ment. Instead, individual southern states enacted their own pension systems. While the Democrats
had largely regained control of state legislatures by 1876, they did not start passing pension legis-
lation in earnest until the mid 1880s. Most existing work explains the emergence of Confederate
pension laws by the fact that Confederate veterans and widows could not access Union Army pen-
sions, taking for granted that southern states would step in to fill this gap. Other work points to
the elevated social position of Confederate veterans and widows in the South to explain why these
states were willing to fund these programs.
        Details of the passage of Confederate pension legislation are summarized in table 1. States
differed in terms of precise eligibility requirements; however, features common to all state programs
are apparent. Pension programs typically included a means test, a residency restriction, and a
remarriage prohibition for widows, although there is considerable cross-state variation in the nature
of these restrictions. For example, the original pension law passed in Texas in 1899 required
applicants to have been Texas residents since 1880, while North Carolina, Mississippi and Virginia
merely required applicants to be state residents at the time of application. Pension amounts
different substantially by state, ranging from a low of $15 per year in Georgia to a high of $300
    5
        For a review of Union Army Pension legislation, see Glasson (1916).



                                                            5
per year in Tennessee. While many states initially required applicants to have been injured or
widowed during the war, by the turn of the century most pension programs functioned essentially
as welfare for Confederate veterans and widows. Much like the Union Army pension, southern
pension programs had evolved to cover all veterans and widows in need.
      Although Confederate pensions were substantially less generous than the Union Army pension,
expenditure on these programs comprised a significant fraction of state budgets [Gorman (1999);
Short (2006); Ratchford and Heise (1938)]. Appendix figures (1) and (2) report the number of
pension applications filed in each year, as well as the percentage of state expenditures allocated
to pensions, separately by state. These figures indicate that these programs were widely taken
up, with thousands of new applications filed form each state in most years. Data on fractions of
state budgets allocated to pensions comes from southern state treasurers’ annual reports.6 Again,
these figures indicate that states spent significant quantities of money on these programs, typically
peaking at between 10 and 20 percent of the budget during the first two decades of the 20th century.
It is notable that spending on Confederate programs peaked while northern states were introducing
other cash transfer programs.
      The administration of Confederate pension programs was fairly uniform across states. Claims
were evaluated first at the county level, by designated county pension boards. After being reviewed
locally, claims were submitted to a state pension board which reviewed them a second time and
rendered a final judgement on the merit of each case. After approval by the state board, the state
treasurer would issue a warrant for each claim on the treasury. So, while initial adjudication of
pension claims was done at the county level, pensions were paid out of a central pension fund.
Pension legislation typically introduced a new property tax to fund pension programs.
      Consider, as an example, the pension law in Alabama. From 1899 onward, claims were assessed
by a county board of examiners, appointed by the governor, and consisting of one “practicing
physician of good standing in his profession” and one Confederate veteran “of good moral character”
[Alabama (1907), S1998]. The Alabama pension law states the following rules for the operation of
these county boards of examiners:

        Upon the first Monday in July in each year, the county board of examiners shall meet
        at the county seat of their respective counties and open an office for the examination of
        applicants for pensions under this chapter. They shall give due notice by publication in
        some newspaper in the county or by posting at the courthouse door of the county and
  6
      See data appendix for detailed list of sources and years for which data are available.


                                                            6
     five other public places for three weeks, ahead of the time and place of their meeting.
     They shall keep their office open for the examination of applicants from nine o’clock
     a.m. until four o’clock p.m. on week days for the first ten days after the first Monday
     in July, after which they may keep open for such a time as may be necessary to examine
     the applications filed with them (SS2003-2005).

During these office hours, county boards would “subject [applicants] to an oral and physical ex-
amination” (S2010), and render a decision about the merit of each claim. Then, the county board
would submit all claims to the state pension board for additional review (SS2011-2013). The state
board of examiners consisted of a physician and two ex-Confederate soldiers appointed by the gov-
ernor (S2000), and they met to review claims in Montgomery beginning on the second Monday
in August every year (S2006). Application materials for approved claims were retained by the
state auditor, which he would use to create a detailed record of pensioners (S2018); however, “all
applications rejected by the board shall be returned to the county board of examiners, who shall
file them with the judge of probate of the county, to be kept for future reference” (S2019). The
pension was funded by “a special tax of one mill on each dollar of the taxable property of the state”
(S2031).
   There is some evidence of corruption among county pension boards from the historical record.
The 1897 state auditor’s report from Alabama complains about local adjudication practices:

     This effort of the State to aid these worthy men is being sadly abused. Applications are
     allowed in a great many instances that should be rejected. The Boards of Examiners,
     in some counties, do not appreciate their trust. They grant applications that they know
     are based upon false statements, thereby diverting this sacred fund from its proper
     course. They should feel that every cent improperly allowed is taken from a pittance
     that is intended for a worthy Confederate soldier who is not able to make a living for
     himself [White (1897), p. 23].

Blanck and Millender (2000) also discuss the arbitrary power that elected county judges wielded
in distributing pensions in Virginia. This behavior is consistent with historical accounts of the
actions of county officials during southern elections. Kousser (1974) discusses the tendency for
local officials to exert influence over voter registration by altering dates during which registration
took place and selectively informing constituents of this fact. He writes that “the county machine
could always remind its followers of the closing date for registration, but it neglected those voters

                                                  7
outside the dominant political structure, or even prevented them from registering” (p. 49).


2.2      Post-Civil War Politics in the South

By the mid 1870s, the Democratic party had largely regained control of southern politics. Voting in
the South during the later 19th century cut primarily along racial lines, with white voters supporting
Democrats and black voters supporting Republicans (Ayers 1992). The Democratic party was
dominated by rural elites from the Black Belt – the portion of the South in which plantation
style agriculture was common. Alston and Ferrie (1993; 1999) argue that Democratic congressmen
viewed these elites as their core constituency, and acted explicitly in the best interests of this group.
Legislative efforts to disenfranchise black voters in the South during this period, including poll
taxes and literacy tests, are well documented [Kousser (1974), Naidu (2012), Margo (1990)]. These
policies began to be enacted in the region during the 1890s but did not become ubiquitous until
around 1910. Prior to adopting these policies aimed at disenfranchisement, Democrats employed
measures like gerrymandering, fraud, and voter intimidation to maintain power in the region,
subject to some federal oversight up to the mid 1890s [Naidu (2012)]. While these measures
significantly decreased turnout among black voters, southern elections were at least somewhat
competitive before legal disenfranchisement [Naidu (2012)]. Importantly, Confederate veterans
were often exempt from poll taxes. For example, the Georgia state legislature passed a law in 1882
”to relieve crippled and disabled Confederate soldiers from poll tax” [Georgia (1882), p. 120].
       While the the Democratic party claimed a majority of the southern white vote during this
period, they were at risk of losing vote share to third party candidates. Populist agrarian movements
were a significant presence in the South during the years following the Civil War. Beginning in
Texas during the 1870s, the Farmer’s Alliance had become an important political force in state
legislatures by the late 1880s and early 1890s (Woodward 1951). This movement gained popularity
among farmers in the face of falling agricultural prices and a perceived lack of power in their
dealings with the banks and railroads [Ayers (1992)].7 As Woodward (1951) notes, with exception
of Virginia, the majority of the populist vote came from small, poor, white farmers. He quotes one
account of the movement in Alabama that characterizes it as “an effort of the masses of the white
to free themselves from the rule of the black-belt Democratic party of the old slave-owning type”
(p 247). Moreover, populist movements in the South during this period seemed to directly threaten
   7
    For a discussion of economic conditions in the South during this period, see Wright (1986). See Goldin and Lewis
(1975) and Ransom and Sutch (1875) for a discussion of the direct effects of the Civil War on the southern economy.



                                                         8
Democratic votes: “The leading conservative paper of Texas described the Populists of that state
as solid, native white stock ‘sober and earnest from first to last’ and estimated that 90 per cent of
them were ‘ex-democrats whose standing in the party was formerly as undisputed’ ” (Woodward
1951, p 247). Maintaining vote share among smaller white farmers at risk of voting for populist
candidates would have been an important political objective for southern Democrats.


3        Data

We combine state-level information on the passage of Confederate pension legislation, state balance
sheet data, individual pension application records, and county-level census and election returns
data. Data on the passage of Confederate pension laws by state legislatures is compiled from
primary and secondary sources,8 and is summarized in table 1. We obtain state balance sheet data
from published annual reports to state treasurers, which are accessed from Hathi Trust.9 This allow
us to observe annual expenditures on pensions relative to total annual expenditures.
        Individual pension data consists of indexes to Confederate pension applications, which are
available online from southern state archives.10 In recent years, complete collections of Confederate
pension files have been made publicly available through genealogical websites such as ancestry.com
and familysearch.org. These files are indexed, either in hard copy or at state archive websites.
We have obtained these indexes for nine states: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Texas, Tennessee, and Virginia. Mississippi and the Carolinas have existing records,
but they are not indexed in machine readable form. Information that can be gathered from these
indexes varies by state. In general, the index will indicate the name of the applicant, the type of
application (veteran or widow), and the county of application. In some cases, the indexes contain
additional information, such as year of application, details of the soldier’s military service, and the
outcome of the pension application. Appendix table 2 lists the number of pension applications
indexed, separately by type as well as decade. All indexes that we have collected report whether
the applicant is a soldier or a widow except for Florida; all indexes report the year of application
except Louisiana and Tennessee.
        We combine data on Confederate pension laws and applications with county-level census data
    8
     See data appendix for a detailed list of sources.
    9
     See data appendix for a complete list of sources and years for which these data are available.
  10
     Pension applications from Arkansas, Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, and Tennessee are collected from the website
of each state’s archives. Pension applications from Alabama, Virginia, and Georgia are collected from ancestry.com.
Pension applications from Texas are collected from both the Texas state archive and from ancestry.com. See data
appendix for further details.


                                                        9
from Haines and ICPSR (2010) and county-level data on gubernatorial election returns from the
ICPSR (1999). We use the county-level census data to determine characteristics of counties from
which Confederate veterans and widows applied for pensions, i.e. population, race composition,
prevalence of farming, farm ownership structure, and value of agricultural output.11 We use the
election returns data from 1876-1930 to determine the fraction of the gubernatorial vote that went
to Democratic, Republican, and third party candidates. The “third party” designation is assigned
to any party that is not classified as Democrat/Democrat equivalent or Republican/Republican
equivalent. These were generally left-leaning and appealed to lower income farmers and labor-
ers. Specific parties that appear frequently include the Communists, the Greenbacks, the People’s
Party, the Populists, Progressives, the Prohibition Party, Socialists, and Socialist-Labor. We use
gubernatorial elections as our baseline measure of voting behavior for two reasons: these data are
available at the county level, and they pertain to state elections rather than federal elections. Hav-
ing county-level data on vote shares is important because it allows us to observe counties in which
Democrats were losing ground to other parties. Having data on state elections is important because
these pensions were state-level programs, so we should expect them to be responsive to state rather
than federal voting patterns (although these are highly correlated).


4         Empirical Approach

We are interested in exploring the effect of voting patterns on the enactment of Confederate pen-
sion programs, expenditure on these programs, and the distribution of pension funds within states.
Because the Democrats were almost always in control of state legislatures, we view the Democratic
party as the sole decision-maker with respect to pensions. Our hypothesis is that the Democrats
used Confederate pensions to respond to political threats from other parties. Specifically, we expect
them to have enacted pension programs and increased funding for pension programs when alterna-
tive parties gained popularity. Within states, we expect pension boards (controlled by Democrats)
to have funnelled pensions to counties in which alternative parties were gaining popularity as
well. This may have occurred for two reasons: first, Democrats may have been seeking to increase
turnout among likely Democratic voters in the face of opposition; alternatively, they may have used
pensions to discourage Confederate veterans from supporting Republican or populist third party
candidates. One confounding factor is that these other parties, particularly populist third parties,
    11
         See data appendix for details on the construction of key variables.



                                                              10
gained popularity during times of economic hardship. As such, it may be that Democrats enacted
and funded pension programs when populists gained vote share because they were responding to
economic hardship rather than a perceived political threat. We will address this concern directly.
       We will look at the effect of voting in gubernatorial elections on two classes of outcomes: (1)
state-level outcomes, which include the passage of Confederate pension legislation and spending on
Confederate pensions, and (2) county-level outcomes, namely the distribution of pension applica-
tions within states.


4.1       Passage of pension legislation and expenditure on pensions at the state
          level

Were are interested in establishing how voting patterns in gubernatorial elections affected program
passage and spending on pensions at the state level. To determine how voting patterns affected
program passage, we construct a panel of southern states, beginning in 1876 and ending in 1912,12
which we use to estimate the following:


                                  Ls,t = α + β1 Os,t + β2 Rs,t + δt + θs + es,t                                    (1)


       Here, Ls,t is equal to one if state s passed an original piece of pension legislation in year t, and
Os,t and Rs,t are measures of vote shares from the gubernatorial election prior to year t in state
s going to third party and Republican candidates, respectively. The parameter δt is a year fixed
effect, and θs is a state fixed effect. We measure voting shares in a variety of ways: vote share
from the most recent election, average of vote share over the last two elections, and average of vote
share over the last and next elections. We do this to capture the possibility that state legislatures
responded to election results with a lag, or that legislatures responded to current public sentiment
reflected in future election outcomes.13 In addition, we allow Os,t and Rs,t to affect the probability
of passing a pension law linearly or quadratically. States exit the sample after they have passed an
initial piece of pension legislation.
  12
    This is the last year in which a state in our panel passed a pension law.
  13
    While accurately forecasting election results during the late 19th and early 20th centuries was difficult, attempts
were made at polling. Some newspapers conducted straw polls in which thousands of questionnaires were sent out
and the responses tallied, although these polls were often biased. Rhode and Strumpf (2004) show that presidential
betting markets during this period did a surprisingly good job of forecasting election outcomes prior to 1940. Future
election results may also important because of the widespread use of primaries in the South, which Kousser (1974)
argues were used to restrict political competition to competition within the Democratic party. These would have
allowed candidates to gauge popular sentiment immediately in advance of an election.




                                                          11
    In addition to exploring the relationship between gubernatorial voting patterns and initial
program passage, we examine the effect of voting patterns on spending on Confederate pension
programs at the state level. State legislatures frequently amended their original pieces of pension
legislation, usually expanding access or pension amounts; this continued into the 1920s. The
simplest way of summarizing changes in state legislatures’ behaviour regarding pensions is to look
at changes in the percentage of a state’s budget that is spent on pensions. Specifically, we estimate
the following:
                                 Es,t = α + β1 Os,t + β2 Rs,t + δt + θs + es,t                                (2)

Here, Es,t is the fraction of state s’s total expenditures in year t allocated to Confederate pensions.
    Because these regressions are done at the state level, we have very few observations, which
makes it difficult to pin down the Democratic party’s precise motives for enacting and funding
Confederate pensions. As discussed earlier, the Democrats may have enacted and expanded access
to pensions in order to buy votes of Confederate veterans and their families. At the same time, they
may have been responding to poor economic conditions, which may generate a similar relationship
between pension outcomes and political variables. As such, we view these state-level regressions as
descriptive. We will address concerns about causality directly in the next section.


4.2    Distribution of pension applications within states

Our second aim is to characterize the way voting patters affected the distribution of pensions
across counties within states. Because we view the Democrats as the decision-maker with respect
to pensions, we hypothesize that the Democrats funnelled pension funds to counties in which their
gubernatorial candidate was threatened.14 They may have approved more applications from these
counties, processed claims from these counties more quickly, or actively solicited applications from
these counties. Our data allows us to observe the number of applications filed from each county in
our data in each calendar year. We use this as our primary measure of the distribution of pensions
within states.
    We believe that the number of applications filed from a county in a given year reflects effort on
the part of local authorities to distribute pensions to that county. This is due to the nature of the
pension application and review process, described in section (2). Claims were heard at fixed times
during the year by county pension boards, who exercised tremendous influence on the outcome
  14
     Another plausible explanation is that pensions were used to bolster support for Democratic representatives in
state legislatures. This mechanism will yield similar results, as splitting tickets was not common.


                                                       12
of an application [Blanck and Millender (2000)]. After initial review, applications were forwarded
to the state pension board for further evaluation. In many cases, pension applications were only
forwarded to the state board if the county board approved them. For example, the Arkansas
pension law indicates that application materials were forwarded to state boards “when said board
is satisfied with the justness of the claim made by the applicant” [Arkansas (1891), Act XCI S3].
Thus, county boards could influence the number of applications in two ways: (i) by restricting or
expanding access to the board itself during the designated time for hearing pension applications;
(ii) by being more or less conservative in the decision to forward an application to the state pension
board. Because our pension application records are comprised of collections at state archives, they
can be presumed to be comprised primarily of records forwarded to or retained by state pension
boards.15 As such, we view our count of applications at the county level as a noisy measure of the
number of approved applications at the county level.
       More formally, the number of applications from a given county in a given year depends on two
factors. First, local economic conditions – such as falling agricultural prices or output – would have
affected the number of people who qualify for the pension, as these pensions were means tested.
Second, political patronage would have affected the number of applications though the channels
discussed above. So, we can write the number of applications as follows:


                                              N = f (X) + g(P ) + u


The number of applications (N ) is a function of the current economic conditions (f (X)), political
patronage (g(P )), and a random component (u). In principle, a correlation between N and gu-
bernatorial voting patterns may work through a correlation between voting patterns and g(P ) or
voting patterns and f (X). Our hypothesis is that the former channel is most important, and we
will offer evidence to support this hypothesis.
       To examine the political determinants of pension allocation, we construct a panel of counties,
beginning in the election year immediately prior to initial program passage, and ending in 1930.
We use this to estimate the following:


                              Nc,s,t = α + β1 Rc,s,t + β2 Oc,s,t + φs,t + χc + ec,s,t                               (3)
  15
    Even in states in which all applications (whether approved by the county board or not) were forwarded to the
state board for secondary review, only accepted pension claims were ultimately retained. If the county board’s
decision had a substantial bearing on the ultimate outcome of a pension application, we are still less likely to observe
the record of an applicant rejected at the county level in these state collections.


                                                          13
Here, Nc,s,t is the number of pension applications filed in county c of state s between election years
t and t + 2.16 We construct this variable from our pension index data. The variable Rc,s,t is a
function of Republican gubernatorial vote share in county c of state s in election year t; Oc,s,t is
a function of third party vote share in the same election; φs,t is a state-year fixed effect; and χc is
a county fixed effect. We include state-year fixed effects to control for any state-level factor, such
as a change in the law expanding access to pensions, that might affect pension applications for all
counties in that state. As such, we are identifying effects of political factors on the within-state
distribution of these applications. As in the previous section, we look at the effect of gubernatorial
vote share from the last election as well as average vote share over the last two elections and the
last and next elections.
       Of course, this does not pin down the channel through which political variables affect the
number of pension applications to come from a particular county. The challenge is that we do
not have data on local economic conditions that vary at the same high frequency as our electoral
data, so we cannot explicitly control for economic indicators in our primary specification. To argue
that patronage rather than local economic conditions drives our results, we construct a smaller
panel, taking a series of snapshots of application rates and voting behavior around 1880, 1890,
1900, 1910, and 1920. We match this panel to county-level census data from Haines and ICPSR
(2010) to allow us to control for county-level economic indicators that may be jointly correlated with
application rates and gubernatorial voting patterns. These include measures of agricultural output,
the ownership structure in agriculture, and agricultural land inequality. To use the notation from
above, if the correlation between N and electoral variables is primarily working through a correlation
between electoral variables and f (X), then controlling for salient local economic characteristics
should dramatically alter the estimated effect of electoral variables on applications.


4.3      Determinants of pension outcomes: Texas

The only pension outcome variable that is broadly available at the county level is the number of
pension applications filed; however, we have additional information about the outcome of pension
applications from Texas. This is because we have merged two sources of data on pension applications
from Texas: (i) an index available from the Texas state archives, which contains a list of pension
applications and indicates whether these applications were rejected or not; (ii) an index to the
  16
     Gubernatorial elections typically occur every 2 years. In the few states in which they occur every 4 years, Nc,s,t
is defined as the number of applications filed between election years t and t + 4.



                                                          14
collection of Texas pension files available at ancestry.com, which contains pension application dates.
The key difference between these two indexes is that the first index is based on a list of applications
kept by Texas pension authorities, while the second index is a list of application records that were
physically present in the archives at the time these records were digitized. We are able to locate
records in the ancestry.com index that match close to 90 percent of the records in the Texas archive
index.
    Having access to these two data sources allows us to do two important things. First, it allows us
to directly test our conjecture that our data on pension applications is disproportionately composed
of accepted pension applications. Recall that it was standard practice for state pension boards to
return rejected pension application files to county pension offices after reviewing them. So, rejected
pension application records should be less likely to be found in surviving archival collections today.
This is one of our reasons for interpreting the number of pension applications from a given county
as a noisy measure of the number of accepted applications from that county. So, it should be the
case that applications recorded as “rejected” in the state archive index should be less likely to be
linked to the ancestry index. In fact, we find this to be the case. Rejected pension records are 5
percentage points less likely to be located in the ancestry pension data, a difference that is highly
statistically significant and robust to including county of application fixed effects.
    Another benefit from observing whether pensions were rejected is that it allows us to test
whether political variables impacted this outcome. We estimate the following equation:


                            Ji,c,t = α + β1 Oc,t + β2 Rc,t + δt + χc + ei,c,t                      (4)


The variable Ji,c,t is an indicator equal to one if a claim by person i from county c who applied
in year t was rejected; Oc,t and Rc,t are functions of third party and Republican vote share in the
most recent gubernatorial election; δt is an application year fixed effect; and χc is a county fixed
effect. We cluster standard errors at the county-year level.


5     Results

5.1      Pension legislation and spending

Table (2) contains estimates of equations (1) and (2). In the top panel, we investigate the effect
of a state’s share of the most recent gubernatorial vote going to non-Democrats on the probability



                                                   15
of passing a new pension law.17 We do this using a panel in which states exit the sample after
they have introduced new legislation. Because these regressions are run at the state-year level, we
have a small number of observations to work with. Still, these results give the impression that new
pension legislation did respond to increases in popularity of alternative party candidates, up to a
point. When third party and republican vote shares enter into the regression linearly, there is no
evidence of a significant effect, as seen in columns (1), (3) and (5). However, when these vote shares
enter quadratically, the picture changes somewhat. In column (2), we can see that the probability
of passing new legislation decreases as the most recent vote share to third party candidates deviates
from about one quarter.18 When we measure vote shares as averages across consecutive elections,
the coefficients on Republican vote share and squared Republican vote share are more significant,
although vote shares to both parties have a qualitatively similar effect.
       While the findings in the top panel of table (2) are somewhat imprecise, they broadly suggest
that state legislatures passed initial pieces of pension legislation following a small spike in the vote
share to parties other than the Democrats. In figure (1), we plot a time series of gubernatorial
vote shares to third party candidates (panel A) and Republican candidates (panel B) relative to
the date of initial program passage. In general, this picture supports our findings from table (2);
however, it also indicates substantial heterogeneity across states in the incidence and timing of
these spikes relative to the passage of new pension laws. In panel A, it is clear that the passage
of initial legislation either follows or coincides with an increase in third party vote share in Texas,
Alabama, Arkansas, Tennessee, and Louisiana; it follows with a greater lag in South Carolina.
However, there is no evidence for this in Florida, North Carolina, Mississippi, or Kentucky.19 In
panel B, initial legislation follows or coincides with spikes in Republican vote share in Louisiana,
Alabama, Arkansas, and, to a lesser degree, Kentucky; Mississippi and Texas follow with a lag.
       In the bottom panel of table (2), we examine the effect of state voting patterns on expenditures
on Confederate pension programs. State legislatures exercised discretion over spending on pensions
by passing amendments to pension laws that expanded access, or by increasing pension amounts.
Moreover, state pension boards would have directly affected spending on pensions by raising or
lowering approval standards. Our results clearly indicate that the rate of spending on Confederate
pensions increased following spikes in either third party or Republican vote shares. From column
  17
     Observations are weighted by the fraction of the state’s counties that report electoral data for that year.
  18
     Using notation from equation (1), we can write ∂Ls,t /∂Os,te = β11 + 2β12Os,te . Given our estimates, the
probability of passing an initial piece of pension legislation is maximized with respect to Os,t when Os,t = 0.25.
  19
     Georgia and Virginia are omitted from this figure because they are missing gubernatorial election data in the
years surrounding the passage of program legislation.


                                                       16
(1), a 10 percentage point increase in vote share to either third party or Republican candidates
increased fraction of budget spent on pensions by almost 1 percentage point. Since this expenditure
was typically in the 10-15% range, this translates into a 5-10% increase in the fraction of state
expenditures allocated to Confederate pensions, which quite a large number. We find no evidence
that this effect is non-linear.
   These results suggest that state legislatures were responding to increases in the popularity of
Republican or third party candidates when they passed and funded Confederate pension programs.
It is important to point out that, because we do not have annual data on other potentially im-
portant state-level characteristics, we are unable to pin down the precise mechanism driving these
results. It may be that democratic state legislatures felt threatened by the popularity of alterna-
tive candidates. However, it is also true that non-Democrats tended to gain popularity in times
of economic distress, particularly on the farm. As mentioned above, these were typically populist
parties. State legislatures may have been responding to this economic distress, or a desire among
voters for redistributive policies, rather than a perceived political threat. As such, we view our
state-level results as descriptive, and we attempt to deal more thoroughly with causality when we
look at pension outcomes at the county level.


5.2    Distribution of pension applications

Table (3) contains estimates of equation (2). Here, we are looking at the effect of voting patterns
on the number of applications at the county-year level. Because we have county fixed effects,
we are effectively controlling for any permanent county characteristic that may jointly affect both
application rates and voting behavior. So, we are looking at whether a deviation in voting behaviour
from a county’s norm induces a deviation in pension application rates from that county’s norm.
Moreover, because we are including state-year fixed effects, our results will not be driven by state-
wide trends in application rates (such as the introduction of an expansionary amendment to a
pension law). Here, we are focusing on the effect of local voting behavior on the within-state
allocation of pension resources.
   Our results clearly indicate that pension application rates increased in counties that had ex-
perienced an increase in third party or Republican vote share in the most recent gubernatorial
election. From column (1), 10% increase in third party vote share relative to Democrats increases
expected applications by more than 1. Given that the mean number of applications to be filed in
one county-year is less than 20, this is a sizeable effect. The coefficient on Republican vote share


                                                 17
is roughly half this size, which is still fairly substantial. Figure (2) plots the predicted number of
applications against gubernatorial vote share to both third party and Republican candidates, along
with the density of these vote shares in our sample. These figures allow for a more flexible relation-
ship between applications and vote shares: they include a quartic in vote shares instead of a linear
or quadratic function.20 These pictures suggest that the relationship between vote share to third
party and Republican candidates is non-monotonic, increasing at low levels and then decreasing
when it exceeds a majority. However, applications generally increase monotonically in vote share
to both parties over the range of vote shares that appear most commonly in our data.
    In table (4), we explore this finding in more depth by estimating equation (3) under different
specifications, focusing on linear effects of voting shares, using only the most recent election. Col-
umn (1) of panel A repeats our baseline estimate, and columns (2)-(4) should be thought of as
robustness checks. Specifically, we estimate our regression using congressional election returns data
instead of gubernatorial data; we estimate the effect using log applications instead of levels; and
we disaggregate our third party category into populist parties, named non-populist parties, and
unnamed parties.21 In columns (4) and (5), we disaggregate by time period, looking before and
after 1910. By 1910, all southern states had adopted measures disenfranchising black and poor
voters, so we are interested in seeing whether electoral variables matter differently in these two
periods. Finally, in panel B, we estimate equation (3) separately by state.
    The overall impression we get from this table is that populist candidates have a larger and
more robust effect on application rates than Republican candidates. The coefficient on Republican
vote share is not robust to using log applications instead of levels (column 3). And, the significant
effect of third party candidates is entirely driven by populist parties (column 4). Interestingly,
Republican vote shares only matter before 1910, while populist vote shares matter during both
period. This makes a lot of sense. As Republican voters were mostly black during this period, the
relationship between Republican vote shares and application rates is likely driven by the following:
a spike in Republican vote share likely indicates an increase in turnout among black voters, and
Democrats wanted to encourage whites to vote in response. By 1910, these states had effectively
disenfranchised black voters, so this would have been less of a concern for southern Democrats.
However, populist third party candidates likely appealed to poor Confederate veterans directly,
which means that pensions may have been used explicitly to buy the veteran vote away from these
  20
     P-values from a test of joint significance of these quartics are included in these figures. Predicted values are
calculated at the mean for all other variables included in these regressions.
  21
     See appendix table 3 for a list of parties that fall into each of these categories.



                                                         18
candidates. As Confederate veterans were typically exempt from poll taxes, this would have been
an important consideration for Democrats during our entire sample period. Panel B shows that the
effect of voting patterns on application rates is not uniform across states. Third party candidates
matter significantly (or almost significantly) in Alabama, Georgia, and Texas, but not in Virginia,
Arkansas, or Florida. Republican candidates matter significantly in Virginia but nowhere else.
   In tables (5) and (6), we try to rule out shocks to county economic conditions as an omitted
variable driving the relationship between voting patterns and pension application rates. The chal-
lenge is that we do not have rich, time-varying data on county-level economic indicators; we only
have such data available from decadal censuses. In table (5), we characterize the effect of county-
level economic indicators on the number of applications filed per decade, controlling for county
population. Specifically, we regress the number of applications filed from county c between years
t and t + 10 on county c’s characteristics in the census of year t. We always include state-decade
fixed effects, so we continue to focus on the distribution of applications within states. In columns
(1)-(7), we do not include county fixed effects, but we cluster standard errors at the county level;
in columns (8)-(14), we do include county fixed effects. So, in the first 7 columns we are simply
characterizing the types of counties that receive the most applications (conditional on population),
while in the last 7 columns we are examining whether shocks to a county’s economic conditions
generate changes in the county’s pension application rate.
   We find that county characteristics matter greatly for pension applications. The economic
indicators we use are: percent in agriculture, farm ownership rate, farm output per acre, and a gini
coefficient for farm land inequality (Nunn 2008). We also look at percent black and percent urban,
although we consider the mechanism through which these variables should affect application rates
to be entirely consistent with our patronage story, since black and urban populations were a likely
political threat to southern Democrats. Consistent with this, we find that counties with large black
and urban minorities generated the most pension applications, whether we include county fixed
effects or not. We find that application rates are maximized in predominantly agricultural counties,
although application rates do not respond significantly to changes in agriculture concentration – this
variable does not enter significantly when county fixed effects are included. However, the remaining
economic indicators matter significantly under both specifications. Applications increase when
agricultural output per acre falls, and they are maximized when counties approach an intermediate
farm ownership rate and degree of farm land inequality.
   In table (6), we combine this county-level data with our electoral data, taking a series of snap-


                                                 19
shots of county electoral and pension outcomes in 1880, 1890, 1900, 1910, and 1920. Specifically,
we regress number of applications between years t and t + 2 on vote shares in year t and economic
indicators from year t. One thing to notice is that, when we re-estimate equation (3) using this
limited sample, the effect of vote shares on application rates becomes much less precisely estimated.
This is not surprising, as our sample size has fallen by 80% relative to table (3): we now have an
average of 2.5 observations per county, compared with 12 observations per county in our baseline
specification. Here, what we are interested in is whether or not controlling for county economic
indicators significantly alters the estimated effect of vote shares on application rates. If so, this
suggests that the correlation between vote shares and application rates is driven by a joint corre-
lation between these two variables and local economic conditions. If not, this would support our
claim that political patronage is driving this correlation. It clear from table (6) that controlling for
county-level economic indicators – which do have an important effect on pension application rates
– does not meaningfully alter the estimated coefficients on vote shares.


5.3       Pension outcomes: Texas

Table 7 contains estimates of equation (4), where we examine the effects of electoral variables on
the probability of a pension claim being rejected in Texas. In panel A, we include all years of Texas
data, including 1899, which is the year in which the pension program was first introduced. In panel
B, we exclude applications filed in 1899. The idea is that there may be a learning curve associated
with using a pension system for political patronage, so any effect may not have been present at the
beginning of the program’s life. Given the large number of applications filed during the first year
the program was enacted, the outcome of these applications will have a large effect on our findings.
In panel A, we find that a county’s third party and Republican vote share typically have a negative
effect on the probability of an application from that county begin rejected; however, this effect is
not quite significant under most specifications. In panel B, we omit applications from 1899, which
causes the estimated effect of third party vote share to double in size and to become significant.
Specifically, based on column (1) from panel B, a 10% increase in third party vote share reduces the
probability of having a claim rejected by 0.7 percentage points. Because the rejection probability
was only 10%, this translates into a 7% reduction in the probability of rejection. This is a large
effect.
    In figure (3), we plot the overall rejection probability in Texas against vote share to the Republi-
can or third party candidate. While this is much more pronounced for third party candidates, these


                                                  20
lines seem to inversely track one another. Especially notable is the large dip in rejection probability
in 1912 that coincides with a large spike in third party vote share. There is also a smaller dip in
rejection probability during the mid 1920s that coincides with a large spike in Republican vote
share. It appears that Texas pension boards were more relaxed about awarding pensions in years
in which Democratic gubernatorial candidates were threatened in that state.


6    Conclusion

This paper offers the first large, multi-state analysis of the introduction and dissemination of
Confederate pensions in the southern United States. We show that these pensions were widely
taken up and funded while states outside the region were passing and funding other types of
welfare legislation. We show that the passage of Confederate pension legislation and the expansion
of funding for pensions are significantly related to increases in the popularity of third party and
Republican candidates. We also show that pensions were distributed to counties in which Democrats
had lost ground to alternative parties, and we show that this cannot be explained by changing
underlying economic conditions. We believe that these results indicate that southern Democrats
used Confederate pensions to court the vote of Confederate veterans.
    These findings offer a new perspective on the welfare state in the American South. The current
literature on this subject posits that rural elites stopped southern legislatures from adopting welfare
programs during the early 20th century, and that they were able to get away with this because
electoral competition had been effectively stifled. Our results suggest a more qualified version of
this story, in which southern states did deploy income redistribution to curry favor with voters,
albeit a very narrowly defined subset of all potential voters. We believe this study offers new insight
into the way in which voters and elites interact in order to shape public policy.


References

 [1] Aizer, Anna, Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2014). “The Long-Term
     Impact of Means-Tested Transfers: Evidence from the Mothers’ Pension Program.” NBER
     Working Paper no. 20103.

 [2] Alabama (1907). The Code of Alabama, Adopted by the Legislature of Alabama, Approved July
     27, 1907. Volume 1. Nashville: Marshall & Bruce Co., Printers and Binders, pp 822-831.


                                                  21
 [3] Alesina, Alberto F. and Paola Giuliano (2009). “Preferences for Redistribution.” NBER Work-
    ing Paper no. 14825.

 [4] Alston, Lee J. and Joseph P. Ferrie (1999). Southern Paternalism and the American Welfare
    State: Economics, Politics, and Institutions in the South, 1865-1965. New York: Cambridge
    University Press.

 [5] —-. (1993). “Paternalism and Agricultural Labor Contracts in the U.S. South: Implications
    for the Growth of the Welfare State.” American Economic Review. 83(4): 852-876.

 [6] Arkansas (1891). Acts and Resolutions of the General Assembly of the State of Arkansas.
    Morrilton: Pilot Printing Company, State Printers.

 [7] Ayers, Edward L. (1992). The Promise of the New South: Life after Reconstruction. New York:
    Oxford University Press.

 [8] Bailey, Martha J. and Nicholas J. Duquette (2014). “How the U.S. Fought the War on Poverty:
    The Economics and Politics of Funding at the Office of Economic Opportunity. Journal of
    Economic HIstory. 74(2): 351-388.

 [9] Blanck, Peter D. and Michael Millender (2000). “Before Disability Civil Rights: Civil War
    Pensions and the Politics of Disability in America.” Alabama Law Review. 52(1): 1-50.

[10] Cascio, Elizabeth U. and Ebonya Washington (2013). “Valuing the Vote: The Redistribution
    of Voting Rights and State Funds Following the Voting Rights Act of 1965.” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics. 129(1): 376-433.

[11] Costa, Dora L (1995). “Pensions and Retirement: Evidence from Union Army Veterans.” The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics. 110(2): 297-319.

[12] Costa, Dora L (1997). “Displacing the Family: Union Army Pensions and Elderly Living
    Arrangements.” The Journal of Political Economy. 105(6), 1269- 1292.

[13] Cox, Gary W. and Matthew D. McCubbins (1986). “Electoral Politics as a Redistributive
    Game.” Journal of Politics. 48: 370-389.

[14] Dixit, Avinash and John Londregan (1996). “The Determinants of Success of Special Interests
    in Redistributive Politics.” Journal of Politics. 58: 1132-1155.


                                                22
[15] Eli, Shari (2014). “Income Effects on Health:      Evidence from Union Army Pensions.”
    Manuscript, University of Toronto.

[16] Fishback, Price V. and Shawn Everett Kantor (1998). “The Adoption of Workers’ Compensa-
    tion in the United States, 1900 - 1930.” Journal of Law and Economics, 41(2, part 2), 305-341.

[17] Georgia (1882). Acts and Resolutions of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, 1882-
    1883. Digital Library of Georgia, Legislative document collection, http://dlg.galileo.usg.
    edu/CollectionsA-Z/

[18] Glasson, William H. (1918). “The South’s Pension Relief Provisions for the Soldiers of the
    Confederacy.” Publications of the North Carolina Historical Commission. Bulletin No. 23.

[19] Goldin, Claudia and Frank Lewis (1975). “The Economic Cost of the Civil War: Estimates
    and Implications.” Journal of Economic History. 35(2): 299-326.

[20] Gorman, Kathleeen (1999). “Confederate Pensions as Southern Social Welfare,” in Before the
    New Deal: Social Welfare in the South, 1830-1930, Elna C Green, Ed. Athens: University of
    Georgia Press, pp 24-49.

[21] Green, Elna (2006). “Protecting Confederate Soldiers and Mothers: Pensions, Gender, and
    the Welfare State in the U.S. South, A Case Study from Florida,” Journal of Social History,
    39(4): 1079-1104.

[22] Haines, Michael R., and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (2010).
    Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002 [Computer
    file]. ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
    Research [distributor], 2010-05-21. doi:10.3886/ICPSR02896.

[23] Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (1999) United States
    Historical Election Returns,     1824-1968 [Computer File]. ICPSR00001-v3. Ann Ar-
    bor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor].
    http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR00001.v3

[24] Kousser, J. Morgan (1974). The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restrictions and the
    Establishment of the One-party South, 1880-1910. Yale University Press.




                                               23
[25] Margo, Robert (1990). Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History.
    University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

[26] Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richards (1981). “A Rational Theory of the Size of Govern-
    ment.” Journal of Political Economy. 89(5): 914-927.

[27] Naidu, Suresh (2012). “Suffrage, Schooling and Sorting in the Post-Bellum U.S. South.” NBER
    Working Paper No. 18129.

[28] National Archives and Records Administration (2012). “Confederate Pension Records.” URL:
    http://www.archives.gov/research/military/civil-war/confederate/pension.html.

[29] Nunn, Nathan (2008). “Slavery, Inequality, and Economic Development in the Americas: An
    Examination of the Engerman-Sokoloff Hypothesis.” In Institutions and Economic Perfor-
    mance, Elhanan Helpman, Ed. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp 148-180.

[30] Ransom, Roger and Richard Sutch (1975). “The Impact of the Civil War and of Emancipation
    on Southern Agriculture.” Explorations in Economic History. 12: 1-28.

[31] Ratchford, B.U. and K.C. Heise (1938). “Confederate Pensions.” Southern Economic Journal.
    5(2): 207-217.

[32] Rhode, Paul W. and Koleman S. Strumpf (2004). “Historical Presidential Betting Markets.”
    Journal of Economic Perspectives. 18(2): 127-141.

[33] Rodgers. Mark E. (1999). Tracing the Civil War Veteran Pension System in the State of
    Virginia: Entitlement or Privilege. Lewiston: Edwin Mellen Press.

[34] Salisbury, Laura (2014). “Women’s Income and Marriage Markets in the United States: Evi-
    dence from the Civil War Pension.” NBER Working Paper no. 20201.

[35] Scott, James (2000). Presidents, Parties, and the States: A Party System Perspective on
    Democratic Regulatory Choice, 1884-1936. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[36] Short, Joanna (2006). “Confederate Veteran Pensions, Occupation, and Men’s Retirement in
    the New South.” Social Science History. 30(1): 75-101.

[37] Skocpol, Theda (1995). Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins of Social Policy
    in the United States. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

                                                24
[38] White, W.S. (1897). Annual Report of the State Auditor of Alabama for the Fiscal Year Ending
    September 30, 1897. Montgomery: Romer Printing Company, State Printers and Binders.

[39] Woodward, C. Vann (1951). Origins of the New South, 1877-1913. Baton Rouge: Louisiana
    State University Press.

[40] Wright, Gavin (1986). Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy since the
    Civil War. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.

[41] Young, James R. (1982). “Confederate Pensions in Georgia, 1886-1929.” The Georgia Historical
    Quarterly. 66(1): 47-52.


Tables and Figures




                                               25
                                                                Table 1: Timeline of Confederate Pension Legislation
                                                              First welfare-
                              First Law -      First Law -    type pension                                                                  Income/Property
     State                     Veterans         Widows             law1           Eligibility - Veterans        Eligibility - Widows           restrictions     Residency restrictions           Amounts
                                                                                Unable to work due to
                                                                                permanent disability,                                                            Alabama Resident
                                                                                 illness or age. Not a       Not remarried. Husband Income < $300 per            prior to January 1,
                                       2                2                 2
     Alabama                    1899             1899             1899                 deserter.                  not a deserter.   year; Property < $400                1899               $50-$100 per year3
                                                                                Unable to work due to
                                                                                   disease or injury         Husband did not desert
                                                                               sustained in service. Not     and died during the war.                           Resident of Arkansas
     Arkansas                   1891             1891             1901                a deserter.                Not remarried,                 Indigent             for 1 year             $25-$100 per year
                                                                                                             Husband killed as direct                            Resident of Florida
                                                                                 Injured during military     result of military service.                         prior to January 1,
     Florida                    1885             1885             1899                   service                  Not remarried.4          Property < $10004            1875. 4             $30-$150 per year4

                                                                                                             Married during husband's
                                                                                                             service. Husband died as                           Resident of Georgia
                                                                                Permanently injured in         result of service. Not                           prior to October 26,
     Georgia                    1887 5           1890             1893              the service                      remarried.                    -                    1886.               $15-$100 per year

                                                                                                                                                                Resident of Louisiana
                                                                                                               Married to soldier who                             for 5 years prior to
                                                                                                             died before June 1, 1865.                          filing if soldier served
                                                                                                                Husband died from                                     in Louisiana
                                                                                Honorably discharged.        wounds contracted in the                           regiments; otherwise,
     Louisiana                  1898 6           1898             1898          Unable to earn a living.              service.                  Indigent        resident for 15 years.      Up to $96 per year
                                                                                                                                                                                           $75-$125 per year for
                                                                                                             Husband died as a result                                                         specific injuries;
                                                                                                                                                                                               remaining fund




26
                                                                                Unable to work due to          of the war. Husband
                                                                                war wound. Enlisted in        enlisted in Mississippi.       Indigent (1890          Resident of            distributed evenly to
     Mississippi                1888             1888             1890          Mississippi regiment.             Not remarried.             ammendmnet)             Mississippi               pensioners.7

                                                                                Incapacitated by wound Husband died as a result Income < $300 per                 Resident of North
     North Carolina             1885             1885             1901            received in service. of the war. Not remarried. year; property < $500               Carolina.             $25-$100 per year
                                                                                Disabled as a result of      Husband died in service.
     South Carolina             1887             1887             1896                 service.                  Not remarried.            Financially needy               -                         -
                                                                                 Honorable character;
                                                                               unable to work due to war                                                            Resident of
     Tennessee                  1891             1905             1905                   wound                            -                        -            Tennessee for 1 year $100 - $300 per year
                                                                                Over 60 years of age or
                                                                                 disabled as a result of Married prior to 1866; not                               Resident in Texas
     Texas                      1899             1899             1899                  service                 remarried                       Indgent              since 1880             up to $96 per year

                                                                                 Unable to work due to
                                                                                injury; Not in receipt of
                                                                               other state or federal aid;                                 Income < $300 per
                                                                                not resident in soldier's                                    year; Property <
     Virginia                   1888             1888             1902                   home                     Not remarried              $1000 per year      Resident of Virginia            $30-$60

     1 Refers to a pension law that does not require recipient to have been wounded or killed during the war.
     2 Date of first annuity offered to Confederate veterans and widows. The Alabama legislature offered one time payments to wounded soldiers and widows as early as 1881 (with welfare-type
     eligibility requiremets in 1891)
     3 Amounts as of 1901
     4 From text of law ammended in 1889.
     5 First cash transfer program. A program for providing veterans with artificial limbs existed from 1877.
     6 First cash trasfer program. Serveral programs providing artificial limbs or land grants to veterans existed from the 1880s.
     7 Amounts from code of 1906
Table 2: Effect of Gubernatorial Vote Shares on Passage of Confederate Pension Legislation and
Spending at the State Level

                                     (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
   Dependent variable:                                          =1 if passed pension law

   Third party vote share           0.514         1.867**         -0.269           1.029         -0.136          1.089
                                   (0.425)        (0.828)        (1.199)         (2.120)        (0.761)        (1.511)
   Third party vote share^2                       -3.787*                         -3.601                        -5.424
                                                  (1.935)                        (4.463)                       (3.878)
   Republican vote share            0.280          -0.492         -0.523           4.065         0.056        3.226***
                                   (0.291)        (0.800)        (0.869)         (2.519)        (0.599)        (1.052)
   Rebpublican vote share^2                        1.384                         -9.779*                      -7.631***
                                                  (1.545)                        (5.449)                       (2.365)
   Constant                         0.351          0.472          -0.853        -2.379**         0.574          0.456
                                   (0.405)        (0.405)        (0.941)         (1.169)        (0.499)        (0.468)

   Observations                      154            154            110            110          141          141
   R-squared                        0.518          0.539          0.574          0.610        0.525        0.607
                                                                                              Mean,        Mean,
                                                                  Mean,          Mean,
   Election                       Previous        Previous                                 previous and previous and
                                                                previous 2    previous two
                                                                                               next         next


   Dependent variable:                               Fraction of state budget allocated to pensions

   Third party vote share          0.173***        0.035         0.157*            0.120       0.194***        0.359**
                                   (0.048)        (0.136)        (0.081)         (0.120)       (0.071)         (0.161)
   Third party vote share^2                        0.401                          -0.051                        -0.627
                                                  (0.377)                        (0.299)                       (0.599)
   Republican vote share           0.196***        0.180         0.292***          0.052       0.264***          0.264
                                   (0.049)        (0.114)        (0.064)         (0.134)       (0.070)         (0.164)
   Rebpublican vote share^2                        0.005                        0.424**                          0.000
                                                  (0.196)                        (0.211)                       (0.260)
   Constant                        -0.070*        -0.069*       -0.126***       -0.101**       -0.105***      -0.103**
                                   (0.036)        (0.037)        (0.038)         (0.039)        (0.037)        (0.040)

   Observations                      205            205            204            204          202          202
   R-squared                        0.886          0.887          0.897          0.901        0.899        0.900
                                                                                              Mean,        Mean,
                                                                  Mean,          Mean,
   Election                       Previous        Previous                                 previous and previous and
                                                                previous 2    previous two
                                                                                               next         next

Note: Sample period is 1876-1912 in panel A, and 1876-1922 in panel B. In panel A, all states exit the sample after
passing initial pension legislation (last law is passed in Kentucky in 1912). All regressions include state and year
fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by the fraction of counties with non-missing election returns data.




                                                           27
Table 3: Effect of Gubernatorial Vote Shares on the Distribution of Pension Applications at the
County Level

                                         (1)            (2)          (3)              (4)            (5)               (6)
   Dependent variable:                                    Number of applications filed (election year)

   Third party vote share            11.006***       17.480***      14.306***          4.101       15.731***        25.012***
                                      (2.683)         (5.881)        (3.485)         (6.575)        (3.811)           (6.809)
   Third party vote share^2                           -12.928                        22.450*                         -23.164*
                                                     (10.108)                       (12.410)                         (13.330)
   Republican vote share              4.744**          -0.621         2.208           -4.167        7.885***        -14.490**
                                      (2.102)         (5.054)        (2.868)         (6.384)        (3.009)           (6.450)
   Rebpublican vote share^2                            9.190                         11.435                         42.281***
                                                      (7.729)                       (10.524)                         (10.745)
   Constant                          20.616***       20.627***      27.057***       17.323***      13.338***        11.210***
                                      (0.860)         (0.907)        (0.961)         (1.123)        (1.010)           (1.080)

   Observations                        10,239         10,239          9,223           9,223       8,979        8,979
   R-squared                            0.502          0.503          0.503           0.503       0.503        0.504
   Number of unique counties             858            858            837             837         838          838
                                                                                                  Mean,        Mean,
                                                                      Mean,          Mean,
   Election                           Previous       Previous                                  previous and previous and
                                                                    previous 2    previous two
                                                                                                   next         next


Note: Sample period is 1876-1930. States included in sample are those with both application year and county data
available: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Texas, Virginia. States do not enter sample until they
have passed an initial piece of pension legislation. All regressions contain county and state-year fixed effects.




                                                          28
Table 4: Effect of Vote Shares on the Distribution of Pension Applications at the County Level:
Sensitivity Analysis

                                              (1)           (2)              (3)                (4)                (5)       (6)
   Dependent variable:                                             Number of applications filed (election year)

                                                                        Panel A. Alternate Specifications

   Third party vote share                  11.006***      3.564**           0.280***                           7.796**    12.776***
                                            (2.683)       (1.650)           (0.083)                            (3.856)     (3.761)
   Republican vote share                    4.744**       3.657***           -0.026          4.509**          12.022***     -2.911
                                            (2.102)       (1.019)           (0.065)          (2.106)           (3.606)     (2.240)
   Third party vote share, disaggregated
    Populist, named                                                                         11.939***
                                                                                             (2.724)
    Other, named                                                                             -11.636
                                                                                            (13.053)
    Other, not named                                                                         -61.142
                                                                                            (67.097)
   Constant                                20.616***     12.289***          2.333***        20.576***         4.261***    22.196***
                                            (0.860)       (1.015)           (0.026)          (0.860)           -1.214      (0.678)

   Observations                             10,239        12,766            10,239        10,239                  5125      5,114
   R-squared                                 0.502         0.512             0.723         0.503                  0.536     0.425
   Number of unique counties                  858           868               858           858                    685       853
                                                                        Log dependent Disaggregated
   Specification
                                           Baseline      Congress          variable     third party           Pre-1910    Post-1910

                                                                           Panel B. Individual States


   Third party vote share                   -12.63        20.12***           -5.146           8.041             7.343     14.91***
                                           (17.35)        (6.158)           (5.584)          (21.69)          (5.144)     (3.365)
   Republican vote share                   22.98**         -2.331            -2.865           8.045               -        1.502
                                           (9.074)        (5.420)           (4.047)          (11.32)              -       (2.345)
   Constant                                18.35***        -3.334           13.61***          1.832           5.484***    25.08***
                                           (5.215)        (2.619)           (2.125)          (5.859)           (2.110)    (1.206)

   Observations                              1,303         1,184            1,575              548              966        4,064
   R-squared                                 0.386         0.704            0.682             0.602            0.351       0.325
   Number of unique counties                  123            67               75                67              152         254
   State                                    Virginia      Alabama          Arkansas           Florida         Georgia      Texas




Note: Sample period is 1876-1930. States included in sample are those with both application year and county data
available: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Texas, Virginia. States do not enter sample until they
have passed an initial piece of pension legislation. All regressions contain county and state-year fixed effects.




                                                          29
                                           Table 5: Effect of County Characteristics on the Distribution of Pension Applications
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)              (8)          (9)       (10)        (11)       (12)        (13)        (14)
        Dependent variable:                                                                                       Number of applications filed (decade)

        % black                        98.668***                                                                         95.072***    115.272**                                                                113.373***
                                        (23.350)                                                                          (20.183)     (54.878)                                                                 (21.167)
        % black ^2                    -228.129***                                                                      -214.224***   -201.184***                                                              -234.654***
                                        (27.283)                                                                          (26.684)     (61.427)                                                                 (28.648)
        % urban                                       87.174**                                                            88.007**                    40.372*                                                  95.034***
                                                      (41.413)                                                            (39.574)                   (23.919)                                                   (17.348)
        % urban^2                                   -145.571***                                                         -117.934**                   -65.032*                                                 -131.103***
                                                      (51.136)                                                            (56.076)                   (38.405)                                                   (24.441)
        % engaged in agriculture                                   53.800***                                              25.945**                               12.958                                           18.592
                                                                   (13.949)                                               (11.810)                              (14.963)                                        (12.145)
        % engaged in agriculture ^2                               -22.268***                                             -12.589**                               -11.558                                         -10.871
                                                                    (6.344)                                                (5.431)                               (8.821)                                         (6.770)
        % farm owners                                                          333.709***                               105.532***                                          73.956**                            73.965**
                                                                                 (34.698)                                 (35.435)                                          (36.737)                            (34.686)
        % farm owners^2                                                        -278.080***                             -114.006***                                          -59.644*                           -83.456***
                                                                                 (28.484)                                 (29.843)                                          (31.167)                            (29.603)




30
        farm output per acre                                                                 -0.647*                       -0.531*                                                     -0.792**                  -0.590*
                                                                                             (0.341)                       (0.311)                                                      (0.329)                  (0.312)
        farm output per acre ^2                                                               0.001                         -0.003                                                      0.008**                    0.002
                                                                                             (0.003)                       (0.003)                                                      (0.004)                  (0.004)
        farm gini                                                                                        319.281***     131.915***                                                                  29.008     117.282***
                                                                                                          (40.868)        (35.154)                                                                 (52.562)     (44.354)
        farm gini^2                                                                                     -449.380***    -203.159***                                                                 -27.877    -157.845***
                                                                                                          (45.590)        (41.774)                                                                 (59.940)     (50.963)
        population                     0.002***      0.002***      0.002***     0.002***     0.002***     0.002***        0.002***    0.001***      0.001***    0.001***    0.001***   0.001***    0.001***     0.002***
                                       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
        Constant                        7.837         -0.985      -27.702***   -92.930***     0.888      -47.706***      -36.996**    32.232***     35.466***   33.004***    15.654    18.211***   29.967**      -24.045
                                       (5.493)       (6.480)        (7.742)     (16.228)     (6.365)       (8.015)        (16.313)     (9.253)       (2.439)     (6.390)    (10.833)    (2.678)    (12.308)     (16.293)

        Observations                    3,194         3,194         3,165        3,188        3,181       3,181           3,156         3,194         3,194      3,165       3,188      3,181       3,181       3,156
        R-squared                       0.564         0.535         0.536        0.547        0.528       0.543           0.589         0.559         0.556      0.560       0.557      0.557       0.556
        County fixed effects             No            No            No           No           No          No              No            Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes




     Note: Sample period is 1880-1920. Unit of observation is the county-decade. All regressions contain state-decade fixed effects. In columns (1)-(7), standard
     errors are clustered at the county level. Columns (8)-(14) contain county fixed effects.
                      Table 6: Effect of Gubernatorial Vote Shares and County Characteristics on Distribution of Pension Applications
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)              (7)            (8)         (9)          (10)         (11)         (12)
        Dependent variable:                                                                    Number of applications filed (election year)

        Third party vote share          5.773        7.306        27.048        20.621    19.553**        16.679        58.170**       50.720**      13.649       14.759       66.252*       68.901*
                                       (8.314)      (8.439)     (21.092)      (21.493)     (9.924)       (10.282)       (24.956)       (25.683)     (12.647)     (12.901)     (34.489)      (35.314)
        Third party vote share^2                                 -49.725       -31.321                                 -107.687*        -94.023                               -207.707      -212.146
                                                                (46.081)      (46.711)                                  (64.680)       (65.868)                              (128.028)     (130.299)
        Republican vote share           9.203        8.793        20.471        12.253      5.953         6.148         33.504*         26.589      15.605*      16.077*        4.287          3.688
                                       (6.981)      (7.472)     (16.271)      (17.175)     (9.190)       (9.714)        (18.567)       (19.465)     (8.763)      (9.340)      (21.393)      (22.472)
        Rebpublican vote share^2                                 -18.644        -6.024                                  -46.881*        -35.475                                23.055         25.532
                                                                (23.926)      (25.982)                                  (28.291)       (30.240)                               (36.370)      (38.643)
        % black                                   161.513***                 160.752***                 181.652***                    176.920***                229.607***                 229.395***
                                                    (46.356)                  (46.399)                   (48.431)                      (48.489)                  (52.973)                   (53.016)
        % black ^2                                -211.431***               -208.454***                -226.882***                   -220.366***               -267.094***                -264.986***
                                                    (55.309)                  (55.502)                   (56.596)                      (56.732)                  (60.696)                   (60.849)
        % urban                                       -5.353                    -5.497                     -5.765                        -7.326                    -2.190                     -4.424
                                                    (18.298)                  (18.311)                   (18.541)                      (18.549)                  (19.264)                   (19.307)
        % urban^2                                    16.420                     16.651                    17.132                         18.598                    11.673                     15.762
                                                    (31.633)                  (31.658)                   (32.133)                      (32.126)                  (33.875)                   (33.954)
        % engaged in agriculture                     17.807                     17.940                    17.568                         17.051                     9.646                      9.895
                                                    (10.982)                  (10.998)                   (11.177)                      (11.181)                  (11.949)                   (11.947)
        % engaged in agriculture ^2                   -6.682                    -6.751                     -6.420                        -6.439                    -3.284                     -3.000
                                                     (5.521)                   (5.525)                    (5.589)                       (5.587)                   (5.855)                    (5.856)
        % farm owners                                -59.587                   -59.020                    -60.526                       -58.270                  -68.353*                   -67.228*




31
                                                    (38.852)                  (38.915)                   (39.529)                      (39.576)                  (40.608)                   (40.655)
        % farm owners^2                              51.328                     50.762                    50.934                         49.280                  59.987*                     59.398*
                                                    (32.141)                  (32.197)                   (32.779)                      (32.841)                  (33.807)                   (33.862)
        farm output per acre                           0.067                     0.062                      0.105                         0.128                     0.067                      0.082
                                                     (0.250)                   (0.251)                    (0.254)                       (0.254)                   (0.260)                    (0.260)
        farm output per acre ^2                        0.002                     0.002                      0.001                         0.001                     0.002                      0.002
                                                     (0.002)                   (0.002)                    (0.002)                       (0.002)                   (0.003)                    (0.003)
        farm gini                                     -0.212                    -1.067                     0.233                         -3.980                    -3.784                     -2.191
                                                    (43.206)                  (43.297)                   (43.860)                      (43.961)                  (45.317)                   (45.321)
        farm gini^2                                  13.221                     14.176                    14.303                         19.722                    23.016                     22.879
                                                    (51.232)                  (51.381)                   (52.530)                      (52.613)                  (55.048)                   (55.048)
        population                                  0.000***                  0.000***                   0.000***                      0.000***                  0.000***                   0.000***
                                                     (0.000)                   (0.000)                    (0.000)                       (0.000)                   (0.000)                    (0.000)
        Constant                      27.745***       -4.003    25.872***       -4.626    19.320***         2.202      24.038***         -9.666    13.255***      -12.587    22.189***       -14.684
                                       (2.044)      (16.641)     (2.624)      (16.675)     (1.821)       (16.981)       (2.665)        (17.032)     (2.071)      (17.056)     (2.741)       (17.377)

        Observations                   2,078        1,964        2,078        1,964         2,045         1,938          2,045          1,938        2,022        1,910        2,022        1,910
        R-squared                      0.492        0.531        0.493        0.531         0.494         0.532          0.497          0.534        0.488        0.528        0.489        0.529
        Number of unique counties       824          784          824          784           817           778            817            778          824          784          824          784
                                                                                                                                                     Mean,        Mean,        Mean,        Mean,
                                                                                            Mean,         Mean,          Mean,          Mean,
        Election                      Previous     Previous     Previous     Previous                                                             previous and previous and previous and previous and
                                                                                          previous 2   previous two    previous 2    previous two
                                                                                                                                                      next         next         next         next



     Note: Sample period is 1880-1920. Unit of observation is the county-decade. All regressions contain state-decade fixed effects and county fixed effects.
       Table 7: Effect Gubernatorial Vote Shares on Probability of Pension Rejection: Texas

                                         (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
    Dependent variable:                                         =1 if pension claim rejected

                                                                     Panel A. All years
    Third party vote share              -0.037       -0.066         -0.043       -0.139**      -0.078**       -0.040
                                       (0.027)      (0.069)        (0.032)        (0.065)       (0.033)      (0.080)
    Third party vote share^2                          0.061                         0.206                     -0.106
                                                    (0.135)                       (0.128)                    (0.208)
    Republican vote share              -0.041*       -0.076         -0.033         -0.048       0.013          0.063
                                       (0.025)      (0.062)        (0.032)        (0.078)      (0.038)       (0.082)
    Rebpublican vote share^2                          0.062                         0.018                     -0.110
                                                    (0.103)                       (0.155)                    (0.174)
    Constant                          0.097***      0.100***       0.111***      0.116***      0.098***      0.091***
                                      (0.017)       (0.018)        (0.020)        (0.020)      (0.018)       (0.020)

    Observations                       43,419        43,419        46,097        46,097        43,849       43,849
    R-squared                           0.029         0.029         0.032         0.032         0.029        0.029
                                                                                               Mean,        Mean,
                                                                    Mean,         Mean,
    Election                          Previous      Previous                                previous and previous and
                                                                  previous 2   previous two
                                                                                                next         next
                                                                  Panel B. Excluding 1899

    Third party vote share            -0.072**       -0.126        -0.089**      -0.148*       -0.071*        -0.100
                                       (0.032)      (0.078)         (0.038)      (0.080)       (0.039)       (0.099)
    Third party vote share^2                          0.140                        0.180                       0.106
                                                    (0.173)                      (0.205)                     (0.299)
    Republican vote share               -0.040       -0.076         -0.026        -0.034        -0.017        0.052
                                       (0.026)      (0.064)        (0.035)       (0.083)       (0.039)       (0.089)
    Rebpublican vote share^2                          0.064                        0.013                      -0.154
                                                    (0.107)                      (0.166)                     (0.186)
    Constant                          0.077***      0.079***       0.096***      0.092***      0.070***      0.064***
                                      (0.021)       (0.021)        (0.023)       (0.024)       (0.020)       (0.023)

    Observations                       37,654        37,654        40,189        40,189        37,941       37,941
    R-squared                           0.032         0.032         0.035         0.035         0.032        0.032
                                                                                               Mean,        Mean,
                                                                    Mean,         Mean,
    Election                          Previous      Previous                                previous and previous and
                                                                  previous 2   previous two
                                                                                                next         next



Note: Sample period is 1899-1930. All regressions contain county fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
county-year level.




                                                        32
        Figure 1: Gubernatorial Voting Patterns and the Passage of New Pension Legislation

                                                    Panel A. Governor, Third Party Vote Share


                                         .5
                  Third Party Vote Share
                   .1    .2    .3
                               0     .4




                                              −15         −10                 −5                  0           5
                                                                    Years since law passed

                                                            Alabama                      Arkansas
                                                    Panel B. Florida
                                                             Governor, Republican  Vote Share
                                                                                Louisiana
                                                            Mississippi                  North Carolina
                                        .5




                                                            South Carolina               Texas
                  Republican Vote Share
                                   .4




                                                            Kentucky                     Tennessee
                              .3




                                                                                                                  ®
                   .1    .2     0




                                              −15         −10                 −5                   0          5
                                                                    Years since law passed

                                                                Alabama                      Arkansas
                                                                Florida                      Louisiana
                                                                Mississippi                  North Carolina
                                                                South Carolina               Texas
                                                                Kentucky                     Tennessee

                                                                                                                      ®




Note: The line t = 0 represents the year in which the first piece of pension legislation is passed. Virginia and Georgia
are omitted from the picture because they are missing multiple years of electoral data around the time of pension
legislation.




                                                                           33
    Figure 2: Relationship between Vote Share and Predicted Number of Pension Applications

                                                 Governor, Third Party Vote Share




                                                                                                                         20
                             24
                  Number of applications




                                                                                                                         15
                                     20




                                                                                                                         Density
                                                                                                                           10
                  12      16




                                                                                                                         5
                             8




                                                                                                                         0
                                             0     .2            .4                .6           .8               1
                                                                      Vote Share

                                                 Predicted applications                  Density of vote share
                                                 p=.001

                                                                                                                                     ®




                                                  Governor, Republican Vote Share
                                24




                                                                                                                           4
                    Number of applications
                                       20




                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                           Density
                             16




                                                                                                                             2
                    12




                                                                                                                           1
                                8




                                                                                                                           0




                                             0      .2            .4                .6            .8                 1
                                                                       Vote Share

                                                 Predicted applications                   Density of vote share
                                                 p=.052

                                                                                                                                         ®




Note: Based on regressions of total number of applications at the county-year level on a quartic in vote share to
Republicans and Third parties. Regressions include county and state-year fixed effects. Predicted effects are at the
mean year and state.




                                                                          34
     Figure 3: Voting Patterns and Pension Rejection Rate: Texas
                  Panel A. Third Party Vote Share
.3
.2
.1
0




        1900                1910                      1920             1930
                               Last election year

                      Rejection rate                Other vote share

                                                                              ®




                  Panel B. Republican Vote Share
.4
.3
.2
.1
0




        1900               1910                       1920             1930
                              Last election year

                   Rejection rate             (Republican vote share

                                                                                  ®




                                       35
A     Data Appendix

Pension Variables: Sources

Multiple States

    • National Archives and Records Administration (2012).     “Confederate Pension Records.”
      http://www.archives.gov/research/military/civil-war/confederate/pension.html

    • Wilson, Mary L. (2004) “The Confederate Pension Systems in Texas, Georgia, and Virginia:
      The Programs and the People.” PhD diss., University of North Texas. UMI (3157499).

    • Glasson, William Henry (1907). “The South’s Care for Her Confederate Veterans.” Review
      of Reviews. 36: 44-47.

    • Morton, M. B. (1893) “Federal and Confederate Pensions Contrasted.” The Forum (Sept
      1893): 68-74.


Alabama

Pension Application Records

    • Ancestry.com (2010). Alabama, Texas and Virginia, Confederate Pensions, 1884-1958 [database
      on-line]. Provo, UT, USA: Ancestry.com Operations, Inc. [Original data from Confederate
      Pension Applications, 1880-1940. Montgomery, Alabama: Alabama Department of Archives
      and History.]

Pension Legislation

    • Alabama (1887). Acts of the General Assembly of Alabama Passed at the Session of 1886-
      1887, Held in the City of Montgomery, Commencing November 2, 1886. Montgomery: W.D.
      Brown & Co., State Printers and Binders, pp 64-66 [Google Book].

    • Alabama (1891). Acts of the General Assembly of Alabama Passed at the Session of 1890-
      1891, Held in the City of Montgomery, Commencing November 11, 1890. Montgomery:
      Smith, Allred & Co., State Printers and Binders, pp 624-627 [Google Book].

    • Alabama (1907). The Code of Alabama, Adopted by the Legislature of Alabama, Approved
      July 27, 1907. Volume 1. Nashville: Marshall & Bruce Co., Printers and Binders, pp 822-831
      [Accessed at hathitrust.org].

                                               36
   • Ancestry.com (2010). [cited above - individual pension forms used to observe important
     legislative dates].

Pension Expenditures

   • Annual Report of the Auditor of the State of Alabama to the Governor, accessed at hathitrust.org.
     Years available: 1877, 1885-1891, 1893, 1897, 1901, 1902, 1904-1922.


Arkansas

Pension Application Records

   • Arkansas History Commission (2014). “Confederate Pension Records.” http://www.ark-ives.
     com/documenting/confed_pensions.aspx

Pension Legislation

   • Arkansas (1891). Acts and Resolutions of the General Assembly of the State of Arkansas.
     Morrilton: Pilot Printing Company, State Printers, pp 160-166 [Google Book].

   • Arkansas History Commission (2014) [cited above].

Pension Expenditures

   • Biennial Report of the Auditor of Public Accounts of the State of Alabama, accessed at
     hathitrust.org. Years available: 1905-1916.


Florida

Pension Application Records

   • Florida Memory, Division of Library and Information Services (2014). “Confederate Pension
     Applications.” https://www.floridamemory.com/collections/pensionfiles/

Pension Legislation

   • Green, Elna C. “Protecting confederate soldiers and mothers: Pensions, gender, and the
     welfare state in the US south, a case study from Florida.” Journal of Social History. 39(4):
     1079-1104.




                                                37
   • Florida (1889). Acts and Resolutions Adopted by the Legislature of Florida at its Second
     Regular Session, Under the Constitution of A.D. 1885. Tallahassee: N.M. Bowen, Printer,
     pp 33-35 [Google Book].

   • Florida Memory (2014) [cited above].

Pension Expenditures

   • Report of the State Treasurer of the State of Florida, accessed at hathitrust.org. Years avail-
     able: 1907-1914, 1917, 1918, 1920, 1921.


Georgia

Pension Application Records

   • Ancestry.com (2009). Georgia, Confederate Pension Applications, 1879-1960. [database on-
     line]. Provo, UT, USA: Ancestry.com Operations Inc. [Original data: Confederate Pension
     Applications, Georgia Confederate Pension Office, RG 58-1-1, Georgia Archives.]

Pension Legislation

   • Short, Joanna (2006). “Confederate Veteran Pensions, Occupation, and Men’s Retirement in
     the New South.” Social Science History. 30(1): 75-101.

   • Gorman, Kathleeen (1999). “Confederate Pensions as Southern Social Welfare,” in Before the
     New Deal: Social Welfare in the South, 1830-1930, Elna C Green, Ed. Athens: University of
     Georgia Press, pp 24-49.

   • Georgia (1887). Acts and Reslutions of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, 1886-
     7. Volume 2, pp 27-28. [Digital Library of Georgia, Legislative document collection, http:
     //dlg.galileo.usg.edu/CollectionsA-Z/zlgl_information.html?Welcome]

   • Ancestry.com (2009) [cited above].

Pension Expenditures

   • Annual Report of the Treasurer and State Bank Examiner of the State of Georgia, accessed
     at hathitrust.org. Years available: 1897, 1904, 1912-1916, 1918-1922.




                                                38
Kentucky

Pension Application Records

   • Kentucky Department for Libraries and Archives (2012). “Department of Confederate Pen-
     sions (1912-1946).” https://dspace.kdla.ky.gov/xmlui/handle/10602/2375

Pension Legislation

   • Kentucky Department for Libraries and Archives (2012) [cited above].


Louisiana

Pension Legislation

   • FamilySearch (2014). “Louisiana, Confederate Pensions, 1898-1950.” Images. State Archives,
     Baton Rouge. https://familysearch.org/search/collection/1838535

Pension Expenditures

   • Biennial Report of the Treasurer to the Governor of the State of Louisiana, accessed at
     hathitrust.org. Years available: 1875, 1878-1881, 1884, 1885, 1888, 1889, 1894, 1895, 1898-
     1915, 1920, 1921.


Mississippi

Pension Legislation

   • Mississippi Department of Archives and History (2014). “Mississippi Office of the State
     Auditor Series 1201: Confederate Pension Applications, 1889-1932.” http://mdah.state.
     ms.us/arrec/digital_archives/pensions/desc

   • FamilySearch (2014). “Mississippi, Confederate Veterans and Widows Pension Applications,
     1900-1974.” Images. Mississippi Department of Archives and History, Jackson. https:
     //familysearch.org/search/collection/1936413

Pension Expenditures

   • Biennial Report of the Treasurer of the State of Mississippi, accessed at hathitrust.org. Years
     available: 1880, 1881, 1886-1901, 1904-1911.


                                                39
North Carolina

Pension Legislation

   • FamilySearch (2014). “North Carolina, Confederate Soldiers and Widows Pension Appli-
     cations, 1885-1953.”   Images.   Citing State Auditor.    State Archives, Raleigh.   https:
     //familysearch.org/search/collection/1911763

Pension Expenditures

   • Biennial Report of the Treasurer of North Carolina, accessed at hathitrust.org. Years avail-
     able: 1879-1886, 1889-1896, 1899-1922.


South Carolina

Pension Legislation

   • South Carolina (1888). Acts and Joint Resolutions of the General Assembly of the State of
     South Carolina Passed at the Regular Session of 1887. Columbia: Charles A. Calvo, State
     Printer, pp 826-829 [Google Book].

   • South Carolina Department of Archives and History (2014). “Series Description: Confederate
     Pension Applications, 1919-1938.” http://www.archivesindex.sc.gov/onlinearchives/
     Terms/Series/SeriesDescriptions/s126088.html

Pension Expenditures

   • Report of the State Treasurer of South Carolina, accessed at hathitrust.org. Years available:
     1879, 1884-1900, 1902-1920, 1922.


Tennessee

Pension Application Records

   • Tennessee State Library and Archives (2014). “Tennessee Confederate Pension Applications:
     Soldiers & Widows.” http://www.tennessee.gov/tsla/history/military/pension.htm

Pension Legislation

   • Tennessee (1891). Acts of State of Tennessee Passed by the Forty-Seventh General Assembly.
     Nashville: Albert B. Tavel, Printer to the State, pp 150-152 [Google Book].

                                               40
   • Tennessee State Library Archives (2014) [cited above].

Pension Expenditures

   • State of Tennessee, Biennial Report of the Comptroller of the Treasury, accessed at hathitrust.org.
     Years available: 1875-1878, 1883, 1884, 1893-1896, 1900-1922.


Texas

Pension Application Records

   • Ancestry.com (2010). Alabama, Texas and Virginia, Confederate Pensions, 1884-1958 [database
     on-line]. Provo, UT, USA: Ancestry.com Operations, Inc. [Original data: Texas, Confederate
     Pension Applications, 1899-1975. Vol. 1-646 & 1-283. Austin, Texas: Texas State Library
     and Archives Commission.]

   • Texas State Library and Archives Commission (2014). “Confederate Pensions.” https:
     //www.tsl.texas.gov/apps/arc/pensions/

Pension Legislation

   • Ancestry.com (2010) [cited above].

Pension Expenditures

   • Annual Report of the Treasurer of the State of Texas to the Governor, accessed at hathitrust.org.
     Years available: 1902, 1904, 1906, 1908, 1910, 1912, 1914, 1916, 1918, 1920, 1922.


Virginia

Pension Application Records

   • Ancestry.com (2010). Alabama, Texas and Virginia, Confederate Pensions, 1884-1958 [database
     on-line]. Provo, UT, USA: Ancestry.com Operations, Inc. [Original data: Confederate Pen-
     sion Rolls, Veterans and Widows. Richmond, Virginia: Library of Virginia.]

Pension Legislation

   • Rodgers, Mark E. (1999). Tracing the Civil War Veteran Pension System in the State of
     Virginia: Entitlement or Privilege. Lewiston: Edwin Mellen Press.


                                                41
   • Library of Virginia (2014). “About the Confederate Pension Rolls, Veterans and Widows
     Database.” http://www.lva.virginia.gov/public/guides/opac/conpenabout.htm

   • Ancestry.com (2010) [cited above].

Pension Expenditures

   • Annual Report of the Treasurer of Virginia, accessed at hathitrust.org. Years available: 1875-
     1880, 1888-1895, 1899, 1900, 1902, 1904-1908, 1910-1917, 1919-1922.


County Characteristics: Constructed Variable Definitions

Percent engaged in agriculture. Acres employed in agriculture, divided by 640 to convert to square
miles, then divided by county area (1880, 1900, 1920, acres disaggregated by tenancy status in
1910); Number of families employed in agriculture divided by total number of families (1890).


Percent farm owner. Number of owned farms divided by total number of farms (1880, 1910, 1920,
farms disaggregated by race in 1900); Number of farm owning families divided by total number of
farm families (1890).


Farm output per acre. Value of farm output divided by acres employed in agriculture (1880, 1900);
Value of farm output divided by sum of improved and unimproved acres in agriculture (1890); Value
of crops divided by acres employed in agriculture (1910, acres disaggregated by tenancy stauts in
1920).


Farm Land Inequality. Follows Nunn (2008). Calculated at gini coefficient for farm size, using the
following formula:                                  Pn
                                                2       (n − i +
                                                     i=1P          1)ai
                                  1 + (1/n) −
                                                      n ni=1 ai

Here, n is the total number of farms, i is the farm’s rank (in ascending order), ai is farm size.
Because the data are reported as the number of farms that fall into discrete size “bins”, ai is
calculated as the median value within a given bin. The bins are: 0-2 acres, 3-9 acres, 10-19 acres,
20-49 acres, 50-99 acres, 100-499 acres, 500-999 acres, 1000 or more acres in 1880; 0-9 acres, 10-19
acres, 20-49 acres, 50-99 acres, 100-499 acres, 500-999 acres, 1000 or more acres in 1890; 0-2 acres,
3-9 acres, 10-19 acres, 20-49 acres, 50-99 acres, 100-174 acres, 175-259 acres, 260-499 acres, 500-999
acres, 1000 or more acres in 1900, 1910 and 1920.

                                                    42
Appendix Tables and Figures


           Table A1: Summary Statistics: Gubernatorial Election Returns, 1876-1930


                           Mean Demcratic   Mean Republican   Mean Other vote   % Counties < 50%   % States with
                             vote share       vote share          share            Democrat      Democratic governor

 By state:
  Virginia                     0.647             0.264            0.089              0.207              0.917
  Alabama                      0.766             0.134            0.100              0.098              1.000
  Arkansas                     0.677             0.242            0.081              0.093              1.000
  Florida                      0.701             0.267            0.032              0.079              0.923
  Georgia                      0.799             0.024            0.177              0.085              1.000
  Louisiana                    0.767             0.189            0.044              0.147              1.000
  Mississippi                  0.920             0.034            0.047              0.018              1.000
  North Carolina               0.553             0.411            0.035              0.339              0.929
  South Carolina               0.959             0.020            0.021              0.022              1.000
  Texas                        0.710             0.179            0.111              0.122              1.000
  Kentucky                     0.508             0.463            0.028              0.447              0.692
  Tennessee                    0.550             0.413            0.037              0.410              0.857
 By time period:
  1876-1889                    0.686             0.252            0.062              0.199              0.964
  1890-1899                    0.646             0.190            0.164              0.260              0.927
  1900-1909                    0.741             0.230            0.029              0.123              0.976
  1910-1919                    0.763             0.185            0.053              0.138              0.919
  1920-1930                    0.750             0.233            0.017              0.123              0.951




                                                43
                                                Table A2: Summary Statistics: Pension Application Indexes

             State            Number of applications by type                              Number of applications by decade
                      Total              Veteran           Widow      1880-89      1890-99            1900-09          1910-19   1920 and later


     Alabama         40,324              20,294            20,030      2,571        12,495            11,656            6,848       6,715
     Arkansas        27,012              12,889            13,696       348         2,147             11,521            8,441       4,457
     Florida         12,856                 -                 -          0          1,042              7,118             1,116      1,214




44
     Georgia         63,151              36,515            26,636      2,524        15,069            17,849            14,392      12,441
     Kentucky        4,675                2,411            2,264         0            0                  0              3,997        671
     Lousiana        18,477              9,366              9,111        -             -                 -                 -           -
     Tennessee       27,516              16,228            10,942        -             -                 -                 -           -
     Texas           58,642              29,441            29,201        3          6,188             12,227            17,761      14,893
     Virginia        47,229              28,513            18,716      3,579        2,106             23,724            7,907       9,913

     Total           299,882                -                  -         -            -                  -                   -         -
                      Table A3: Classification of Parties in Election Returns Data
                                              % elections on                                               % elections on
                  Party Name                      ballot                       Party Name                      ballot

          DEMOCRAT OR EQUIVALENT                                               POPULIST

                  DEMOCRAT                       99.2%                          SOCIALIST                     41.0%
           INDEPENDENT DEMOCRAT                   5.3%                         PROHIBITION                    37.4%
               GOLD DEMOCRAT                      1.3%                          POPULIST                      20.0%
              LOW TAX DEMOCRAT                    0.8%                        PROGRESSIVE                     13.5%
           STATE CREDIT DEMOCRAT                  0.8%                         GREENBACK                      11.1%
                  ANTI-SMITH                      0.6%                      SOCIALIST LABOR                   11.0%
            GREENBACK DEMOCRAT                    0.5%                          PEOPLE'S                      10.4%
              BOLTING DEMOCRAT                    0.3%                         COMMUNIST                       5.2%
                CONSERVATIVE                      0.3%                          AMERICAN                       1.6%
           ANTI-LOTTERY DEMOCRAT                  0.3%                     SOCIAL DEMOCRAT                     1.5%
           PEOPLE'S AND DEMOCRAT                  0.3%                   NATIONAL GREENBACK                    1.1%
          NATIONAL (GOLD) DEMOCRAT                0.2%            PROHIBITION AND FARMERS' ALLIANCE            1.1%
                                                                                POPULITE                       1.0%
          REPUBLICAN OR EQUIVALENT                                           FARMER-LABOR                      1.0%
                                                                                  LABOR                        0.9%
              MODERN REPUBLICAN                  88.8%                        UNION LABOR                      0.8%
          INDEPENDENT REPUBLICAN                  3.9%                        READJUSTER                       0.8%
             LILY-WHITE REPUBLICAN                1.3%                  AGRICULTURAL WHEELER                   0.6%
          BLACK AND TAN REPUBLICAN                1.1%               INDEPENDENT PROGRESSIVE                   0.6%
            REFORMING REPUBLICAN                  1.1%                           LIBERTY                       0.6%
        REPUBLICAN-GREENBACK-FUSION               1.1%                 INSURGENT REFERENDUM                    0.6%
               LIBERAL REPUBLICAN                 0.9%               COMMONWEALTH LAND PARTY                   0.5%
         GREENBACK AND REPUBLICAN                 0.8%                        TEMPERANCE                       0.5%
             LILY BLACK REPUBLICAN                0.7%           RKERS (COMMUNIST) PARTY OF AMERICA            0.5%
            HAMBRIGHT REPUBLICAN                  0.6%                PROGRESSIVE REPUBLICAN                   0.4%
              TOLBERT REPUBLICAN                  0.6%                      NATIONAL PARTY                     0.3%
                 TAFT REPUBLICAN                  0.5%                  FLORIDA PEOPLE'S PARTY                 0.3%
           PEOPLES AND REPUBLICAN                 0.3%                   LA FOLLETTE WHEELER                   0.3%
            REPUBLICAN GREENBACK                  0.3%                   NATIONAL PROHIBITION                  0.3%
              COLORED REPUBLICAN                  0.3%
               REPUBLICAN FUSION                  0.3%                           OTHER
         REPUBLICAN POPULIST FUSION               0.3%
                WHITE REPUBLICAN                  0.3%                        SCATTERING                      30.3%
                                                                             INDEPENDENT                       9.0%
                 UNIDENTIFIED                                            NEGRO INDEPENDENT                     2.2%
                                                                            ELECTOR LIGON                      0.7%
                 UNIDENTIFIED                    27.9%                     ELECTOR ROGERS                      0.7%
                   NO NAME                        7.6%                     NATIONS PICKETT                     0.6%
                                                                             STATE RIGHTS                      0.5%
                                                                      INDEPENDENT CONSERVATIVE                 0.4%


Note: Percent of elections is calculated by dividing the number of times each party appears in the election returns
data by the number of unique elections in our data.




                                                         45
                                             Figure A1: Confederate Pensions by State: Spending and Applications
                                                         Alabama                                                                                                                                                     Arkansas




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .25
                                                                                                    .25




                                                                                                                                                                              40
                           60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                 Hundreds of applications
 Hundreds of applications




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Percent of state budget
                                                                                                      Percent of state budget




                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                  40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .15
                                                                                                                    .15




                                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                                                                            .1
    20




                                                                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .05
                                                                                                    .05




                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                           0




                                                                                                    0
                                  1880      1890       1900           1910        1920       1930                                                                                           1880      1890          1900          1910      1920         1930
                                                               year                                                                                                                                                        year

                                          Number of pension                   % of state spending                                                                                                  Number of pension                     % of state spending
                                          applications filed                  on pensions                                                                                                          applications filed                    on pensions

                                                                                                                                 ®                                                                                                                                                                                 ®




                                                            Florida                                                                                                                                                   Georgia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .25
                                                                                                                                                                              50
                           25




                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                       20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                                                 Hundreds of applications
 Hundreds of applications




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Percent of state budget
                                                                                                    Percent of state budget
                                                                                                     .1 .15 .2 .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .15
                                                                                                                                                                               30
               15




                                                                                                                                                                       20
       10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .05     .1
                                                                                                                                                                 10
 5




                                                                                                    .05




                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                           0




                                                                                                    0




                                  1880      1890       1900           1910        1920       1930                                                                                           1880      1890          1900          1910      1920         1930
                                                               year                                                                                                                                                        year

                                          Number of pension                   % of state spending                                                                                                  Number of pension                     % of state spending
                                          applications filed                  on pensions                                                                                                          applications filed                    on pensions

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ®
                                                                                                                                 ®




                                                       Louisiana                                                                                                                                             Mississippi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .25
                                                                                                    .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                      Hundreds of applications
Hundreds of applications




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Percent of state budget
                                                                                                      Percent of state budget




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .15
                                                                                                                    .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .1
                                                                                                            .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .05
                                                                                                    .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                    0




                                1880      1890       1900            1910        1920        1930                                                                                  1880        1890          1900          1910          1920      1930
                                                              year                                                                                                                                                  year

                                         Number of pension                   % of state spending                                                                                              Number of pension                    % of state spending
                                         applications filed                  on pensions                                                                                                      applications filed                   on pensions

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ®
                                                                                                                                 ®




                                                                                                                                     46
                                             Figure A2: Confederate Pensions by State: Spending and Applications
                                                    North Carolina                                                                                                                                   South Carolina




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .25
                                                                                                     .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                 Hundreds of applications
Hundreds of applications




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Percent of state budget
                                                                                                       Percent of state budget




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .15
                                                                                                                     .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                                                                     .05     .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .05
                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                1880      1890       1900            1910        1920        1930                                                                                1880      1890       1900            1910        1920        1930
                                                              year                                                                                                                                             year

                                         Number of pension                   % of state spending                                                                                          Number of pension                   % of state spending
                                         applications filed                  on pensions                                                                                                  applications filed                  on pensions

                                                                                                                                    ®                                                                                                                                                  ®




                                                      Tennessee                                                                                                                                                Texas
                                                                                                       .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .25
                                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                           40
Hundreds of applications




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .2
                                                                                                                                                     Hundreds of applications
                                                                                                         Percent of state budget




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Percent of state budget
                                                                                                                       .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .15
                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .1
                                                                                                       .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .05
                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                1880      1890       1900            1910        1920        1930                                                                                  1880       1890      1900           1910        1920       1930
                                                              year                                                                                                                                              year

                                         Number of pension                   % of state spending                                                                                           Number of pension                   % of state spending
                                         applications filed                  on pensions                                                                                                   applications filed                  on pensions

                                                                                                                                        ®                                                                                                                                          ®




                                                          Virginia
                                                                                                    .25
                           80




                                                                                                                            .2
Hundreds of applications




                                                                                                      Percent of state budget
                    60




                                                                                                                    .15
          40




                                                                                                            .1
 20




                                                                                                    .05
                           0




                                                                                                    0




                                  1880      1890       1900           1910        1920       1930
                                                               year

                                          Number of pension                   % of state spending
                                          applications filed                  on pensions

                                                                                                                                    ®




                                                                                                                                            47
