                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PRISON CROWDING, RECIDIVISM, AND EARLY RELEASE IN EARLY RHODE
                                ISLAND

                                          Howard Bodenhorn

                                         Working Paper 20837
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20837


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




I thank the economics department at Brown University for hosting me while I collected much of the
data used here. Sherry Jensen provided excellent research assistance. I thank Tomas Cvrcek, Carl Kitchens,
Carolyn Moehling, Tom Mroz, Paul Wilson and seminar participants at Florida State University for
comments on an earlier version. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Howard Bodenhorn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Prison Crowding, Recidivism, and Early Release in Early Rhode Island
Howard Bodenhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 20837
January 2015
JEL No. K14,N00

                                              ABSTRACT

Prison overcrowding is a perennial problem and several states are under court order to reduce crowding.
The long-term solution to crowding has been more prisons. The short-term solution is early release.
Early release programs can be effective when they balance the savings of reduced prison costs against
the costs of recidivism by released convicts. This paper uses historical data to investigate how prison
officials altered their early release policies in the face of prison crowding and rising real per prisoner
detention costs. The empirical evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that prison officials make
use of information about the risks of recidivism revealed at trial and during incarceration to make informed
decisions about whom to release and when.


Howard Bodenhorn
John E. Walker Department of Economics
College of Business and Behavioral Science
201-B Sirrine Hall
Clemson University
Clemson, SC 29634
and NBER
bodenhorn@gmail.com
1. Introduction

       In its 2011 Plata v. Brown decision the Supreme Court of the United States upheld a

lower court’s decision that overcrowded prisons violated prisoners’ Eighth Amendment rights

against cruel and unusual punishments. Overcrowded conditions reduced the state’s ability to

provide adequate medical and mental health care for its prisoners, which by the court’s findings

resulted in about one extra death per week in the system. The order required California to reduce

its prison population from about 150,000 to 110,000, which still implies that the state’s system

would be operating at 137.5% of overall design capacity (Moore 2009).

       Prison crowding is not a new problem and California is not alone (Giertz and Nardulli

1985). In 1992, 37 states and the District of Columbia were under court orders to reduce prison

crowding. And the problem persists: in June 2014, Alabama’s governor formed a task force to

study how best to deal with its 25,000 prisoners housed in prisons designed for 13,000 inmates

(Lloyd 2014). In 2008 Rhode Island was one of the few states with excess prison capacity.

Overall its system operated at 90 percent of federally allowable capacity, but even two of its

facilities exceeded 100 percent (American Legislative Exchange Council 2014).

       The long-term solution to prison crowding has been more prisons. The short term

solution is early release. In 1981, for example, Georgia freed up 900 prison beds when the parole

board, under order from the governor to make space, freed 901 non-violent offenders with the

earliest prospective release dates (Kuziemko 2007). Georgia’s solution to crowding resolved the

immediate problem of over-capacity, but it mitigated the incapacitation effect and may have

increased the social costs of crime by releasing potential recidivists at an earlier than optimal

date. The social costs of early release can be reduced through selective or so-called “good-time”


                                               1
release, under which prisoners who behave and participate in rehabilitative, vocational or

academic programs earn points toward early release. Modern early-release systems are based on

the presumption that prison officials might have access to information concerning a prisoner’s

recidivism risk that is revealed only after sentencing (Abadinsky 2003). If, by the officials’

determination, a prisoner presents a lower recidivism risk than implied by the original sentence,

they can reduce the effective sentence and free up prison capacity at a relatively low cost.

         Miceli (1994), Garoupa (1996), Kuziemko (2007), Scoones (2008) and Bernhardt,

Mongrain and Roberts (2010) develop models of early release of increasing complexity, but the

basic result remains: early release increases social welfare when, at the margin, a good-time

policy equates the reduced costs of maintaining order in prison against the implicit increase in

the cost of recidivism-based crime.1 Using the Georgia quasi-experimental release and a later

change that eliminated parole for inmates convicted of certain crimes, Kuziemko (2007) finds

that parole boards employ early release as if they gather and act on information useful in

predicting post-release recidivism. The elimination of parole for select crimes also led to more

disciplinary infractions, lower completion rates in GED courses, and a higher recidivism rate.

Yet even an effective parole system can operate sub-optimally if crowding pressures force it to

accelerate the process and release prisoners earlier than is optimal given their recidivism risk. It

is not hard to accept, for example, that Texas’ policy of 90 days good-time credit for every 30

days served without incident is less an efficient than a pragmatic response to prison

overcrowding (Abadinsky 2003, 178).


         1
           See, also, Polinsky (2012) who develops a model of rewards for good behavior, including parole, on
deterrence. He shows that privileges are generally inferior to early release, but notes that the reverse might be true if
the principal purpose of incarceration is incapacitation.



                                                            2
       This paper uses historical data from the Rhode Island state prison (1849-1907) to

investigate how prison officials altered their good-time policies in response to overcrowding and

rising costs of housing prisoners. Despite expanding its prison capacity twice in the second half

of the nineteenth century, Rhode Island prisons were seriously overcrowded by the 1890s and the

real cost of housing prisoners doubled between 1850 and 1900.             Authorities were under

increasing pressure to alleviate crowding and the burden on the state’s taxpayers, so it is not

surprising that the use of good-time early release programs increased. The issue is whether

prison authorities responded in a manner consistent with economic models of early release; that

is, whether the authorities balanced the cost of an additional day of incarceration with the

incremental increase in crime due to expected recidivism. Using information on post-release

recidivism, the data provide insights into whether good-time deductions were consistent with the

likelihood of recidivism based on actual post-release recidivism or with observable

characteristics of the criminal and his crime associated with future recidivism at sentencing and

during incarceration.

       Using a Heckman (1979) sample selection approach, which models the early release

decision as a two-step process, the empirical results are consistent with the idea that Rhode

Island’s prison officials responded in a predictable and systematic fashion to changing

conditions. Prison crowding and higher incarceration costs are associated with greater

probabilities of prisoners being selected into the early release program. This holds for violent and

nonviolent criminals, though the effect is stronger for prisoners serving time for property crimes.

One feature of the data is that the historian/econometrician observes one measure of post-release

recidivism in retrospect that prison officials did not observe in prospect; that is, we observe

whether an ex-convict returned for a second term at the state prison. These future recidivists did


                                                 3
not differentially select into early release, but they received significantly fewer days off through

Rhode Island’s early release program conditional on selecting in. When we put ourselves in the

position of contemporary prison officials and include those characteristics of the criminal that

predict future recidivism – prisoner’s age, length of original sentence and nativity – into the

second-stage of the Heckman model, the results are consistent with the conclusion that prison

officials exercised their early release prerogative in a fashion consistent with concerns for

minimizing the social costs of incarceration, including recidivism risk.

        The modern reader might, quite legitimately, wonder what is to be gained by studying the

nineteenth-century prison. One response is that the power to deny a criminal his or her liberty is,

next to the state’s power to impose capital punishments, “the most formidable” power the state

has over the individual (Garman 2005, p.7). It was in the mid-nineteenth century that Americans

were convinced by reformers that the use of that formidable power could be prudentially

exercised in the pursuit of a well functioning, more orderly society.         And it is useful to

understand whether prison officials exercised their power judiciously. A second response is that

it was during the nineteenth century that the prison evolved from the Jacksonian-era experiment

in the power of the state to reform the criminal to a place to warehouse society’s criminal flotsam

at the least possible cost to the taxpayers. Once the concern with prison costs and taxpayer

contributions toward housing prisoners became paramount, contemporary penal philosophies

were mostly abandoned in the search for pragmatic solutions to increased criminality, increased

prison costs, and limited prison capacity. Early release, which had once fallen from favor, came

back into use in Rhode Island and elsewhere in the second half of the nineteenth century

(Friedman 1993). The available evidence from Rhode Island points to rational practice on the

part of the state’s prison officials.


                                                 4
2. Nineteenth-century penology

       When Rhode Island opened it prison in 1838, it could choose between either of two

contemporary approaches to penology: New York’s Auburn or Pennsylvania’s Eastern State

model. Each was centered on housing prisoners in massive, intimidating structures, but each

offered a distinct vision of prison life. The Auburn system, sometimes referred to as the

“congregate system,” was originally based on the Upstate Calvinist belief in the “depravity of

man” and divided convicts into three groups: hardened offenders; serious felons; and less

dangerous thieves (Lewis 1965, p. 57). Hardened offenders were committed to solitary

confinement in a cell measuring 7 feet by 3½ feet by 7 feet high in which they were forced to

stand continuously during daylight hours. Unremitting solitary confinement in tight quarters was

designed to replace physical with psychological punishment. And it apparently worked, perhaps

too well. Suicide attempts and insanity occurred regularly enough that the punitive,

claustrophobic experiment was abandoned in 1825, nine years after the prison’s opening. After

that, hardened criminals joined ordinary felons and the less dangerous men, who slept in solitary

confinement cells at night, but worked together during the day in complete silence. The

combination of hard labor and silence were the defining features of the Auburn system and,

according to Lewis (1965, 81), silence was enforced much more effectively than many

contemporary skeptics believed possible.

       The Eastern State Penitentiary in Philadelphia offered an alternative approach. Steeped in

the Quaker tradition of the inherent goodness and “inner light” of man, time served at Eastern

State was designed less to punish than to provide an extended period for the prisoner to reflect on

one’s life and actions and offer an opportunity to initiate change. Prisoners spent nearly all their


                                                 5
days in complete isolation in a private cell constructed of thick stone walls with running water

and a toilet; a skylight and a private outdoor exercise yard surrounded by a 10 foot-high wall

offered limited access to the outdoors. Inmates were to spend their days engaged in productive

labor, shoemaking and weaving being common, and serve their sentence in nearly complete

silence. Guards passed meals through a slot in the door without speaking. If a prisoner needed to

be removed from his cell, he was hooded beforehand so he could not construct a mental map of

his surroundings. The only regular, permissible conversation a prisoner might engage in was

with the prison chaplain.

       The Eastern State experiment attracted visitors who debated the merits of long-term

solitary confinement. Gustave de Beaumont and Alexis de Touqueville (1833, p. 22) visited the

prison in 1831 and left believing in its efficacy. “Placed alone, in view of his crime,” they wrote,

“[the criminal] learns to hate [the crime] ... remorse will come to assail him.” They were

convinced that the consequence of enforced silence and solitude would lead from “reflection to

remorse.” Charles Dickens (1874, p. 115), who toured in the prison in 1843, disagreed. He

considered the silence and solitude inhumane: “I hold this slow and daily tampering with the

mysteries of the brain,” he wrote, “to be immeasurably worse than any torture of the body.”

Despite its critics, of which Dickens was one among many, the Eastern State maintained the

silence and solitude model until 1913.

       In the early days of the penitentiary, whether built on the congregate or solitary model,

rehabilitation, reintegration and deterrence were the driving concerns. In 1834, for instance, a

Rhode Island legislative committee considering the advisability of constructing a state prison

reported that “no government can be presumed to be actuated by that spirit of revenge ... the

penalties ... have as their object the prevention of crime by reforming the delinquent and by


                                                 6
detaining others from like course” (quoted in Garman 2005, p. 6). In one of their early annual

reports to the legislature, the prison inspectors noted the success of former prisoners in

“becoming reputable members of society” which provided evidence of the prison’s efficacy

(Rhode Island Board of Inspectors 1857, p. 6). But little was written about reformation after that.

In 1867, the prison chaplain concluded that, despite his best efforts, “many prisoners after their

release from prison ... return[ed] to their former associates and old modes of life” (Rhode Island

Board of Inspectors 1868, p. 35). The chaplain’s assessment matched that of the warden of New

York’s Auburn prison, who fully expected about 60 percent of discharged prisoners to resume

their criminal career, 30 percent were likely to do the same. Of the remaining 10 percent, “he

could not form a confident opinion” (Friedman 1993, p. 159). Such sentiments were hardly an

endorsement of the prison’s ability to reform or rehabilitate and they point to the difficulties of

determining how and how well a prison might alter a prisoner’s post-incarceration choices.

       It was not long after their establishment that contemporaries lost faith in prisons as a

reformative institution. Thomas Larcombe, the Eastern State’s chaplain wrote that prisoners

presented “a cheerless aspect” of ignorance, profligacy, licentiousness and depravity (quoted in

Janofsky 2012, p. 116). As it became increasingly evident that a term in the penitentiary was

unlikely to elicit reform, deterrence and incapacitation became the central objectives. Prisons and

prison discipline reflected this new approach. Prison structures themselves were to be so

monstrous and uninviting as to invoke terror and provide a warning to those contemplating a

criminal act. While reformation may have been a concern, it had to be secondary because the

moment it became ascendent, “then the period will arrive when insurrection, incendiarism,

robbery and the evils most fatal to society and detrimental to law and order, will reign supreme

(New York Senate 1848, quoted in Lewis 1965, 249-50).


                                                7
         Whether it adopted the congregate (Auburn) or solitary (Pennsylvania) system, nearly

every state’s prison grew increasingly crowded and often exceeded design capacity. Rhode

Island adopted the solitary system in 1838, but crowding forced its abandonment it in favor of

the congregate model by 1844.2 In 1850 as many as three prisoners sometimes shared a cell,

which was “injurious to their health” and mitigated “all efforts for improvement in morals,” so a

planned expansion was imperative if the prison was to function effectively (Prison Discipline

Society 1850, p.28). The expansion was completed by 1855 and the number of cells increased

from 40 to 88, but the original prison cells were considered so inferior to the new that it appears

that prisoners were mostly housed in the 48 new cells.3 Figure 1 traces prison capacity and

population between 1849 and 1910. Population slightly exceeded capacity in the early 1850s, fell

below capacity with the addition of 48 cells in 1855, but consistently exceeded capacity after the

early 1860s, when prisoners were no longer housed in the original, pre-1855 cells. The opening

of the new prison in November 1876 relieved overcrowding only until the 1890s, after which

time the number of prisoners approached 150 percent of design capacity. Prison overcrowding

undermined the “solitary-confinement- at-night-enforced-silence-around- the-clock” penology

model because the least troublesome, least hardened prisoners shared cells at night.

         A second feature shared by nineteenth-century prisons was that prisoners were expected

to work. To contemporaries, prison labor served three purposes: it developed habits of routine


         2
           Garman (2005, p.1) writes that the Rhode Island prison was a Pennsylvania-style solitary confinement
prison in 1867, but that is inconsistent with contemporary and other accounts. Inmates labored together in
workshops by day.
         3
           In his 1866 report, the prison chaplain explained that in winter frost formed on the inside of the cell walls
of the old prison and he considered forcing prisoners to live in them “barbarous treatment” (Rhode Island Board of
Inspectors 1867, p. 40).



                                                           8
and steady work, which most criminals lacked; it provided instruction in a useful trade, which

most criminal lacked; and it was supposed to make former prisoners self-supporting, an attribute

that most criminals lacked. Finally, the prisons themselves were expected to be partly if not

wholly self-supporting and, therefore, independent of taxpayer support (Garman 2005, p. 121).

Rhode Island’s prison authorities contracted with outside firms for the employment of its

prisoners. In the mid-1850s, the majority of the inmates worked at cabinetmaking; the others

worked in a machine shop (Rhode Island Board of Inspectors 1857, p.4). In the mid-1880s, Rice

& Hucthins, a Boston shoemaking firm, contracted for the employment of 100 men at 40¢ per

prisoner work day; George Campbell contracted for 12 men in a wire-making shop for 50¢ per

prisoner day; the remaining men worked in the cabinetmaking shop, the coal dump or the prison

garden (Rhode Island Board of Charities 1884). The use of contract labor and market gardening

defrayed the costs of housing prisoners, but not every prisoner was employable and it is unlikely

that more than a few worked a full year.

       Figure 2 reveals four noteworthy features of the costs of running Rhode Island’s

nineteenth-century prison. First, housing prisoners was expensive. Gross annual per prisoner

expenditures in 1856 of $78.02 is approximately $14,800 in constant 2013 dollars. The $118.60

per prisoner cost in 1880 is $18,200 and the 1910 cost of $251.72 is about $26,000 in 2013

dollars.4 These values are in line with modern costs of incarceration, which average about

$14,000 across states and range upwards of $23,500 in California and $27,000 in federal prisons

(Abadinsky 2003, p. 18). Second, until about 1900, prison labor reduced the effective taxpayer

contribution to the cost of housing prisoners by about one-half to two-thirds of the gross costs. In


       4
           Conversions made using the online calculator available at Williamson (2014).



                                                        9
1900, for example, the gross annual per prisoner cost was $133; the net cost was $64. Third, the

state prison sometimes ran small per prisoner surpluses (revenues exceeded expenditures): 40¢ in

1861; $18 in 1862; $2 in 1874; and between $3 and $9 in the late 1870s and early 1880s. Fourth,

after the mid-1880s the cost of housing prisoners escalated rapidly. Prison labor still offset the

rising costs, but prisoners were no longer able to pay their own way. After 1883, annual per

prisoner net costs rarely fell below $30 ($4900 in 2013) and approached $150 by 1910 ($15,700

in 2013).

        As early as 1867, the state’s prison inspectors warned the legislature that “the people of

the State must not expect to be relieved of the necessary expense of supporting their

penitentiaries exclusively by the labor of convicts” (Rhode Island Board of Inspectors 1867, p.

8). Wardens were effective in controlling costs for another two decades after the inspector’s

warning, but less so after that due, in part, to the severe overcrowding problem that developed

after 1900. Table 1 shows that, measured in constant 1860 dollars, gross expenditures on salaries

doubled, driven more by increases in salaries than to increases in the number of prison guards.

The warden’s salary increased from $1,050 in 1856 to $2,500 in 1900 in current dollars, or by

2.4 times in constant dollars. The deputy warden, in 1900, earned three times the deputy

warden’s constant dollar 1856 salary. Electrification of the prison also led to the addition of an

electrician at $60 per month. The number of overseer’s (guards) increased from four to five,

despite the prison population increasing from 63 to 195 convicts; and, there was a modest

increase in the number of watchmen.5 The amount spent on fuel and lighting per prisoner tripled;


        5
           In 1856 the prison report provides separate employment records for the state prison and the Providence
county jail. The 1900 report provides a combined report. In 1856 the prison reported four overseers and three
watchmen, all of whom were employed for the entire year. In 1900 the prison and jail combined reported four
overseers who worked for the entire year and two who, combined, worked for one year (6 months, 9 days plus 5


                                                        10
bedding and clothing costs doubled; and repairs and maintenance expenses increased fivefold.

The real cost of feeding prisoners remained relatively constant. Prisoners were fed a relatively

boring but high-protein diet, augmented by seasonal vegetables grown in the prison garden

(Rhode Island Board of Inspectors 1868, p. 24). Costs rose in most categories, but increases in

salaries and wages account for about one-half of the overall increase in the cost of housing

prisoners.

         Nineteenth-century prison officials dealt with short-term crowding problems and long-

term rising costs in the same way modern prison authorities do; they released prisoners early.

The basis for early release dated to the earliest days of the penitentiary, when reformers believed

in the institutions’ reformative mission. Caleb Lownes, a Philadelphia penal reformer, advocated

for an early-release policy when the prisoners’ disposition led the “inspectors to believe that they

might be restored to their liberty” (quoted in Teeters 1955, p. 42). Both prisoners and prison

officials quickly learned the value of early release programs. Prison officials faced a challenge:

how were a handful of lightly armed guards expected to maintain control over, much less enforce

silence and elicit diligent labor from, several dozen dangerous men confined in a space no larger

than a city block? The answer, as Caleb Lownes, recognized was to appeal to the prisoners’

rationality. Bad behavior earned a flogging and true solitary time in a dark, dungeon cell; good

behavior earned early release credits. In one annual report, the Rhode Island Board of Prison

Inspectors (1861, p. 6) took obvious pride in reporting that no corporal punishment had been

meted out during the preceding year and that only a few prisoners’ bad behavior had been


months, 15 days). In 1900 the prison and jail combined reported 14 watchmen; two reported all-year employment;
one worked for one day; the remaining 11 men were employed between two and seven months. I assume the “day
officers” reported in the combined prison-jail report worked at the jail, as did the second deputy warden. See Rhode
Island Board of Inspectors (1856, p. 119) and Rhode Island Board of State Charities (1900, pp. 70-71).



                                                         11
punished by 36 hours in solitary confinement. By 1896, floggings were prohibited and other

corporal punishments (mostly reduced rations or solitary confinement in the dungeon cells) could

be imposed only if authorized by at least two members of the prison oversight board (Rhode

Island General Assembly 1896, p. 1048). Absent the authority to mete out harsh and immediate

punishments, early release was the carrot that replaced previously relied on sticks. Prisoners

appear to have responded favorably to the incentive. Of the 77 prisoners in detention on 31

December 1873, 47 had clean disciplinary records for the year; and, of the 67 prisoners on 31

December 1874, the warden reported no disciplinary sanction against 46 of them (Rhode Island

Board of Prison Inspectors 1874, p. 10; 1875, p. 11).

       Because the prison was new at mid-century Rhode Island had no formal early-release

program in place so prisoners seeking early release petitioned the governor for pardons, often

with the encouragement of prison officials. Under Rhode Island’s constitution the governor, with

the advice and consent of the state senate, was given the exclusive pardoning power (Rhode

Island 1896, p. 35). Although Rhode Island’s governors did not pardon at the rate of governors

elsewhere, they were not reluctant to exercise their power. Between 1854 and 1907 governors

pardoned 142 prisoners. The average sentence of those receiving pardons was 126.4 months and

they were released, on average, 2,440.3 days early. Men convicted of serious crimes – murder,

manslaughter, rape, and robbery, in particular – were more likely to receive a pardon than men

convicted of property crimes, as were men who received longer than average sentences for a

given crime (see Appendix Table A1). John O’Brien, a 26 year-old, native-born Rhode Islander,




                                               12
convicted of murder in February 1863, received the most generous pardon having served only 39

months of a prospective 40-year (life) sentence.6

         Not every prisoner considered eligible for early release was deserving of a pardon, which

restored the convicted criminal’s civil rights and expunged his or her criminal record. When the

legislature was convinced that an individual deserved a reduction in his or her sentence, but no

pardon was forthcoming, it was free to exercise its right to grant clemency. In January 1850, for

example, the legislature directed the prison warden to release Thaddeus Manchester, a 20 year-

old convicted of burglary, because his family had secured him a place on a whaling vessel

(Rhode Island 1850, p.64). In another case that came before the January 1850 term, the

legislature instructed the warden to release Aaron Batcheller, a 55 year-old convicted of murder

who had served less than seven years of a prospective life (18 year) sentence. But in granting

clemency the legislature directed any judge who became aware of a threat uttered by or any

alleged violence perpetrated by Batcheller to immediately have the felon recommitted to the

prison for the remainder of his life sentence. Before parole emerged, this was about all that could

be done toward monitoring post-release behavior and punishing post-release misconduct.7

         As the state prison and county jail population grew, the legislature searched for an

alternative to the growing number of requests for clemency from inmates. In its 1867 annual

report, Rhode Island’s prison inspectors (1868, p.8) recommended the adoption of a good-time

         6
           The prospective sentence (in months) for murderers serving life sentences was calculated using life tables
for nineteenth-century white men. Life expectancy for men in their mid-twenties was 40 years.
         7
            In their 1872 (p. 10) report, Rhode Island’s Board of Inspectors recommended the adoption of a parole-
like program to complement the early-release program. Rather than release a prisoner unconditionally, it would be
better to place the ex-convict under the surveillance of the police, who could return him to prison for serious
misconduct. My reading of Rhode Island statute law suggests that the legislature did not enact a parole-like program
up to 1907.



                                                         13
release program. “Prisoners are,” they wrote, “like the rest of mankind, open to such

inducements to good conduct.” They called their proposal an appeal to “higher rather than the

lower motives” of punishment. A short time later a statute was enacted under which the majority

of the board of prison inspectors could, with the consent of the governor, deduct as many days

per month as there were years in a prisoner’s sentence, “provided, that when the sentence is for a

longer term than five years, only five days shall be deducted for one month’s good behavior”

(Rhode Island General Assembly 1872, p. 586). A prisoner sentenced to one year, for example,

was eligible for up to 12 days of good-time release; a prisoner sentence to two years was eligible

for 48 days (= 2 days per month of sentence times 24 months).8

         The prison inspectors made extensive use of the program. Of 1,100 prisoners sentenced

to less than five years and not released by pardon, the average prescribed term was 19.0 months;

the average number of days deducted was 28.4, or 1.5 days per month of sentence. Of 142

prisoners sentenced to more than 60 months and released under this program after 1871, the

average sentence was 74.1 months and the average number of days deducted was 296.1 days, or

an average of 4.0 days deducted per month.9

         In discussing prison practice, the Board of Inspectors (1873, pp. 8-9) noted that the early-

release program might be interpreted as subverting the intention of judges and juries. But they

were keenly aware that, in some instances, punishment might be “carried too far.” Because


         8
           Maximum good-time release was limited to 12 days for a 1 year sentence; 48 days for a 2-year sentence;
108 days for 3 years; 192 days for 4 years; 300 days for 5 years. For sentences exceeding five years, potential good-
time release says increased at a constant 60 days per additional year of sentence. Thus a prisoner sentenced to 6-year
sentence was eligible for 360 days; 420 days for 7 years; 480 days for 8 years, and so on.
         9
           Another 41 prisoners were released by pardon after 1871. Their mean sentence was 113.3 months and the
pardon provided them with an average of 2041 days off, or a deduction of 18 days for every month of the original
sentence. Given the difference in time off between pardons and good-conduct time, regression analyses sometimes
excludes prisoners released by pardon.



                                                         14
criminals were individuals, the appropriate punishment for some was shorter than for others. The

question of whether to release early involved the prisoner’s character, deportment, disposition,

and the “sincerity of his professions of penitence.” To keep a prisoner too long could be as bad

for the prisoner as it was to keep him too short a time. The question of how long to incarcerate a

prisoner, the Board of Inspectors (1873, p.9) concluded, “is [as] important to society… as to the

convict.” It was and it is.



3. The economics of early release

        When an individual is convicted of a crime, the social costs of his crime, pretrial

detention, and trial are sunk, but he may impose future costs on society. 10 Assuming that the

crime warrants a jail term, food, clothing, shelter and supervision are provided by the state

during his period of incarceration. Moreover, if he engages in further criminal activity after

release, he imposes additional (recidivism) costs on society.

        Figure 3 provides a simple model for thinking about the adoption and expansion of

Rhode Island’s early-release program. At the beginning of each day, a social planner whose

principal concern is minimizing the social cost of crime, including recidivism, chooses whether

to keep a prisoner through that day. The planner compares the incremental cost of that day’s

incarceration, which defines the marginal cost curve in the figure, to the incremental reduction in

the social cost of crime due to incarcerating him for the additional day, which defines the

marginal benefit curve. The planner releases the inmate on day t*, when the marginal social cost



        10
           My discussion here follows Kuziemko (2007), but is consistent with approaches discussed in Miceli
(1991), Garoupa (1996), Scoones (2008) and Berhardt, Mongrain and Roberts (2010).



                                                       15
of an additional day’s incarceration equals the marginal social benefit of the expected reduction

in recidivism (see Appendix A for an algebraic approach).

       The analysis in Figure 3 relies on several assumptions. First, the marginal social cost of

incarceration is upward sloping when the prison faces capacity constraints. Although many of the

daily per-inmate costs of housing prisoners – food and clothing – are approximately constant, a

capacity constraint implies that each additional day of time served for already-incarcerated

prisoners reduces the space available for incoming prisoners. Crowding-related costs include the

increased supervision required to maintain order in more crowded prisons, the potentially

detrimental effects on prisoner health due to prison crowding, and modifications in the prison

officials’ preferred approach to penology.

       Second, it is assumed that the marginal social benefit of incarceration declines in the

number of days served. The marginal benefit curve is, conceptually, made up of two parts.

Incarceration prevents whatever crimes the prisoner may have committed were he not in prison,

which are labelled the incapacitation effect. The incapacitation effect is the product of the

prisoner’s probability of recidivating and his initial recidivism risk, as determined by the

sentencing court. The marginal social incapacitation benefit follows from the fact that an

additional day in jail is an additional day that the prisoner is not committing crime (outside the

prison). If the probability of committing crime falls with days spent in prison, the incapacitation

component of the marginal social benefit curve also falls with days spent in prison.

        The marginal social benefit curve is also influenced by what Kuziemko (2007, p.35)

labels the rehabilitation benefit. The rehabilitation benefit equals the change in the prisoner’s

recidivism risk due to time served multiplied by the prisoner’s remaining criminal career, which

is shortened by each additional day in prison. Because crime is mostly an enterprise of youth,


                                                16
time spent in prison effectively shortens the prisoner’s effective criminal career. If the effect is

diminishing in time, this, too, will lead to a downward sloping marginal social benefit curve. It is

also presumed that additional time in prison reduces the prisoner’s recidivism risk at a declining

rate, though prison officials then and now were concerned that young convicts might develop

criminal human capital in prison as they learn from more experienced criminals.11 Nineteenth-

century penology’s insistence on silence was an effort to combat this problem. To the extent they

were correct and silence was reasonably well enforced, additional days in prison imply a

decrease in criminal human capital if it deteriorated with inactivity.

        A third assumption implicit in Figure 3 is that the sentencing court observes the convicted

criminal and imposes an initial sentence, which reflects the court’s assessment of the criminal’s

recidivism risk and the cost of housing the prisoner, as well as any explicit statutory and implicit

sentencing norms. If the court behaves as if it were the cost-minimizing social planner and it

faces the marginal benefit curve mb0 and the marginal cost curve mc0, the optimal sentence,

given the information available to the sentencing court at the time the sentence is imposed is t0*.

        Early release programs are justified on the belief that prison officials (parole boards in the

modern context) observe the prisoner’s post-conviction behavior and can update the sentencing

court’s assessment of the danger the convict presents to society. If the prison officials’ update is

such that they revise the recidivism risk downward, this new information shifts the marginal

benefit curve to the left to, say, mb1. The rational response to the officials’ new information is to

reduce the prisoner’s sentence to t1*. In nineteenth-century Rhode Island, the law created an

asymmetric response in that, absent escape and recapture or assaulting a prison official, a


        11
            Lochner (2004) and Mocan, Billups and Overland (2005) develop dynamic models of criminal human
capital formation.


                                                     17
prisoner’s sentence could not be extended (that is, there was no indeterminate sentencing in the

period considered here). When new information about a prisoner suggested a shorter optimal

sentence, prison officials could reduce the number of days served within the limits imposed by

the statutory law. If the new information suggested a substantially shorter sentence, the prisoner

could apply for executive pardon or legislative clemency. But when new information points to a

longer optimal sentence, prison officials were bound by the sentencing court’s determination and

could not lengthen the prisoner’s term.

       Figure 4 presents a second scenario, one also consistent with the evidence on nineteenth-

century prison practice. Again, assume that the sentencing court observes the convicted criminal

and the costs of housing prisoners and assigns the optimal sentence t0* at sentencing. After the

convict is committed to prison, the marginal cost of housing the prisoner increases, such that the

marginal cost curve shifts left to mc1. A cost-minimizing social planner will respond by reducing

each prisoner’s sentence from t0* to t2*. In this case, no new information is revealed concerning

the prisoner’s recidivism risk; rather the new information concerns the cost of incarcerating

prisoners. As the marginal cost increases, optimal sentences become shorter, holding constant

recidivism risk and the expected social costs of post-release crime.

       This simple model of recidivism risk and optimal sentencing illuminates several features.

First, optimal sentences depend on both the court’s initial determination of the convict’s

recidivism risk and the cost of housing the prisoner over some period of time. Second, it is

optimal to alter the sentence if prisoners reveal something about their post-release recidivism risk

during their time in prison. If good behavior reflects legitimate changes in behavior, as opposed

to simply gaming the system, good-behavior credits toward early release can be efficient in that

they reduce the costs of housing prisoners during their time in prison and the social costs of


                                                18
future crime. In cases where prisoners demonstrate some actual behavioral changes, there are

welfare gains to early release. Third, the asymmetric nature of determinant sentencing means that

prison officials cannot extend sentences for prisoners who reveal that they are more dangerous

than the original sentencing court believed. In these cases, there would be welfare gains to

extending sentences, but those gains cannot be captured under a determinant sentencing regime.

Fourth, increases in the cost of housing prisoners means more prisoners with given

characteristics select into early release. The remainder of this paper considers whether Rhode

Island’s nineteenth-century prison officials responded rationally to observable features of the

criminal and his crime in reducing time served through the early release program adopted in

1871.



4. Criminals, crimes, punishments and good-time deductions

        Most convicts ended up in Rhode Island’s prison for the same reason they ended up in

most nineteenth-century prisons; they stole something. “The criminal masses,” as Lawrence

Friedman (1993, 212) notes, “committed property crimes of staggering banality.” They stole a

pig, perhaps, or a few slices of bacon, a hat, a bucket, a wheelbarrow, a $1 banknote. With few

exceptions such petit larcenists did not end up in prison; they spent a few days to a few months

in the city or county jail. The larcenists that ended up in prison generally stole something fairly

substantial or they made a habit of stealing or both.

        Nineteenth-century prisons also housed dangerous felons – murderers, highway robbers,

rapists and those convicted of assault with a dangerous weapon and with the intent to rape, rob or

murder. Table 2 provides information on the principal violent and property crimes for which

Rhode Island’s prisoners were convicted, the statutory penalties, average sentence lengths and


                                                 19
the average number of days of good-time credit earned. Murders were exempt from the good

time deductions described earlier, but they were eligible for executive pardons. The median

sentence for the 41 men committed for manslaughter, whose commitment and discharge dates

are observed, was 60 months; their mean sentence was 72.3 months. These 41 men earned an

average of 179.6 good-time days, so that time served amounted to less than 92 percent of their

original sentences. Convicted rapists, on average, served just less than 90 percent of their

original sentences. Men convicted of robbery served about 85 percent of their original sentences.

       Among property offenses, the law imposed the steepest penalty on burglary, which was

differentiated from larceny in that it involved theft accomplished by breaking and entering, often

at night. The line between larceny and burglary, writes legal historian Lawrence Friedman (1993,

p. 109) was significant because burglary implied a violation of the “sanctity of the home, and

thus [was] more menacing than simple theft.” And judges and juries were particularly punitive

when that sanctity was violated after dark – when people were most vulnerable. Despite the

seriousness of the burglars’ offense, they still received enough good time credits that they served

just 87 percent of their sentences, on average, while men convicted of breaking a dwelling in

daytime with intent to steal (i.e., they were caught before they made off with the goods) received

only one third of the burglars’ sentences, but served nearly 95 percent of their sentences.

Larcenists, likewise, served 95 percent of their sentences, as did men convicted of receiving

goods under false pretenses (fraud). It is important to note that the last column, which reveals a

great deal of within-crime variation in good-time credits earned, a feature that will be exploited

in the empirical analysis below.

       Another feature of crime is that it is (and was) a youthful enterprise. Figure 5 provides a

histogram of age at commitment between ages 15 and 75. More than 40 percent of prisoners


                                                20
entered the prison by age 25 and the proportion of men entering prison after age 30 drops

markedly. Age enters into a rational early-release decision because criminal careers tend to be

over by middle age, so recidivism risk declines in age (Moehling and Piehl 2009; Bodenhorn,

Moehling and Piehl 2011). Table 3 provides some evidence of a negative relationship between

age and days deducted from the sentence as part of the prison’s early release program (the

statistics exclude executive pardons). Teenage criminals were sentenced, on average, to 23.5

months and were released 43.7 days early. Prisoners in their early 30s were sentenced to 28.3

months and had 100.2 days deducted. The relationship is not linear in age but the pattern holds

over the life cycle. Older prisoners received larger early-release deductions, probably because

they represented a lesser risk for post-release crime than younger, more impetuous men.



5. Selection into and the determinants of early release

       An empirical investigation of whether Rhode Island’s prison officials were systematic in

their early release decisions employs Heckman’s (1979) selection bias correction technique and

is based on the following econometric approach to early release. Whether prison officials chose

to release a prisoner early is represented by a binary variable R = 1 if the prisoner was released

early and zero otherwise. But theory implies that there is some propensity to release early R*,

which is unobserved, and that the unobserved propensity is related to a vector of covariates X.

The true model of selection into early release is:

(1)    Ri* = α Xi + ηi

where i indexes the prisoners. To estimate the effect of covariates thought to be correlated with

the propensity to release early, a probit model of the following form is estimated:

(2)    Pr(Ri =1 | x) = Φ (α Xi )


                                                 21
where Φ(.) represents the standard normal distribution; and, Ri = 1 if a prisoner is released early.

       The selection mechanism implied by equation (2) is then incorporated into the regression

equation for days deducted from the original sentence through the prison board’s early release

prerogative, executive pardon, or legislative clemency. For the cases, where Ri =1, the following

regression model is estimated:

(3)    Zi = β Wi + εi

The Heckman selection procedure assumes (ηi , εi ) is bivariate normal, so that when Ri =1

(4)    E(Z | Ri =1) = β Wi + γλi

where λi = f(α Xi )/ F(-α Xi ), where f(.) and F(.) are the standard normal density and cumulative

distribution functions, and α is the vector of parameter estimates in Eq (2). Identification depends

on having at least one explanatory variable in Eq (2) that is not included in Eq (4), though

estimation improves if there is variation in selection unrelated to the outcome decision, so it is

important for theory to offer guidance on variables to include in the first-stage probit and the

second-stage outcome regressions.

       One way to thing about connecting the different cases presented in Figures 3 and 4 is that

reductions in the sentence itself due to post-incarceration changes in expected recidivism,

conditional on being selected into the early-release program, were idiosyncratic to the prisoner.

That is, prison officials made choices based on individual characteristics and behaviors, which

shifted the marginal benefit curve. Unless an individual prisoner had unique housing or

supervisory needs, cost increases applied to all prisoners. The Heckman model is an appropriate

modeling choice because individual characteristics mostly influence the marginal benefit curve,

which is captured by the outcome (days off) equation, while systemic changes in costs influence

the marginal cost curve, which is captured by the first-stage selection equation.


                                                 22
         For Rhode Island prisoners the probit (selection) equation takes the following form:



(5)      Early releaseit (0/1) = α0 + α1 ln(Sentenceit) + α2 (% Capacityt) + α3 (% Capacityt)2 +

                  α4 ln(Gross Costt) + α5 ln(Age at Releaseit) + ∑ αj Nativityit + ηit



where Sentence is the sentence (in months) imposed by the court at conviction; it is included in

the first-step equation because prisoners sentenced to longer-than-average terms, for a given

offense, contributed to crowding. It is likely that prison officials would have looked to shortening

these prisoners’ sentences as the prison approached or exceeded its capacity constraint. The term

% Capacity is calculated as the number of prisoners incarcerated on January 1 of each year

divided by the number of cells available to house prisoners on that date; its square is included to

capture any nonlinearity in the relationship. This variable is included because it is assumed that

when the prison is operating above capacity, prison officials were more motivated to identify

candidates for selecting into early release. Gross Cost is the real daily per-prisoner cost reported

by the warden in the annual prison reports. It is included in the selection equation because it is

expected that higher costs of housing prisoners will induce prison officials to identify more

prisoners for early release.12 Age at Release is included because theory predicts that older

prisoners are less likely to recidivate and are, therefore, more attractive early release candidates.

Finally, the selection equation is alternatively estimated with and without a vector of Nativity

dummy variables. There is no a priori reason why a prisoner’s place of birth would make him a

         12
            Gross rather than net cost is used because the two series move together (see Figure 2), and the
correlation coefficient (0.87) is high and gross cost is always positive, which allows taking the natural log.
Alternative specifications of the regressions included the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of net costs and the
results were qualitatively the same, though the interpretation of the ihs transform is less transparent.



                                                          23
more or less attractive candidate for early release, but prison officials may have been prejudiced

toward certain groups and those prejudices may have influenced a prisoner’s candidacy for early

release.13

         The early release (outcome) regression takes either of the two following forms:

(6a)     ln(Days Offit ) = β0 + β1 Future recidivistit + β2 λit + εit



(6b)     ln(Days Offit ) = β0 + β1 ln(Sentenceit) + β2 (Age at releaseit)+ β3 λit + ∑ βj Nativityit + εit



         The logarithmic specification for the outcome variable in Equations 6a and 6b follows

from the skew, or the long right tail, of the Days Off variable. In estimating equation (6a), the

principal explanatory variable is whether the prisoner who received a non-zero number of good-

behavior days off returned to the prison in the future; thus, “future recidivist” is a binary variable

that equals one if the convict returned to the prison on a second conviction and zero otherwise.

This specification presupposes that prison officials observed something about the prisoner that

was correlated with his return to the prison and that they acted on those observations through

smaller reductions in the prisoner’s sentence.

         To identify future recidivists, the data were sorted by prisoner name, prisoner number,

incarceration date, age, and place of birth. In most instances, future recidivists were identified by

name. George M. Boss, for instance, was committed on December 21, 1876 for 12-month

sentence for larceny. He received 9 good-behavior days and was released on December 13, 1877;

         13
            There is some evidence of reverse ethnic discrimination in Rhode Island’s sentencing. After controlling
for the recommended sentence and criminal’s age and its square, Irish, Canadians and British immigrants all
received statistically significantly shorter sentences than criminals born in Rhode Island. These are consistent with
Bodenhorn (2009), who finds little evidence of discriminatory sentencing in nineteenth-century Pennsylvania.



                                                         24
or two less days than the maximum number for which he was eligible. Boss returned to the

prison on September 18, 1883, to serve 96-months for a conviction on assault and attempted rape

charges. In the case of common names, a combination of date, age and place of birth was used to

identify whether the individual in question was a repeat offender, recognizing that age was not

always accurately reported.14 Between 1856 and 1904, for example, the prison housed four

George Browns, one from Rhode Island, one from Maine, one from Massachusetts and one from

the District of Columbia. It is clear that George H. Brown, a 25-year old from Rhode Island is

not the same George H. Brown, a 42-year old from D.C. sentenced in 1904. But there is good

reason to think that George Brown, a 25-year old from Massachusetts who entered the prison on

September 28, 1878 to serve 12 months for breaking and entering and the 27-year old George

Brown from Massachusetts who was sentenced to the prison for larceny and receiving stolen

goods on March 18, 1882 were the same George Browns, despite the one-year discrepancy in

recorded ages.

        The issue, of course, is whether, when making their early-release decisions, prison

officials were able to observe and act on some characteristic(s) correlated with future recidivism.

Figures 6a and 6b provide histograms of the fraction of good-behavior days off received relative

to the maximum number of days off a prisoner might receive. Figure 6a presents the distribution

for prisoners not identified as having returned to the Rhode Island state prison; Figure 6b

presents the distribution of the fraction of days off relative to eligible days off for prisoner who

did return to the prison. The most striking feature of the diagrams is the disparate outcomes for

future recidivists and non-future recidivists. Approximately 22% of future recidivists received no


        14
           See A’Hearn, Baten and Crayen (2009) for a study of the connection between misreporting of age and
numeracy in the nineteenth century.


                                                      25
good-behavior credits; only about 10% of non-future recidivists received no good-time credits.

Similarly, only about 15% of future recidivists received the maximum number of eligible good

time credits compared to about 22% of non-future recidivists. Moreover, a larger proportion of

non-future recidivists received between 80% and 90% of their maximum eligible days off. It

appears that prison officials identified something about prisoners’ recidivism risks and

conditioned their early release decisions on those observations.

       One concern with using return to the state penitentiary as the measure of recidivism risk

is that it captures recidivism conditional on it occurring in Rhode Island and that the recidivists’

crimes were of sufficient gravity to warrant a return to the state penitentiary. People in the

nineteenth century were mobile and criminals may have been more transient than others; and,

Rhode Island was small and many of the people entering the prison were from outside the state,

which makes it likely that they left after their prison term expired. They may have recidivated

outside Rhode Island or been committed to a county jail rather than the state penitentiary.

Equation (6b) offers an alternative specification of the outcome equation using, instead of

observed recidivism, those characteristics of the convict observable to the econometrician (and

the prison officials) that are correlated with recidivism (see Appendix Table 3). Probit and linear

probability models of recidivism on sentence length, recidivism and nativity reveal that they are

strongly correlated with observed recidivism.

       The logarithm of Sentence is included in the Days Off (outcome) equation because the

mechanical rule created by statute in 1872 meant that prisoners who received longer sentences

were eligible for more good-time days, as well as the empirical result that prisoners sentenced to

longer than average terms for a given offense were more likely to receive executive pardons or




                                                26
legislative clemency. It is also possible that criminals serving longer sentences, all else equal,

were less likely to recidivate because their criminal human capital deteriorated relative to their

legitimate human capital during the long prison term (Lochner 2004; Mocan, Billups, and

Overland 2005). It enters the equation in logarithmic form because of the significant right skew

in sentence lengths. Age at Release is included because the prisoner’s remaining criminal career

and his potential for recidivism declines in age. And, finally, the prisoner’s place of birth is

included to capture either of two possible effects. First, although there is little evidence that

immigrants were discriminated against at sentencing, prison officials may have discriminated

against immigrants or non-Rhode Islanders in early-release days. Second, convicts from outside

Rhode Island may have returned home or otherwise have moved on where they may have

committed new crimes that are not observed in the Rhode Island data.

        Table 4 provides the summary statistics for the full sample and the subsamples analyzed

in subsequent sections. Among prisoners not released by pardon, the average sentence was 26.4

months; violent offenders received sentences about 4 months longer than offenders convicted of

property crimes.15 Prisoners released through the early release program (excluding pardons)

earned nearly 89 good-time days, on average. Violent criminals earned 55% more good-time

days even though their original sentences were only 17% longer. Men tended to be in their late

twenties and early thirties when they were released. In real terms, the cost of housing, feeding

and supervising a prisoner averaged 30¢ per day, though the costs increased sharply after the

1880s. In the second half of the nineteenth century, the prison operated about 20 percent above

design capacity, on average. And, finally, about 10% of property offenders and 3% of violent


        15
           The residual category of nonviolent and non-property crime consists of morals offenses (adultery,
bigamy, carnal knowledge of underage girls) and perjury.


                                                        27
offenders received a second sentence to the prison; they are the “future” recidivists used in the

estimation.



5.1 Selection and early release: full sample results

         Table 5 reports the results from four sample selection specifications. Columns 1 through

3 include all crimes and all forms of early release, including executive pardons, for the years

after the 1871 adoption of a formal early release program. Because pardons tended to grant very

large numbers of days off, columns 4 through 6 report results when early release was granted

other than through executive pardon.

         Panel A of Table 5 reports parameter estimates from the first-step selection equation,

which is implemented as probit specification in the standard Heckman (1979) approach, and

Panel B reports the outcome (days off) regression. The results from Column 1 of Panel A, which

report the marginal effects calculated from the first-stage probit of the standard two-step

Heckman (1979) model are consistent with predictions from the economic model: older prisoners

serving longer sentences when the prison was more crowded and the cost of housing prisoners

was higher were more likely to select into the early release program. The question of interest is

the relative magnitude of the effects. One standard deviation change around the mean for each of

the variables of interest shows that the capacity constraint had the largest effect on selection into

early release: a one standard deviation increase in the Percent Capacity variable led to a 57%

increase in the likelihood of being selected into early release. 16 By comparison, a one standard

deviation increase in the (log) cost of housing a prisoner increased the likelihood of selecting in


         16
             The estimated marginal effects imply that the likelihood of selecting into early release occurred when
the population was 130 percent of design capacity.


                                                         28
by 11%; a one standard deviation increase in the prisoner’s age at release increased the

likelihood of release by 6.6%; and a one standard deviation change in (log) sentence length

increased the likelihood of early release by 5.6%. Using the marginal effects from the maximum

likelihood specification implies different magnitudes, but does not alter the basic interpretation: a

one standard deviation increase in capacity leads to a 68% increase in likelihood of early release,

18% for length of sentence, 5.3% for cost, and 3.7% for age at release.

       Columns 4 through 6 of Panel A report marginal effects when prisoners released by

executive pardon are excluded from the estimation. Because executive pardons tended to release

prisoners several months to several years prior to their eligibility for release through the

conditions contemplated by the 1871 statute, it is important to know whether they are driving the

results. The estimated coefficients (and, by implication, the marginal effects) are smaller when

pardons are excluded than when they are included, but the estimates are still statistically

significant in most cases and the magnitudes are economically meaningful. Using the two-step

estimates from Column 4 imply that a one standard deviation increase in Percent Capacity leads

to a 47% increase in the likelihood of early release. One standard deviations increase in the cost

of holding a prisoner increases the likelihood of early release by 13%; 7.2% for age at release;

and 2.6% for sentence length.

       The results of the selection specifications are, therefore, consistent with theory and with

what is generally known about recidivism. Prison crowding creates increases the cost of housing

prisoners, which pressures prison authorities to select more prisoners in an early release program.

They responded by differentially releasing prisoners serving longer sentences and older prisoners

into the program. They responded to crowding and direct costs in predictable fashion. But they

also selected prisoners sentenced to longer terms into the early release program because a longer


                                                 29
sentence, all else constant, contributes to crowding if new convicts enter at a faster rate than

seasoned convicts are released. Older prisoners at release were also granted more days off, which

is consistent with the empirical phenomenon that crime is a youthful activity. Older men are less

likely than younger men to commit crimes, and they are less likely to recidivate (Kuziemko

2007; Worthington, Higgs and Edwards undated).

       Panel B of Table 5 reports the results from the alternative specifications of the outcome

or the (log) Days Off equation. The histograms presented in Figures 6a and 6b suggest that

prison officials observed some characteristic(s) of prisoners that provided some information

about future recidivism and they acted on those observations. The econometric results are

consistent with that interpretation. The exponentiated coefficient on Future Recidivist reported in

Column 4 implies that ex-convicts who later returned to the state penitentiary (which is a lower-

bound estimate of recidivism) received about 68% of the number of days off, conditional on

selecting into the early release program, as ex-convicts who did not later return to the

penitentiary. The coefficient from the maximum likelihood specification imply that future

recidivists were received, on average, about 70% of the number of days off as non-recidivists.

       Column 6 reports the effects when, instead of observed recidivism, the outcome equation

is estimated using characteristics correlated with future recidivism. Given the log-log

specification, the reported coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities. Thus, a one percent

increase in sentence length leads to a 1.9 percent increase in the number of early-release days.

This is, in part, a purely mechanical result given the statutory procedure for calculating the

eligibility for early release. But is also reflects, in part, that longer sentences were likely to have

eroded criminal human capital, which reduced the expected recidivism costs of early release.

Early-release days were relatively inelastic with respect to the prisoner’s age at release; a one


                                                  30
percent increase in convict’s age increased the number of early-release days by just 0.26%.

Finally, to save space, the individual nativity coefficients are not reported, but the nativity

variables as a group add meaningful information to the regression.17 It is of interest that the

individual coefficients on the Irish (-0.33) and Germans (-0.75) suggest some measure of ethnic

discrimination; whereas the coefficient on Canadians (+0.31) suggest that they were either more

well behaved than men of other nationalities or that the prison authorities thought they might

return home and, therefore, present less of a recidivism risk for Rhode Island than men from

farther afield.



5.2 Property and violent crime and early release

        Table 6 reports maximum likelihood parameter estimates when crimes are separated into

property crimes and violent crimes. The regressions are well behaved for the large sample of

property crimes and the results mirror the full sample results reported in Table 5. Prisoners were

more likely to be selected into the early release program if they were serving a longer sentence,

were older at prospective release date, when the prison was crowded, and when cost of feeding

and clothing prisoners were higher. The estimated coefficient in the outcome equation in Column

(2), which excludes prisoners released by pardon, implies that future recidivists received 72% of

the days off, on average, as non-recidivists.

        A comparison of the results from the violent and non-violent subsamples generates some

seemingly counterintuitive results. Using the marginal effects reported in Columns (2) and (4),

which excludes pardons, a one standard deviation increase in sentence length is associated with a


        17
          Nativity was divided into 13 categories that include Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Connecticut, other
New England, Mid-Atlantic, South, Old Northwest, Ireland, Britain, Germany (including Austria), Canada, Italy,


                                                       31
19% increase in the likelihood of release for violent convicts, but only a 15% increase for

nonviolent convicts. At the mean Percent Capacity, violent convicts were nearly three times

more likely than non-violent convicts to select into the early release program; and at the mean

Cost, they were nearly twice as likely to select in. At the mean Age at Release, however, violent

criminals were about half as likely as non-violent offenders to select into early release. This

apparently counterintuitive result is consistent with other features of the data: violent offenders

were initially sentenced to longer terms so at a given capacity constraint, holding violent

offenders for their full terms exacerbated the crowding problem; and, violent offenders were only

about one-third as likely as non-violent offenders to recidivate. The results of the outcome

equations in Panel B also reveal that, while violent offenders were more likely to select into early

release, they served relatively more of their sentences, conditional on selecting into the early

release program.



6. Concluding comments

        The introductory section closed by posing a question about what lessons an historical

study might offer modern criminologists. The answer, in part, comes from the results of this

study: historical prison officials appear to have responded reasonably and systematically to

observables believed to be correlated with recidivism risk, as well as to the social costs of crime

and incarceration. As Dharmapala, Garoupa and Shepherd (2010) note, the late twentieth-century

movement away from discretionary sentencing through the adoption of sentencing guidelines

and truth-in-sentencing laws may have had the unintended consequence of exacerbating prison

crowding and contributing to the already rising costs of prisons. Mandating long(er) terms keeps


and Other Immigrant. Rhode Island is the excluded category in the regressions.

                                                        32
existing prison bunks full, so that any increase in crime or conviction rates increases crowding

and costs. Discretionary parole systems can mitigate these unintended consequences and, if

properly implemented and administered, still serve the public interest by balancing the social

costs and benefits of incarceration. But the same legislatures that constrained the judiciary

through guidelines and truth-in-sentencing laws, did away with or reined in discretionary parole

decisions, as well.

       One argument against discretion is that it can be driven by or subject to prejudice.

Determinant sentences or strict guidelines can mitigate trial-level sentencing disparities across

groups that may be compounded through discretionary parole or other early release programs,

which formed the basis for liberal political support for both measures in the late twentieth

century. There is some evidence of discriminatory sentencing and disparate use of good-time

release for immigrants in nineteenth-century Rhode Island, but the effects worked in opposite

directions. Irish immigrants, for example, received sentences about 12 percent shorter than native

Rhode Islanders, but they were about 30 percent less likely to select into the early release

program. It is difficult to determine whether the net effect operated to the disadvantage of Irish-

born convicts. I have found no historical discussion of disparate treatment, so it seems unlikely

that concerns with potential disparities drove the use of good time policies in the nineteenth

century.

       A second concern driving the adoption of sentencing guidelines and the elimination of

discretionary parole was that judicial and parole discretion undermined the deterrent effects of

imprisonment. Less severe and less certain punishments are thought to offer less of a deterrent to

crime. And, rising crime rates in the post-war era were attributed in part to the increased use of

discretion in sentencing and parole. While the excessive use of pardons in Pennsylvania and New


                                                33
York came under fire in the early nineteenth century, there was little criticism of Rhode Island’s

good-time policy, which may have been due to the prison board’s limited use of good-time

release: the typical prisoner that earned good time credits served 90 percent or more of his

original sentence. Compare this to 1999, when inmates released under discretionary parole

programs across the United States served a mere 37 percent of their original sentence

(Dharmapala, Garoupa and Shepherd 2010, p. 1048) and all prisoners served about half their

original sentence (Benson 2009). One difference between then and now is that, despite

increasing urbanization, and an increase in the aggregate number of crimes and criminals, the

crime rate in Providence, Rhode Island declined about 40 percent between 1855 and 1905.18

        As the rehabilitative and reformative aspects of imprisonment came to be doubted in the

post-war era, early release programs based on presumed post-incarceration changes in convicts’

behavior lost their appeal. If incarceration did not rehabilitate, it was hard to defend an early-

release (parole) system premised on a prisoner’s changed behavior. This was the argument put

forward in the 1970s and 1980s, which led to the elimination of discretionary parole in many

states. A related argument was put forth in the 1870s as the original promises of the penitentiary

went unrealized, yet early release continued. The continued use of early release may have been

driven, in part, by the greater nineteenth-century concern with the consequences of crowding and

rising prison costs on prisoners and taxpayers alike. Asking prison officials to offer annual

income statements and explain why their institutions failed to return a profit kept cost

containment in the forefront.

        18
             If the arrest rate approximately reflects the crime rate, admissions to the Providence County, Rhode
Island jail declined from about 700 per 100,000 in the mid-1850s to about 400 per 100,000 in the mid-1900s. Rates
calculated from data reported in Rhode Island Board of Inspectors (1857-1859) and Rhode Island Board of Charities
(1901-1905).



                                                       34
       In assessing the modern approach to criminal corrections, John DiIulio (1992, p. 6) notes

that Americans want a system that visits harm on criminals (retribution); makes criminals more

law abiding (rehabilitation); dissuades potential offenders from criminal activities (deterrence);

protects citizens from becoming victims of crime (incapacitation); and successfully returns

inmates that have served their time to the community (reintegration) without violating public

norms concerning appropriate punishment (civil rights) or imposing too great a cost on taxpayers

(cost containment). The mid-nineteenth-century approach included the same concerns, though

the earliest advocates of the penitentiary placed different weights on retribution, rehabilitation

and the other concerns than do modern penologists. There was, for instance, less concern for a

prisoner’s constitutional rights, but particularly brutal punishments, including unsupervised use

of the bludgeon and generous use of the lash by prison guards, fell from public favor by mid-

century and disappeared from most prisons soon thereafter (Lewis 1965, p. 251; Rhode Island

Board of Inspectors 1862). The common thread linking then and now is the ongoing concern

with crowding and cost containment. The available evidence points toward Rhode Island’s

attempts to balance the rising costs of housing prisoners and the social costs of post-release

recidivism.



References

Abadinsky, Howard. 2003. Probation and Parole: Theory and Practice. Upper Saddle River,

       N.J.: Prentice Hall.

A’Hearn, Brian, Joerg Baten, and Dorothee Crayen. 2009. “Quantifying Quantitative Illiteracy:

       Age Heaping and the History of Human Capital.” Journal of Economic History 69(3):

       783-808.


                                               35
American Legislative Exchange Council. 2014. “Prison Overcrowding: Rhode Island.” Available

       at        http://www.alec.org/initiatives/prison-overcrowding/prison-overcrowding-rhode-

       island/

Avio, Kenneth L. 1998. “The Economics of Prisons.” European Journal of Law and Economics

       6(x), 143-175.

Beaumont, Gustave de and Alexis de Toqueville. 1833. On the Penitentiary System in the United

       States, and Its Application in France. Translated by Francis Lieber. Philadelphia: Carey,

       Lea & Blanchard.

Benson, Bruce L. “Escalating the War on Drugs: Causes and Unintended Consequences.”

       Stanford Law and Policy Review 20(x): 293-

Bernhardt, Dan, Steve Mongrain, and Joanne Roberts. 2010. “Rehabilitated or Not: An

       Informational Theory of Parole Decisions.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization

       28(2), 186-210.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2009. “Criminal Sentencing in 19th-Century Pennsylvania.” Explorations in

       Economic History 46(3), 287-298.

Bodenhorn, Howard, Carolyn M. Moehling and Anne Morrison Piehl. 2010. “Immigration:

       America’s Nineteenth-Century ‘Law and Order Problem?’” In Migration and Culture,

       295-324. Frontiers of Economics of Globalization Series. Edited by Gil S. Epstein and Ira

       Gang. Emerald Publishers.

Dharmapala, Dhammika, Nuno Garoupa, and Joanna M. Shepherd. 2010. “Legislatures, Judges,

       and Parole Boards: The Allocation of Discretion under Determinate Sentencing.” Florida

       Law Review 62( ): 1037-1090.

Dickens, Charles. 1874. American Notes for General Circulation and Pictures from Italy.


                                               36
       London: Chapman and Hall.

DiIulio, John J., Jr. 1992. Rethinking the Criminal Justice System: Toward a New Paradigm.

       U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs.

Friedman, Lawrence M. 1993. Crime and Punishment in American History. New York: Basic

       Books.

Garman, James C. 2005. Detention Castles of Stone and Steel: Landscape, Labor, and the Urban

       Penitentiary. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.

Garoupa, Nuno. 1996. “Prison, Parole and the Criminal Justice Act of 1991.” Research in Law

       and Economics .

Giertz, J. Fred and Peter F. Nardulli. 1985. “Prison Overcrowding.” Public Choice 46(1): 71-78.

Heckman, James. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as Specification Error.” Econometrica 47(1):

       153-161.

Janofsky, Jennifer Lawrence. 2012. “ ‘Hopelessly Hardened’: The Complexities of Penitentiary

       Discipline at Philadelphia’s Eastern State Penitentiary.” In Buried Lives: Incarcerated in

       Early America, 106-123. Edited by Michele Lise Tarter and Richard Bell. Athens and

       London: University of Georgia Press.

Kann, Mark E. 2005. Punishment, Prisoners, and Power: Liberty and Power in the Early

       American Republic. New York and London: New York University Press.

Kuziemko, Ilyana. 2007. “Going Off Parole.” Working paper, National Bureau of Economic

       Research.

Lattimore, Pamela K and Joanna R. Baker. 1992. “The Impact of Recidivism and Capacity on

       Prison Populations.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 8(2): 189-215.

Lewis, W. David. 1965. From Newgate to Dannemora: The Rise of the Penitentiary in New


                                               37
       York, 1796-1848. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Lindert, Peter H. and Robert A. Margo. 2006. “Consumer Prices Indexes, for All Items: 1774-

       2003.” Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition, Series Cc1-2, p. 3-

       158. Edited by Susan Carter, et al. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Lloyd, Gary. 2014. “Alabama Launches Initiative to Reduce Prison Overcrowding.” Available at

       http://www.trussvilletribune.com/2014/06/10/alabama-launches-initiative-to-reduce-

       prison-overcrowding/

Lochner, Lance. 2004. “Education, Work, and Crime: A Human Capital Approach.”

       International Economic Review 45(): 811-843.

Miceli, Thomas J. 1994. “Prison and Parole: Minimizing the Costs of Non-Monetary Sanctions

       as Deterrents.” Research in Law and Economics 16: 197-212.

Mocan, H. Naci, Stephen C. Billups, and Jody Overland. 2005. “A Dynamic Model of

       Differential Human Capital and Criminal Activity.” Economica 72(): 655-681.

Moehling, Carolyn and Anne Morrison Piehl. 2009. “Immigration, Crime, and Incarceration in

       Early Twentieth Century America.” Demography 46(4): 739-763.

Moore, Solomon. 2009. “California Prisons Must Cut Inmate Population.” New York Times (4

       August).

Polinsky, A. Mitchell. 2012. “Deterrence and the Optimality of Rewarding Prisoners for Good

       Behavior.” Working paper, Stanford Law School.

Prison Discipline Society. 1850. Twenty-Fifth Annual Report of the Board of Managers of the

       Prison Discipline Society, Boston, May, 1850. Boston: T. R. Marvin.

Rhode Island. Board of Inspectors of the State Prison. 1856-1875. Report of the Board of

       Inspectors of the State Prison, with Accompanying Documents. Providence: Knowles,


                                               38
       Anthony & Co., State Printers.

Rhode Island. Board of State Charities and Corrections. Annual Report of the Board of State

       Charities and Corrections. 1876-1910.

Rhode Island. General Assembly. 1850. Acts and Resolves of the General Assembly. January

       Session. Providence: Joseph Knowles, State Printer.

Rhode Island. General Assembly. 1857. The Revised Statutes of the State of Rhode Island and

       Providence Plantations. Providence: Sayles, Miller and Simons, 1857.

Rhode Island. General Assembly. 1872. The General Statutes of the State of Rhode Island and

       Providence Plantations. Cambridge: Riverside Press, 1872.

Rhode Island. General Assembly. 1896. General Laws of the State of Rhode Island and

       Providence Plantations. Providence: E. L. Freeman & Son, Printers to the State.

Scoones, David. 2008. “Unconditional Parole.” Working paper, University of Victoria.

Sigleman, Lee and Langche Zeng. 2000. “Analyzing Censored and Sample-Selected Data with

       Tobit and Heckit Models.” Political Analysis 8(2): 167-182.

Teeters, Negley K. 1955. The Cradle of the Penitentiary: The Walnut Street Jail at Philadelphia,

       1773-1835. Philadelphia: private printing.

Williamson, Samuel H. 2104. "Seven Ways to Compute the Relative Value of a U.S. Dollar

       Amount, 1774 to present," MeasuringWorth. Available at EH.net. Accessed September

       2014.

Worthington, Andrew, Helen Higgs, and Glyn Edwards. Undated. “Predicting Criminal

       Recidivism in Paroled Queensland Prisoners: Findings from a Multinomial Ordered

       Probit Model.” Working paper, School of Economics and Finance, Queensland

       University of Technology.


                                               39
Appendix A

        Consider types of inmates, indexed by j, convicted of the same crime each of which
receives sentences of Sj months in prison. Statutory law defines the minimum and maximum
sentence, which places sometimes binding constraints on the sentence, and the court sentences
the convicted criminal to a term based on the statutory limits, standard sentencing practice
(simple larceny typically merited twelve months), the court’s assessment of the criminal’s
recidivism risk, as well as other characteristics, only some of which are observable to the
historian. Individual deviations from the mean sentence are assumed to reflect the court’s
assessment of the type-j prisoner’s capacity to recidivate. Prisoners receiving sentences longer
than the mean likely present a relatively greater recidivism risk, and extended incapacitation is
expected to reduce future social costs. It is further assumed that prison officials observe aspects
of the inmates’ behavior, which reveals information about their expected post-release recidivism
risk.

        An inmate’s annual risk of recidivating R(rj, tj) depends on the prisoners’ initial
recidivism risk, rj, and the time in months, t, since his admission to prison. For simplicity, further
assume that the inmate imposes additional post-release social costs γ if he recidivates and zero if
he does not. At the moment the inmate arrives at prison he has Tj months remaining to his
expected criminal career, after which he has zero probability of committing a crime.

        Under these assumptions, we can write the social costs of incarcerating prisoners of type j
for t months as:

(A1)   SC = Ctj + γR(rj, tj) (Tj - tj)

where C is the daily per-inmate costs of incarceration. Dropping the j subscripts and taking the
derivative with respect to t yields the following first-order condition:

(A2)   C = γ [R(r, t*) - Rʹ(r, t*)(T-t*)]

where the left-hand side is the marginal cost of incarcerating a prisoner for one additional day. It
is assumed to increase in t because, as the prison become more crowded, an additional day
served by each prisoner increases the crowding-related costs. The term on the right-hand side
defines the marginal benefit curve, and is made up of two parts. First, incarceration prevents
whatever crimes the prisoner may have committed were he not in prison. This is captured by the
term γ R(r, t*), which is simply the social cost of crime times the recidivism risk. It depends on
the level of R(r, t*). The second element of the right-hand side is what Kuziemko (2007, p.35)
labels the rehabilitation benefit. It is the incremental change in the recidivism risk due to time




                                                 40
served multiplied by the prisoner’s remaining criminal career, which is shortened by each
additional day in prison.19

         Rearranging terms and solving for t* yields the optimal sentence:

(A3)     t* = T + [(γ R – C) / - γ Rʹ]

Kuziemko (2007) finds the empirical evidence to be consistent with R´<0 and R´´>0, so that the
denominator is positive. The optimal sentence increases with initial recidivism risk ( R ), the
social cost of recidivism, γ, and the prisoner’s remaining criminal career (T). The optimal
sentence declines in the cost, including crowding cost, of incarceration.




         19
           For the marginal benefit curve to slope downward, the following must hold for the second derivative
with respect to time: 2Rʹ - Rʺ(T-t) > 0. Kuziemko (2007) provides empirical evidence that the condition is met in
modern data. I assume it is met in the historical data.



                                                         41
Figure 1
Effective prison capacity and inmate population
1849-1910



                                 P ris o n c a p a c ity a n d p o p u la tio n
                                                    1 8 49 -1 91 0
      200
      150
      100
      50
      0




            1840          1860                          1880                       1900                          1920
                                                        Year

                                    C ap a c ity                     P ris o n P o p ula tion




Figure 2
Per prisoner gross and net annual expenditures
1849-1910



                   P e r p ris o n e r g ro s s a n d n e t a n n u a l e x p e n d itu re s
                                                   1 8 49 -1 91 0
      200
      150
      100
      50
      0




            1840         1860                          1880                      1900                           1920
                                                       Year

                   R e a l G ro s s E x p e n d itu re s                   R e a l N e t E x p e n d itu re s




                                                                                                  42
Figure 3
Optimal good-time policy when recidivism risk is lower than originally believed




 Social Cost

                                                           mc   0




                                                                        mb   0

                                                           mb   1


                               t* 1          t* 0                       Days




Figure 4
Optimal good-time policy when cost of incarceration increases




     Social Cost
                                                           mc       1



                                                                    mc   0




                                                                         mb      0




                                      t* 2          t* 0                  Days




                                                                    43
Figure 5
Age at commitment
Rhode Island state prison, 1856-1907




                                            A g e a t c o m m itm e n t
                                   R h o d e Is la n d S ta te P ris o n 1 8 5 6 -1 9 0 7
           15  10
   P e rc e n t
           5
           0




                    15   20   25      30      35      40      45      50      55      60    65   70   75
                                                            age




                                                                                   44
            Figure 6a
            Histogram of good-behavior days off as a fraction of maximum eligible days off for prisoners not returning to the
            Rhode Island state prison (non-Future Recidivists)
             .25
               .2
             .15
 Fraction




               .1
             .05
                   0




                        0   .1    .2     .3     .4    .5       .6      .7     .8    .9        1
                                 Fraction of maximum eligible days off received




            Figure 6b
            Histogram of good-behavior days off as a fraction of maximum eligible days off for prisoners who latere returned to
            the Rhode Island state prison (Future Recidivists)
             .25
               .2
             .15
Fraction




               .1
             .05
                    0




                        0   .1     .2     .3     .4    .5       .6      .7     .8        .9       1
                                  Fraction of maximum eligible days off received




                                                                                         45
                                   Table 1
           Per prisoner annual cost of incarceration, 1856 and 1900

Expense category                          1856                        1900
                                    (Constant 1860 $)           (Constant 1860 $)

Salaries                                   $25                         $50

Provisions and groceries                   35                           38

Fuel and lighting                           4                           15

Bedding and clothing                        3                           7

Repairs and maintenance                     1                           5

Discharge of convicts                       1                           1

Miscellaneous                               4                           6

Other expenses                              4                           11

Total expenses                             $77                         $133

Sources: Expenses from Rhode Island Board of Inspectors (1856) and Rhode Island Board
of Charities (1900). Price index from Lindert and Margo (2006).




                                                                  46
                                                         Table 2
                      Statutory penalties, median and mean sentences (in months), and days deducted

          Crime              Statutory         Median            Average        Std Dev       Commit-           Days           Std Dev
                              penalty          sentence          sentence      (sentence)      ments          deducted          (days)

                                                          Panel A: Violent crime

Murder                         Life              Life              Life             na           40              na               na

Manslaughter                   ≤240               60               72.3             56.4         41             179.6           226.1

Robbery                      60 - Life            72               98.2             57.9         75             453.1           548.9

Rape                         120 - Life          180               199.4            94.4         13             627.3           134.8

Assault                       12 - 240            12               17.7             20.3         38             14.3             23.6

  w/ intent to kill           12 - 240            42               44.8             34.1         46             179.2           292.4

  w/ intent to rape           12 - 240            36               46.7             36.8         57             102.9           127.5

  w/attempt to rob            12 - 240            18               26.5             16.2         16               0               na

  w/dangerous weapon            ≤24               12               18.0             15.0         147            19.1             29.2

                                                          Panel B: Property crime

Burglary                     60 - Life            60               76.7             41.6         111            298.7           344.8

Breaking – commercial          ≤ 120              18               22.2             14.1         445            29.1             64.1
property

Breaking – dwelling            ≤ 60               20               25.8             15.1         313            41.3             58.3

Larceny                       12 - 120            15               19.8             11.6         528            33.2             78.3

Larceny from the              12 - 120            18               23.3             18.0         149            38.4             65.1
person

Receiving stolen goods        12 - 120            12               17.2             9.6          19             24.2             37.9

Entering – dwelling             ≤60               18               24.0             14.6         84             33.9             46.1

Entering – non-                 ≤24               15               18.4             8.9           7             28.0             35.6
dwelling

False pretenses                 ≤60               14               19.7             12.3         23             26.9             26.5

Forgery                         ≤60               24               35.4             16.7         89             89.9            106.7

Embezzlement                  12 - 120            18               19.3             9.8          30             38.7            105.7

Sources: Statutory penalties: Rhode Island General Assembly (1857, 1872, 1896); median and average sentences and days deducted: author’s
calculations from Rhode Island prison reports (1856-1907).




                                                                     47
                                   Table 3
                Average sentences and early-release time by age
Age group                    Sentence                    Deduction             N
(years)                      (months)                     (days)

15-19                          23.52                         43.65             231
                              (17.65)                      (113.95)

20-24                          25.12                         51.70             481
                              (19.13)                      (124.81)

25-29                          27.44                         70.50             313
                              (21.13)                      (176.05)

30-34                          28.27                        100.17             169
                              (23.31)                      (250.33)

35-39                          31.20                         83.02             128
                              (30.24)                      (153.94)

40-44                          20.99                         56.74             92
                              (17.68)                      (178.41)

45-49                          26.34                         93.11             53
                              (20.92)                      (286.95)

50-54                          22.27                         56.77             26
                              (14.40)                      (108.88)

55-59                          28.26                        146.89             19
                              (18.74)                      (366.53)

Sources: authors’ calculations from Rhode Island prison reports (1856-1907).




                                                              48
                                                               Table 4
                                                           Summary statistics

Variable                           Full sample                 Full sample,     Property crime,    Violent crime,
                                                             exclude pardons    exclude pardons   exclude pardons

Sentence                              33.77                        26.37             22.84             26.66
 (mos)                               (51.64)                      (26.58)           (16.27)           (26.38)

ln(Sentence)                           6.55                        6.45              6.38              6.41
                                      (0.74)                      (0.61)            (0.53)            (0.68)

Days off                              261.02                       88.75             46.92             72.84
                                    (1141.95)                    (523.48)          (120.97)          (166.09)

ln(Days off)                           3.73                        3.38              3.19              3.33
                                      (1.74)                      (1.37)            (1.19)            (1.42)

Age at release                        30.36                        30.17            28.72              33.78
                                     (10.18)                      (10.08)           (9.09)            (11.89)

ln(Age at release)                     3.36                        3.36              3.31              3.46
                                      (0.30)                      (0.30)            (0.28)            (0.33)

Daily per prisoner cost                0.30                        0.30              0.30              0.31
                                      (0.09)                      (0.09)            (0.08)            (0.09)

ln(daily per prisoner cost)             -1.25                      -1.24             -1.24             -1.22
                                       (0.33)                     (0.31)            (0.31)            (0.30)

Percent capacity                       1.19                        1.20              1.20              1.19
                                      (0.32)                      (0.32)            (0.32)            (0.32)

Future recidivism                      0.08                         .08              0.10              0.03
                                      (0.26)                      (0.27)            (0.29)            (0.18)



Uncensored obs                        1,371                        1,236             909               201

Censored obs                           342                         342               249                49

Sources: authors’ calculations from Rhode Island prison reports (1856-1907).




                                                                     49
                                                              Table 5
                                          Heckman selection specification results – All crimes

                                  (1)                  (2)                 (3)              (4)                 (5)                   (6)
                             Full sample          Full sample         Full sample       No pardons          No pardons            No pardons
                              two-step               MLE                 MLE             two-step             MLE                   MLE

                                                   A. Selection equation: Early release (0/1)

ln(Sentence)                     0.076                0.297              0.069             0.042                0.288                0.044
                               (0.013)**            (0.016)**          (0.013)**         (0.016)**            (0.022)**            (0.016)**

% Capacity                       0.721                0.902               0.549            0.595                0.719                0.637
                               (0.207)**            (0.194)**           (0.269)*         (0.218)**            (0.190)**            (0.221)**

% Capacity2                      -0.238               -0.345              -0.165           -0.189               -0.272               -0.208
                               (0.090)**            (0.084)**            (0.113)          (0.094)*            (0.081)**             (0.096)*

ln(Cost)                         0.333                0.160              0.344             0.430                0.391                0.431
                               (0.023)**            (0.039)**          (0.025)**         (0.028)**            (0.032)**            (0.025)**

ln(Age release)                  0.220                0.124              0.212             0.241                0.165                0.241
                               (0.031)**            (0.032)**          (0.035)**         (0.032)**            (0.033)**            (0.032)**

Constant                         -4.958               -8.855             -4.069            -3.384               -8.263               -3.536
                               (0.805)**            (0.659)**          (1.122)**         (0.865)**            (0.751)**            (0.869)**

Nativity dummies                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 F-stat (p-value)                (0.10)              (0.11)              (0.07)            (0.10)               (0.03)               (0.04)

                                                               B. Days off regression

Future recidivist                -0.536               -0.492               --              -0.383               -0.361                  --
                               (0.172)**            (0.130)**                            (0.140)**            (0.090)**

ln(sentence)                       --                   --               2.029               --                   --                 1.950
                                                                       (0.028)**                                                   (0.029)**

ln(Age release)                    --                   --               0.139               --                   --                 0.258
                                                                        (0.065)*                                                   (0.054)**

Constant                         4.183                4.188             -10.750            3.740                3.744               -10.029
                               (0.076)**            (0.058)**          (0.555)**         (0.064)**            (0.048)**            (0.253)**

Nativity dummies                  No                   No                 Yes               No                   No                   Yes
 F-stat (p-value)                                                        (0.07)                                                      (0.04)

lamba                            -1.529               -1.671              0.289            -1.251               -1.301                -0.053
                                (0.203)              (0.056)             (0.272)          (0.169)              (0.050)               (0.024)

Wald test statistic                --                407.19               1.00               --                277.62                 4.55
(p-value)                                            (0.00)              (0.32)                                (0.00)                (0.03)

Note: selection equation results, except constant, are marginal effects corrected for inclusion in both equations, when relevant. Wald test: null
is independent equations in maximum likelihood estimation (MLE).
** implies p-value <0.01; * implies p-value <0.05.




                                                                         50
                                                  Table 6
                       Heckman selection specifications – Property and violent crimes

                                  (1)                       (2)                          (3)                       (4)
                            Property crimes           Property crimes              Violent crimes            Violent crimes
                                  All                   No pardons                      All                   No pardons

                                            A: Selection equation: Early release (0/1)

ln(Sentence)                      0.293                     0.288                          0.255                  0.272
                                (0.031)**                 (0.031)**                      (0.033)**              (0.076)**

% Capacity                         0.534                     0.427                         1.475                   1.213
                                 (0.246)*                  (0.225)*                      (0.589)*                (0.534)*

% Capacity2                       -0.196                    -0.155                        -0.553                  -0.460
                                 (0.105)                   (0.094)                       (0.274)*                (0.229)*

ln(Cost)                          0.309                     0.437                          -0.010                  0.204
                                (0.047)**                 (0.035)**                       (0.066)                (0.098)*

ln(Age at release)                0.229                     0.248                          0.156                  0.098
                                (0.042)**                 (0.043)**                      (0.075)*                (0.070)

Constant                          -9.163                    -8.698                        -10.910                 -8.917
                                (1.024)**                 (0.988)**                      (1.522)**              (1.802)**

Nativity dummies                   Yes                       Yes                           Yes                     Yes
F-stat (p-value)                  (0.03)                    (0.00)                        (0.07)                  (0.14)

                                               B: Outcome equation: ln(Days off)

Future recidivist                 -0.429                    -0.328                         -0.520                 -0.130
                                (0.115)**                 (0.093)**                       (0.491)                (0.443)

Constant                          3.747                     3.501                          4.106                  3.683
                                (0.059)**                 (0.047)**                      (0.145)**              (0.120)**

Lamba                             -1.209                    -1.086                         -1.862                 -1.449
                                 (0.079)                  (0.050)**                      (0.127)**              (0.123)**

Wald test statistic              124.63                     158.34                        35.71                   25.50
(p-value)                        (0.00)                     (0.00)                        (0.00)                  (0.00)

Censored/Uncensored              967/249                   909/249                        270/49                  250/49
N

Note: selection equation results, except constant, are marginal effects corrected for inclusion in both equations, when
relevant. Wald test: null is independent equations in maximum likelihood estimation (MLE).
** implies p-value <0.01; * implies p-value <0.05.




                                                                         51
                                   Appendix Table A1
                            Determinants of receiving a pardon

                                  (1)             (2)               (3)      (4)

Arson (malicious burning)        0.141                             1.132
                               (0.066)*                          (0.478)*

Assault                          -0.035                             --
                               (0.007)**

Assault w/weapon                 -0.022                            -1.256
                                (0.012)                          (0.282)**

Attempted rape                   -0.018                            1.356
                                (0.019)                          (0.246)**

Attempted robbery                0.027                             0.531
                                (0.061)                          (0.246)*

Breaking-dwelling                -0.032                            -1.081
                               (0.008)**                         (0.246)**

Breaking-commercial              -0.018                            -0.196
                                (0.009)                           (0.402)

Burglary                         0.199                             1.133
                               (0.041)**                         (0.285)**

Counterfeiting                   0.112                             -1.187
                                (0.070)                           (0.731)

Embezzlement                     0.064                             0.266
                                (0.055)                           (0.592)

Entering-dwelling                -0.036                             --
                               (0.007)**

Entering-commercial              -0.036                             --
                               (0.007)**

Fraud                             --                                --

Forgery                          0.122                             0.284
                               (0.039)**                          (0.292)

Larceny from person              -0.029                            -0.873
                               (0.010)**                         (0.246)**

Manslaughter                     0.184                             1.334
                               (0.065)**                         (0.410)**

Murder                           0.389                             2.795
                               (0.079)**                         (0.290)**

Rape                             0.349                             1.795
                               (0.136)**                         (0.318)**

Receiving stolen goods           -0.036                             --
                               (0.007)**

Robbery                          0.164                             1.002
                               (0.047)**                         (0.308)**




                                                        52
                                           Appendix Table A1
                                    Determinants of receiving a pardon

                                           (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)

Sentence / Mean sentence                                        0.031                                    0.591
                                                              (0.009)**                                (0.130)**

Constant                                  0.036                 0.012                6.156               6.015
                                        (0.007)**              (0.008)             (0.246)**           (0.191)**

N                                         2485                  2215                  135                  90

F-statistic                                10.4                 13.0                  92.8                20.6


R-square                                   0.13                 0.01                  0.63                0.22

Notes: Columns (1) and (2) report regression coefficients from linear probability models (OLS) in which the
dependent variable =1 if the prisoner received a pardon and zero otherwise. Columns (3) and (4) report regression
coefficients from OLS regressions where the dependent variable equals ln(days deducted) only for those receiving a
pardon. The regressor Sentence / Mean Sentence is calculated as the sentence received by individual i for some
crime j divided the mean sentence of all convicts sentenced for crime j. The mean value across all crimes is 1.02
with a standard deviation of 0.68; minimum value = 0.16 and maximum value 6.78. See Data section of further
description of the data and the variables. Standard errors are corrected for heteroskeadsticity using the Huber-White
correction. The excluded category in Columns (1) and (3) is larceny, which was differentiated under Rhode Island
law from larceny from the person.
Sources: authors calculations from data reported in Rhode Island Board of Prison Inspectors (1856-1875) and Rhode
Island Board of State Charities (1876-1910).




                                                                         53
                                          Appendix Table A2
                                     Determinants of sentence length

                                          (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)

ln(Recommended sentence)               0.493**               (0.022)             0.495**             (0.028)

Age                                      0.009               (0.008)              0.010              (0.008)

Age squared                             -0.0001             (0.0001)             -0.0001            (0.0001)

Massachusetts                                                                     -0.008             (0.043)

Connecticut                                                                       0.127              (0.079)

Other New England                                                                -0.180*             (0.069)

Mid-Atlantic                                                                      0.037              (0.052)

South                                                                             -0.096             (0.091)

Old Northwest                                                                     -0.067             (0.103)

Ireland                                                                          -0.120*             (0.054)

Canada                                                                          -0.181**             (0.060)

Britain                                                                         -0.234**             (0.058)

Germany                                                                           -0.012             (0.132)

Italy                                                                             0.129              (0.138)

Other Immigrant                                                                   -0.039             (0.088)

Constant                               4.430**               (0.177)             4.427**             (0.179)

Observations                             2407                                     2407

F-stat                                 103.1**                                   23.24**

Notes: Columns (1) and (3) report ordinary least squares (OLS) regression coefficients in which the dependent
variable = ln(Sentence Lenth), where sentence length is measured in months. Columns (2) and (4) report estimated
standard errors on the coefficients. Recommended Sentence is the midpoint of the statutory minimum and maximum
sentence. The midpoint for larceny, for example, is 54, which is based on a minimum 12 month and maximum 120-
month sentence (i.e., 54= (120-12)/2). Standard errors are corrected for heteroskeadsticity using the Huber-White
correction. The excluded category in Columns (1) and (3) is Rhode Island nativity.
Sources: authors calculations from data reported in Rhode Island Board of Prison Inspectors (1856-1875) and Rhode
Island Board of State Charities (1876-1910).




                                                                       54
                                           Appendix Table A2
                                     Determinants of future recidivism

                                           (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)

ln(Sentence)                            -0.024**               (0.007)             -0.028**              (0.009)

ln(Age at Release)                      -0.085**               (0.020)             -0.083**              (0.020)

Massachusetts                           -0.063**               (0.019)             -0.041**              (0.011)

Connecticut                              -0.05**               (0.017)             -0.060**              (0.009)

Other New England                         -0.050               (0.033)               -0.029              (0.020)

Mid-Atlantic                            -0.068**               (0.021)              -0.041*              (0.012)

South                                    -0.064*               (0.033)               -0.036              (0.018)

Old Northwest                            -0.087*               (0.035)               -0.047              (0.017)

Ireland                                  -0.047*               (0.022)               -0.029              (0.014)

Canada                                  -0.090**               (0.021)              -0.052*              (0.011)

Britain                                  -0.053*               (0.026)               -0.032              (0.015)

Germany                                   -0.043               (0.053)               -0.026              (0.038)

Italy                                   -0.080**               (0.024)               -0.051              (0.015)

Other Immigrant                          -0.065*               (0.031)               -0.037              (0.020)

Constant                                 0.558**               (0.080)

Observations                              1782                                       1782

F-stat / Wald chi sq                     4.86**                                     57.5**

Notes: Column (1) reports ordinary least squares (OLS) or linear probability regression coefficients in which the
dependent variable = Future Recidivist, which equals one if the convicts served a second term in the state prison and
zero otherwise. Column (3) reports the estimated marginal effects from a probit regression with Future recidivist as
the dependent variable. Columns (2) and (4) report estimated standard errors on the coefficients. Recommended
Sentence is the midpoint of the statutory minimum and maximum sentence. The midpoint for larceny, for example,
is 54, which is based on a minimum 12 month and maximum 120-month sentence (i.e., 54= (120-12)/2). Standard
errors are corrected for heteroskeadsticity using the Huber-White correction. The excluded category in Columns (1)
and (3) is Rhode Island nativity.
Sources: authors calculations from data reported in Rhode Island Board of Prison Inspectors (1856-1875) and Rhode
Island Board of State Charities (1876-1910).




                                                                         55
