                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE RETURNS TO THE FEDERAL TAX CREDITS FOR HIGHER EDUCATION

                                         George B. Bulman
                                         Caroline M. Hoxby

                                        Working Paper 20833
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20833


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily represent
the views of the Internal Revenue Service, the U.S. Treasury Department, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This work is a component of a larger project examining the effects of federal
tax and other expenditures that affect higher education. Selected, de-identified data were accessed
through contract TIR-NO-12-P-00378 with the Statistics of Income (SOI) Division at the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service. The authors gratefully acknowledge the help of Barry W. Johnson of the Statistics
of Income Division, Internal Revenue Service. The authors also gratefully acknowledge comments
from Jeffrey Brown, James Poterba, Martin Feldstein, Nicholas Turner, Gerald Auten, and Adam Cole.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by George B. Bulman and Caroline M. Hoxby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Returns to the Federal Tax Credits for Higher Education
George B. Bulman and Caroline M. Hoxby
NBER Working Paper No. 20833
January 2015
JEL No. H2,H24,I22,I23,I26,I28

                                             ABSTRACT

Three tax credits benefit households who pay tuition and fees for higher education. The credits have
been justified as an investment: generating more educated people and thus more earnings and externalities
associated with education. The credits have also been justified purely as tax cuts to benefit the middle
class. In 2009, the generosity of and eligibility for the tax credits expanded enormously so that their
2011 cost was $25 billion. Using selected, de-identified data from the population of potential filers,
we show how the credits are distributed across households with different incomes. We estimate the
causal effects of the federal tax credits using two empirical strategies (regression kink and simulated
instruments) which we show to be strong and very credibly valid for this application. The latter strategy
exploits the massive expansion of the credits in 2009. We present causal estimates of the credits' effects
on postsecondary attendance, the type of college attended, the resources experienced in college, tuition
paid, and financial aid received. We discuss the implications of our findings for society's return on
investment and for the tax credits' budget neutrality over the long term (whether higher lifetime earnings
generate sufficient taxes to recoup the tax expenditures). We assess several explanations why the
credits appear to have negligible causal effects.


George B. Bulman
Department of Economics
University of California
1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
gbulman@ucsc.edu

Caroline M. Hoxby
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Building, 579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
choxby@stanford.edu
1 Introduction to the Tax Credits for Higher Education
Since 1997 the U.S. federal government has offered tax credits--the Hope Tax
Credit (HTC) and Tax Credit for Lifelong Learning (TCLL)--to households who
pay tuition and fees for higher education. In 2009, the enactment of the
American Opportunity Tax Credit (AOTC) made the postsecondary tax credits
much more generous. It also expanded eligibility for the credits to a large
number of low-income and higher-income households that had previously been
ineligible. The estimated fiscal cost of the tax credits is $23 billion for 2014.
For comparison, the much better-known Pell Grant program, which provides
grants to low-income students, cost approximately $33 billion in the same year.
All other federal programs that support higher education are smaller.
    From 1997 to today, proponents have offered two main justifications for
the tax credits. The first is that tax credits will induce individuals to invest
more in their own education, causing them to have improved earnings and
other improved outcomes (some of which may occur through social mechanisms
such as educational spillovers or reduced dependency). The improvements will
be such that the tax credits ultimately pay for themselves--for the federal
government in particular or for society in general. Hereafter, we classify
arguments under this general heading as "return on investment" (ROI)
arguments.
    Some proponents of the tax credits have suggested, as a second
justification, that they are simply a tax cut--more especially a "middle class tax
cut." Although this justification has always been more controversial than the
ROI argument, it is safe to say that at least some proponents would judge the
credits to be successful if they could be shown to be an efficient means of
reducing taxes relative to other tax cuts with similar incidence.
    In this paper, we show how the tax expenditures associated with the tax
credits are distributed among households. This evidence should help readers
assess the credits' distributional consequences purely as tax cuts. Most of the
study is, however, dedicated to assessing the ROI argument. It is logically
necessary for this argument that the tax credits have a causal effect on some
educational outcome such as college attendance, the educational resources
students experience, or the type of college students attend. Once one has
obtained causal effects on such outcomes, one can project their long-term
consequences by, for instance, by associating changes in college attendance
with changes in lifetime earnings.
    The main challenge in this study is to identifying causal effects of the tax
credits. Our first approach relies on the phase-out of each tax credit. Each
phase-out creates two kinks in an otherwise linear relationship between
household income and the tax credit obtainable. These kinks allow us to use
regression kink methods to estimate effects of the tax credits. These methods
are suitable not only because they can produce highly credibly causal estimates
but also because we estimate the kinks precisely using dense data from the
population of potential tax returns. The limitation of the regression kink
estimates is that they inform us only about causal effects for households in the

                                        2
vicinity of the phase-out range of income. If the effects on these households is
dissimilar from the effects on, say, low-income households, we have learned
only part of the story.
     Therefore, we also use the method of simulated instruments to analyze the
effects of the tax credits. In particular, we look before and after the enactment
of the AOTC in 2009. This enactment greatly increased the generosity of the
tax credits and also extended credits to households that had previously been
ineligible. Thus, we have "before" and "after" periods and we have households
whose eligibility was changed ("treated") and whose eligibility was unchanged
("controls"): the ingredients of a classic difference-in-differences analysis.
Because the changes in the tax credits are complicated, we form simulated
instruments that embody the policy-driven (and only the policy-driven) changes
in the credits available to a household. Nevertheless, one should think of the
simulated instruments analysis as logically analogous to a differences-in-
differences analysis.
     The advantage of the simulated instruments analysis is that we can assess
the effects of the tax credits on households of all income levels, not just
households in the phase-out ranges. However, a disadvantage is that the 2008
to 2009 period is hard to analyze because the financial crisis and recession
might also have affected higher education. For instance, the method could be
undermined by effects of the business cycle that differ for students with
different family incomes. Nevertheless, we are confident that our simulated
instruments findings can dependably be interpreted as causal. Our confidence
is based on three facts. First, changes in the generosity of the tax credits were
spread throughout the income distribution. There were low-income, middle-
income, and high-income individuals who were "treated." Similarly, there were
low-, middle-, and high-income "controls" who experienced little or no change
in the tax credits. Second, we can show that individuals who would be more or
less affected by the enactment of the AOTC were on parallel trends, in terms
of college outcomes, prior to the AOTC. Third, when applied to the relatively
high income individuals for whom we have regression kink results, the
simulated instruments method produces results that are essentially the same.
     Having produced credible estimates of the causal effects of the tax credits
on outcomes such as college attendance, we consider the implications for the
ROI argument. We conclude the paper by discussing explanations for the
apparently negligible causal effects of the tax credits. We also discuss the tax
credits purely as tax cuts.
     We benefit from several excellent, previous studies of the tax credits for
higher education. Crandall-Hollick (2012a, 2012b) concisely summarizes the
provisions of the higher education tax credits and the legislative debate
surrounding them. Lederman's (1997) narrative about the lobbying for and
passage of the tax credits is highly informative about the announced intentions
of their proponents. Several previous studies have predicted the impact of the
credits or highlighted their peculiar features: Hoxby (1998), Davis (2002),
Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2006), Kane (1997), and Maag and Rohlay (2007).


                                       3
     Long (2004b) assesses the impact of the initial introduction of the credits.
She uses the data from the National Postsecondary Student Aid Survey to
show their distributional consequences. She then uses differences-in-
differences methods on the 1990 through 2000 October Enrollment
Supplements to the Current Population Survey to show that the introduction
of the tax credits appears to have generated little or no increase in
postsecondary enrollment. Long classifies students based on their actual
eligibility for the credit.
     Like Long (2004b), Turner (2011) analyzes the initial enactment of the tax
credits. He relies on data from the 1996 and 2001 waves of the Survey of
Income and Program Participation, and uses an approach that is essentially
differences-in-differences. However, he classifies students by their potential
eligibility for the credits. In other work, Turner (2012a, 2012b) investigates
whether the tax credits are offset by tuition increases and why many filers fail
to take the tax credit that would apparently benefit them most.
     Relative to Long (2004b) and Turner (2011), we make several
improvements. First, we use data from the population of potential tax return
filers. These allow us to be fairly definitive about the distributional
consequences of the credits. They also allow us to use the regression kink
method--a method that is not reliable with data that is less than very dense.
(Certain key variables are not available before 1999 so we do not study the
initial enactment of the credits.) Second, although we cannot study the initial
introduction of the tax credits, the enactment of the AOTC provides us with a
much larger shock to tax expenditures than the initial introduction provided.
The fiscal cost of the credits rose by $12 billion between 2008 and 2009 ($2014
dollars). The fiscal cost rose by only $4.9 billion when the credits were initially
introduced ($2014 dollars). The AOTC also affected households over a much
wider range of incomes than the HTC and TCLL Third, our use of simulated
instruments is a major improvement over both the Long and Turner methods.
This point is subtle but boils down to the fact that we observe both the exact
use of the tax credits and exact eligibility for the credits. This allows us to
instrument for the actual credits with the credits for which the filer is eligible.
This is superior to using just the actual credits (Long) because the actual
credits are potentially endogenous. It is also superior to using only an inexact
measure of eligibility in a reduced-form analysis (Turner). Instrumental
variables analysis is strictly superior to the reduced-form analysis because we
obtain the correct magnitudes of the effects.1 Fourth, since the data are
longitudinal, we know the filer on whom an individual would be a dependent
if she were a student. This allows us to construct tax credit eligibility even for
those who are not students. Finally, because we have very dense data, we can


1
  Turner estimates a reduced-form whereas we estimate by instrumental variables.
While time-series and cross-sectional variation in eligibility drives the estimates in both
cases, only the instrumental variables results will deliver coefficients of the correct
magnitudes.

                                            4
construct simulated instruments based on behavior that is typical for
households in precise income ranges. This is also a subtle point but it greatly
increases our statistical power to discern effects relative to what Turner has
to do.2
    We are able to make these improvements over prior studies mainly because
we have better data. They allow the estimates to be fully representative (an
obvious point) but also allow us to use empirical methods that are otherwise
infeasible. Had we only the limited survey data that Long and Turner had, we
would have had been hard-pressed to improve upon their studies.

2 The Tax Credits
2.1      The Mechanics of the Tax Credits
In the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, two important and "permanent" tax credits
were enacted: the HTC and the TCLL. Both credits reduce the amount that
a household owes in taxes, dollar for dollar, when the household spends a
sufficient amount on qualifying postsecondary tuition and fees. A household
does not need to itemize deductions to take these credits, but the HTC and
TCLL are non-refundable so that these credits can only reduce a household's
tax liability to zero. Thus, a household with no tax liability cannot benefit from
the credits and a household with little tax liability may benefit only to a limited
extent.
     The HTC gives a household a credit equal to 100 percent of its first $1200
and 50 percent of its second $1200 of expenditure on each student's qualifying
tuition and fees.3 Thus, the maximum amount of the credit is $1800 per
student, and this maximum can reached only by households that spend at least
$2400 per student. For his tuition and fees to qualify, a student must be
enrolled at least half time in the first two years of a postsecondary education
that could lead to some degree or certificate. In 2008, the HTC phased-out
between $48,000 and $58,000 of modified adjusted gross income for single tax
filers. The phase-out range was $96,000 to $116,000 for married joint filers.
(Hereafter, we use "income" to denote modified adjusted gross income.)
     Independent students (mainly students age 24 and over) receive the credit


2
   Turner assigns each student to the maximum tax credit for which she would be
eligible if she enrolled in college and had tuition spending equal to or greater than the
relevant credit's spending limit. This is the best available procedure given his data.
3
  The HTC and TCLL have had their parameters adjusted multiple times to account
for inflation. In 1997, the HTC was 100 percent of the first $1000 and 50 percent of the
second $1000. Because the HTC has been effectively suspended since the 2009
introduction of the AOTC, the tuition and fee numbers in this paragraph reflect the
HTC parameters in 2008. However, the phase-out range for the HTC is the same as
that for the TCLL so we know where the HTC would phase out--were it in effect--in
2009 and after. If the AOTC expires in 2017, as planned under current legislation, the
HTC will resume with tuition and fee parameters that take account of inflation between
2008 and 2017.

                                           5
themselves. However, if a student is a dependent of another tax filer, as most
full-time students under age 24 are, then the HTC goes to the filer--typically
a parent. In theory, there is no limit on the number of dependent students a
family could have who qualify for the HTC. In practice, it is most common for
there to be only one credit per filer and it is rare for there to be more than two
because each child is eligible only during her first two years of college.
     It is important to note that the credit is for expenses paid in the relevant
tax year. For instance, if a student entered college in the 2007-08 school year,
his family would typically pay for the fall term in the summer of 2007 and pay
for the spring term in December of 2007 or January of 2008. If the family paid
for both fall and spring in calendar year 2007, their expenditures on the 2007-
08 school year would generate a credit on the taxes due on April 15, 2008.
However, if the family paid for spring in January 2008, they would only receive
the credit with their 2008 tax filing, due in April 2009.
     The household itself must spend the money for tuition and fees. If some or
all of a student's college expenses are paid by a tax-free scholarship, fellowship,
grant, employer assistance, or veterans' assistance, the qualifying tuition and
fees are reduced commensurately.
     The TCLL is a non-refundable credit equal to 20 percent of a tax payer's
first $10,000 of expenditure on tuition and fees.4 Thus, the maximum credit is
$2,000. Unlike the HTC, the credit is per tax payer, not per student. The
TCLL can be generated by the tax payer's expenditure on virtually any
postsecondary coursework: undergraduate, graduate, or courses that improve
job skills (even if they are not part of a degree or certificate program). The
other major features of the TCLL--timing, the phase-out ranges, are the same
as for the HTC.
     Although both the HTC and TCLL are "permanent" tax credits, the HTC
has been in abeyance since the enactment of AOTC in 2009 because the AOTC
is more generous than the HTC on all dimensions and expenses cannot qualify
for both. Thus, so long as the AOTC is in effect, the HTC is effectively
suspended. The AOTC was passed as a temporary measure as part of the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.5 Due to expire in 2012, it was
extended for an additional five years by the American Taxpayer Relief Act and
will expire at the end of 2017 under current law.
     The AOTC is equal to 100 percent of the first $2,000 plus 25 percent of the
next $2,000 of a student's qualifying tuition and fee expenditures. Thus, the
maximum credit is $2,500 per student, but $4,000 per student must be spent
to reach that maximum. Unlike the HTC, the AOTC can be claimed for all four
of a student's first four years of postsecondary education.
     It is important for its distributional consequences that, unlike the HTC and


4
   Between 1998 and 2002, the TCLL was equal to 20 percent of the first $5,000 of
expenditures on qualifying tuition and fees.
5
  It was extended to 2012 by the Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization,
and Job Creation Act of 2010.

                                         6
TCLL, the AOTC is partially refundable. Specifically, a tax payer receives a
minimum of 40 percent of what he would receive, per student, had his taxes
owed not been taken into account. Thus, a tax payer who owes zero taxes
receives a check for $1,000 per student if each student spends at least $4,000
on qualifying tuition and fees. Also important for its distributional
consequences are the substantially higher income thresholds before the AOTC
begins to phase out: the range is $80,000 to $90,000 for single filers and
$160,000 to $180,000 for married joint filers. In other words, the AOTC makes
eligible many taxpayers who were previously ineligible for higher education tax
credits because their incomes were either too low or too high. Table 1
summarizes key parameters of the HTC, TCLL, and AOTC from 1999 through
2012.
    Figures 1 through 6 show the tax credits available to a student by income
and spending on qualified tuition and fees. In order to emphasize the change
in the law between 2008 and 2009, these figures are for an individual who, if
he were to attend college, would be a dependent of a married couple filing
jointly. Figure 1 and 2 show the tax credits available to him if he were to
spend $10,000, the tuition at which the TCLL is maximized. Figures 3 and 4
show the credits if he were to spend $4,000, the tuition at which the AOTC is
maximized. Figures 5 and 6 show the credits if he were to spend $2,400, the
tuition at which the HTC is maximized.
    There are a few things to take away from these figures. First, for students
with less than $9,000 in qualified tuition, the HTC is always preferable to the
TCLL. Above $9,000, the TCLL is always preferable to the HTC. Thus, up
through 2008, many students would take the HTC in their first two years and
only take the TCLL in the third and high years. Second, the AOTC is more
generous at every income and tuition level than the HTC or TCLL. Thus, from
2009 to today, all students in their first four years of postsecondary school
should take the AOTC in preference to the TCLL. Third, each figure shows
that the tax credits phase out rather sharply. The HTC and TCLL always
phase out in the same income range, which is much lower than the AOTC's
phase-out range.
    Fourth, on the left hand side of each figure, there is what appears to be a
phase-in range for the HTC and TCLL. This is not a true phase-in but, rather,
the empirical evolution of federal tax liability which limits the HTC and TCLL
because they are nonrefundable. That is, owing to exemptions, deductions,
brackets, and certain non-education credits (the credits for child care expenses
and foreign taxes), households with fairly low incomes have negative, no, or
small positive tax liability before the education tax credits are considered.
Thus, the tax credits grow with income in the lower ranges but not because of
income per se. Rather, a whole host of tax provisions affect a household's tax
liability in the lower range and it is the combination of all these provisions that
makes the education credits tend to grow with income as an empirical matter.
Put another way, the apparent phase-in would look different if we made
different assumptions about households' children under 17, deductions,


                                        7
allocation of earnings, childcare expenses, and so on.
    We make further use of Figures 1 through 6 below when we exploit the
changes in the tax law between 2008 and 2009 to analyze the causal effects of
the tax credits.

2.2     The Fiscal Cost of the Tax Credits
    Even prior to the enaction of the AOTC, the higher education tax credits
were the single largest educated-related tax expenditure. They represent a
very important component of federal support for students' higher education
expenses. Total tax expenditures on the tax credits were $25.1 billion in 2011.
    Table 2 and Figure 7 show how the fiscal cost of the tax credits grew from
their inception. Actual credits claimed are shown for 1998 through 2012.
Estimated tax expenditures are shown for 2013 through 2015. The data show
the fiscal cost of the higher education tax credits grew gradually in real dollars
until 2008 when they totaled $8.3 billion in 2014 dollars. With the advent of
the AOTC, the tax expenditures on the credits more than doubled in a single
year: the 2009 total was $20.3 billion. Much of the growth in expenditures was
due to the introduction of the refundable component of the credit which cost
$8.4 billion in 2009 and grew to $12.1 billion in 2011, the last year for which
we have non-preliminary actual numbers available. However, the cost of the
nonrefundable component of the tax credits also grew dramatically--by 42
percent between 2008 and 2009.

2.3     The Manner in which the AOTC is Computed
    Here, it is useful to note a curious feature of how the refundable credits are
computed because it affects interpretation of Table 2, Figure 7, and all of our
distributional calculations. One might think that the legislation would have
individuals calculate the AOTC they could take as a nonrefundable credit and
then take the partially refundable credit only if the latter were greater than
the nonrefundable credit. This is not, however, what is done. Instead,
everyone eligible for the AOTC takes the partially refundable credit first (40
percent of qualified tuition and fees after imposing the phase-out). Only then
is the remaining 60 percent of tuition and fees considered for the
nonrefundable credit.6
    The result is that many filers who do not need the AOTC to be refundable--
that is, they have more than enough taxes owed--are reported as taking a
refundable credit. To see why this matters, consider a filer with a single child



6
  The legislation (Public Law 111–5, section 1004) states: "(6) Portion of Credit Made
Refundable.—40 percent of so much of the credit allowed under subsection (a) as is
attributable to the Hope Scholarship Credit (determined after application of paragraph
(4) and without regard to this paragraph and section 26(a)(2) or paragraph (5), as the
case maybe) shall be treated as a credit allowable under subpart C (and not allowed
under subsection (a)). The phrase we have italicized is the crucial part.

                                          8
for whom she spends $10,000 on tuition in 2008. If she has tax liability of at
least $2,000, the filer can get a $2,000 TCLL. With the same circumstances in
2009, the filer can get a refundable credit of $1,000 and a nonrefundable credit
of $1,500. Although her total tax credits have risen by $500 and the
refundability of the AOTC is irrelevant to her, her nonrefundable credit will be
reported as falling by $500.
     In short, the enormous rise in refundable credits from 2009 onwards and
the smaller rise in nonrefundable credits does not mean that most of the tax
expenditure on the AOTC has gone to low-income households. Most of the
increased tax expenditure on the AOTC has gone to households that were
already eligible for the HTC and TCLL or to households with incomes above
the HTC/TCLL phase-out range.             Later, we show the distributional
consequences of the AOTC's refundability where we define it as refundable only
for those filers who would get a different credit were it nonrefundable.

2.4     The Intended Effects of the Tax Credits
It is always difficult to say what legislators intended a policy to do, but there
is good documentation of the origins and debate surrounding the enactment of
the HTC, TCLL, and AOTC. In particular, see Lederman (1997). The majority
of the justifications for the tax credits suggest that they were intended to cause
an increase in students' investments in higher education.
     For instance, in the Princeton University commencement address in which
he initially proposed tax credits that would become the HTC and TCLL,
President Clinton said:
     America knows that higher education is the key to the growth we need
     to lift our country....Today, the college-educated worker makes 74
     percent more than the high school worker. Higher education is the key
     to a successful future in the 21century. We must say to all Americans:
     Go to college....That is why, today, I am announcing a new plan to
     complete our college strategy, and make two years of college as
     universal as four years of high school. And the right way to do it is to
     give families a tax cut, targeted to achieve our national goal....[N]o tax
     cut will do more to raise incomes and spur economic growth over the
     long haul than one designed to help people to college.

    Similarly, President Obama proposed a fully refundable higher education
tax credit when campaigning late in 2007:
    It ... means putting a college education within reach of every American.
    That's the best investment we can make in our future. I'll create a new
    and fully refundable tax credit worth $4,000 for tuition and fees every
    year, which will cover two-thirds of the tuition at the average public




                                        9
    college or university.7

While the tax credits enacted do not precisely match the policies initially
envisioned by Presidents Clinton or Obama, both speeches emphasize the ROI
argument. That is, the presidents suggest that the tax credits will cause
students to invest more in higher education which will generate higher future
earnings, greater economic growth, and other benefits over the long term.
Notably, both speeches suggest that the tax credits will have a causal effect on
college education and that they represent an investment (not a simple transfer
of income).
     In contrast, Lederman (1997) indicates that, when pushing their passage,
various policy makers argued that the higher education tax credits were simply
a well-targeted middle class tax cut. For instance, he quotes the then head of
the National Economic Council, Gene Sperling, as saying, "This is a middle-
class tax break, first and foremost."
     It would be hard to justify the higher education tax credits purely as a
method of cutting the taxes of middle-income households because they require
substantially more paperwork than would a reduction in the tax rates applied
to middle incomes. However, we may speculate that the tax credits were
intended to direct tax relief to middle-income households who invest in higher
education rather than, say, spend money on consumption. Such intentions
would be consistent with optimal tax logic which, as rule, suggests that income
that is invested should be treated differently than income that is consumed.
For instance, fundamental tax reform proposals often provide for income that
is invested being pre-tax (not subject to tax) while income that is consumed is
post-tax.8 Like the simpler ROI arguments, optimal tax-based arguments
require that (i) the credits have causal effects on families' spending on higher
education, (ii) families' college spending is actually an investment with
positive expected returns. The latter requirement is something we evaluate in
other studies but that is beyond the scope of this study.
     Alternatively, policy makers may have preferred the higher education tax
credits to a simpler rate cut for middle-income households because the credits
were less transparent. That is, policy makers may have been willing to accept
more paperwork and a lack of causal effects in return for a tax cut that was
politically more feasible because it appeared to be an education program, not
tax relief program.




7
   Barack Obama, "Remarks in Bettendorf, Iowa: 'Reclaiming the American Dream'",
November 7, 2007. Posted online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The
American Presidency Project. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=77019
8
  The proceeds of the investments are eventually consumed so all income is eventually
taxed. A practical classic on fundamental tax reform is Bradford (1984). See
Stantcheva (2014) for an optimal tax analysis using the most modern methods.

                                         10
3 Data
We rely on selected, de-identified data from an IRS database. We use variables
derived from Form 8863: qualified spending on tuition and fees, the refundable
credit (from 2009 onwards), and the nonrefundable credit before it is limited
by taxes owed. We also use tax credit-related variables from returns: modified
adjusted gross income, taxes owed before credits, and credits that are
considered before the education credit. For non-filers, we use wages from Form
W-2 in place of adjusted gross income. Finally, we use variables derived from
Form 1098t (the form on which institutions report payments of tuition and
fees): tuition and fee payments, whether the student is enrolled at least half-
time, whether the student is enrolled in graduate studies, and scholarships and
grants received by the student.
     It is not always possible to use 1098t-derived variables to compute the
credit for which the filer is eligible. First, scholarships are reported in such a
way that they cannot be used for precise tax credit calculations. If a
scholarship can pay for qualified tuition and fees and can also pay for other
expenses such as room and board, only the part of scholarship that pays for
tuition and fees should be subtracted from the payment made by the student's
family. However, all of the scholarship is typically reported on the 1098t.
Below, we show lower bounds that assume that all of the scholarships reported
pay for tuition and fees. We show upper bounds that assume that none of the
scholarships pay for tuition and fee. Second, tax years are not aligned with
school years, and the restrictions on the HTC and AOTC are a function of how
many years of school the student has enrolled in. It is possible that a student
who has been reported as enrolled at least half-time in two previous tax years
is, in fact, only beginning her second year of enrollment. Thus, the lower bound
we show below assumes that the a student is ineligible for the HTC (AOTC)
once she has been reported as enrolled half-time in two (four) previous years.
Our upper bound allows her three (five) previous years before she is ineligible
for the HTC (AOTC). Summing up, when we use 1098t-derived variables to
compute the credit for which the filer is eligible, our upper bound overstates
the truth probably much more than our lower bound understates the truth.
     We use information on each postsecondary school's characteristics from the
U.S. Department of Education's Integrated Postsecondary Education Data
System (IPEDS). We employ College Board and ACT data in a limited
capacity.

4 The Distribution of the Tax Credits
In this section, we examine how the higher education tax credits are
distributed among households. This is not merely a matter of who is
potentially eligible based on income. It is also a matter of how much each
student and tax filer spends on tuition and fees and what the student's college
attendance patterns are. Thus, a household with a college-aged individual who
is academically ready for college may get a credit when a household with a
similarly college-aged but not college-ready individual could not get a credit.

                                       11
Even within households with the same income and same college readiness, one
household may get the credit and another may not owing to differences in local
schools' tuition and fees, the availability of full-time degree programs, and so
on. Even within households who have the same income, same college
experience, and same expenditures on tuition and fees, some may take up a
credit when others fail to do so owing to, for instance, their knowledge of the
tax law. See Davis (2002) and Turner (2011a).
     Table 3 shows potential and actual higher education tax credits for 19 and
20 year olds in 2008. This and the subsequent tables, which present different
age ranges and tax years, are structured similarly. Thus, it is worthwhile
reviewing the table structure here. Each row of the table shows an income
group: 0 to $10000, $10001 to $20000, and so on up to $190,000 to $200,000.
     The left-hand column shows the number of 19 and 20 year olds who would
belong to each income group were they to be students who would (therefore)
typically qualify as dependents. That is, the column shows the approximate
number of 19 and 20 year olds who could be affected by the tax credits. For the
"potential" calculations, we assign 19 and 20 year olds an income group based
on the 2008 income of the person of whom they were a dependent at age 17.
This is regardless of whether they are still a dependent since their 2008
dependency is a function of whether they actually choose to be a student, which
is possibly a function of the tax credits.
     The next column shows the percentage of the 19 and 20 year olds in the
left-hand column who appear to qualify for a tax credit based on 1098t
information returns. That is, the column shows the share of 19 and 20 year
olds who are reported to pay qualified tuition and fees and who are eligible for
a credit based on the filer's income and tax due before credits. Observe that
low income individuals tend not to qualify because they do not owe positive tax
before credits. No individual above the phase-out range qualifies.
     The next column shows the total tax expenditure associated with the tax
credits that could be received by the 19 and 20 year olds. To make these
calculations, we need to determine whether an individual is in her first two
years of postsecondary school and whether she attends at least half-time. This
allows us to determine whether she qualifies for the HTC or only for the TCLL.
     The two aforementioned columns show minimum and maximums for the
19 and 20 year olds who qualify for a tax credit. These are the lower and upper
bounds mentioned in the previous section. Keep in mind that the upper bound
is probably farther from the truth than the lower bound.
     So far, we have only considered the potential higher education tax credits.
That is, we have shown how they would be distributed if they were to be based
purely on administrative reports. We have not accounted for take-up.
     The remaining three columns address this gap by showing how the tax
credits are actually distributed based on variables derived from returns and
Form 8863. The potential (1098t based) and actual (8863 based) distribution
of the tax credits can differ for at least four reasons. First, some postsecondary
institutions might not file accurate 1098t returns. Second, some families might


                                       12
(deliberately or mistakenly) overstate or understate their true qualified
spending on tuition and fees. Third, some families who qualify for a tax credit
and who would report their qualified tuition and fees accurately if they knew
to do it might be unaware of the tax credits and fail to take them up. Fourth,
some families who take up a tax credit might fail to take the one that benefits
them most.
     The next column presents the percentage of 19 and 20-year-olds who are
actually associated with a nonrefundable credit--the only type of credit
available in 2008.        The subsequent column presents their average
nonrefundable credit.9 The final column presents the tax expenditure
associated with the students in each income group.
     The corresponding tables for 2009 have additional columns that show the
refundable part of the AOTC.
     Having reviewed the structure of the table, now consider what Table 3
shows. The table demonstrates that, in 2008, the credit was very much a
middle-class affair. For instance, there were 902,946 19 and 20 year olds who,
had they been dependent students, would have been in households with
$20,001 to $30,000 of income. Only 16 to 23 percent of them appear to have
qualified for a credit based on 1098t information, and only 7 percent of them
actually got a tax credit. The potential tax expenditure on them was $79 to 134
million, and the actual tax expenditure on them was $37 million. This modest
tax expenditure is partly because many were not students and partly because
many owed insufficient taxes to benefit from a nonrefundable credit.
Furthermore, their average tax credit when they did take one was a modest
$631. Compare this record to that of households with $70,001 to $80,000 of
income. They were associated with a smaller number of 19 to 20 year olds who
could have been students: 438,416. However, 45 to 49 percent of them appear
to have qualified for a tax credit based on 1098t information. 30 percent of
them (in other words, about 2/3rds of those who qualified) actually got a tax
credit, and their average tax credit was a much larger $1,394. Thus, the
potential tax expenditure on them was $244 to 323 million, and the actual tax
expenditure was $183 million.
     So far, we have contrasted low-income households, who often spent too
little on tuition or owe insufficient taxes to get tax credits, to middle-income


9
  We can show the average nonrefundable credit per student in all households that
contain a 19 or 20 year old claimant. We can alternatively show the average
nonrefundable credit for 19 and 20 year olds who are the only students in their
households for whom a credit is claimed. The first calculation matches aggregate data.
but includes credits not just for 19 and 20 year olds but for students who are 21 to 23
years old. The older students tend to be eligible only for the TCLL but the breakdown
between the HTC and TCLL by student is not reported. Therefore, there is some
advantage to the second calculation which, though not fully representative, excludes
older dependent students. We did the calculation both ways and found that they were
so similar that we show only the first version.

                                          13
households. But, Table 3 also shows that high-income households got no tax
credits in 2008 because they were above the phase out. For instance,
households with $120,001 to $130,000 in income (just above the phase out) got
no tax credits although they were associated with 167,373 19 and 20 year olds.
    If we divide the actual tax expenditures by the potential tax expenditures
in Table 3, we see that the take-up rate of the tax credits rises almost
monotonically with income until we reach the bottom edge of the phase-out
range. The increasing take-up rate may be due to higher income households
being (or using) better tax preparers. It may also be due to their having more
to gain from filing the tax credit paperwork: their average tax credit is much
larger.
    At least some of the low credit take-up of low-income households was
probably due to their students being poorly prepared for college, especially for
the sort of colleges that would charge sufficient tuition and fees that they
would not have been entirely covered by a Pell Grant. (For students of most
achievement levels, colleges that have more resources are more selective and
charge higher tuition and fees.10) For instance, Appendix Table 1 shows that
only 39.5 percent of 19 and 20 year olds associated with a 2008 household with
$20,001 to $30,000 of income took a college assessment, a prerequisite for
admission to most selective colleges.11 (By including the PSAT©, we are being
very generous in recording someone as having taken a college assessment.)
Among the minority who took an exam, their mean math score was 444 in
SAT© scale points (approximately the 26th percentile among test-takers in that
year).
    In contrast, 59.2 percent of potential students from households with
$70,001 to $80,000 of income took a college assessment. Among those who took
an exam, their mean math score was 496 (the 43rd percentile among test-
takers). More generally, the (admittedly partial) exam-based measure of
college preparedness is monotonically increasing in household income. For
instance, the top income group shown on the table (which is, of course, not the


10
    This pattern is reversed for very high-achieving students. For them, the most
resource-rich institutions charge them the lowest tuition and fees. See Hoxby and
Avery (2013). However, the patterns for these very high-achieving students are largely
irrelevant to the distribution of tax credits: the very high achieving make up only a
small share of total potential students.
11
   We record a student as having taken a college assessment if he or she took the SAT© ,
ACT© , or PSAT© . In some states and some school districts, nearly all students take one
of these of tests owing to universal test-taking policies. In other states, students elect
to take one of these tests. It is rare, however, for a student to enter any selective
college in the U.S. without taking a college assessment. Students with no assessment
scores are typically restricted to enrolling in two-year institutions and "open
enrollment" or nonselective four-year institutions. Of course, some students who take
no assessment exam would have proved to be college ready had they been forced to take
one. However, almost no students who would score very well on a college assessment
fail to take one. For evidence on these points, see Bulman (2012) and Klasik (2013).

                                           14
top income group in the U.S.) has an average math score of 556, the 62nd
percentile. In short, not all of the differences in tax credit receipt are due to
eligibility criteria that are potentially controlled by the federal government.
Some of the differences are probably due to differences in preparation for
college.
     Table 4 is like Table 3 except that it shows numbers for 2009, after the
enactment of the AOTC. In this table,we classify the tax credits as
nonrefundable and refundable according to the IRS definition. We hereafter
refer to this as the "legislative" definition. However, we also present Table 5
which treats as nonrefundable all those credits that would be approximately
the same if the AOTC were purely nonrefundable. We hereafter refer to this
as the "economic" definition of refundability. It is what we need to answer
questions about how refundability changes the distributional consequences of
the credits.
     Because the individuals themselves are very much the same in 2008 and
200912, nearly all of the changes between Table 4 and Table 3 are due to
changes in the tax credit formulae. Most obviously, there is massive increase
in the share of potential and actual tax expenditure for students with incomes
above $120,000. For instance, 71 to 75 percent of 19 or 20 year olds associated
with households with $150,001 to $160,000 of income appear to qualify for a
credit. The potential tax expenditure on them (nonrefundable plus refundable)
is $162 to $178 million, and the actual tax expenditure on them is $135 million.
Their average tax credit (nonrefundable plus refundable) is $2261--close to the
maximum. Notice that the households who are newly eligible due to the raised
phase-out (those with $116,000 to $180,000 in income) disproportionately
contain students who not only have qualifying tuition but enough of it to
generate a substantial credit. Thus, raising the phase-out range to cover them
greatly increased the share of credits taken by relatively high income
households.
     To understand the importance of refundability, it is necessary to examine
Table 5 in which credits are classified according to the economic definition.
Comparing Table 5 to Table 3, we see an enormous increase in the potential tax
expenditure on individuals from low-income households. This is entirely due
to the refundable nature of the AOTC. For instance, among the 962,065
students associated with households with 2009 income of $20,001 to $30,000,
the potential tax expenditure on nonrefundable credits is $81 to $130 million--
almost unchanged from 2008. However, the potential tax expenditure on
economic refundable credits was $0 in 2008 but $128 to $235 million in 2009.
Actual economic refundable tax expenditures on these individuals was a
smaller but still very substantial $94 million. Note also that low-income
students' average refundable credit hovers around $800--that is, 80 percent of



12
  We have verified this statement but do not show the data for reasons of conciseness.
The results are available from the authors.

                                         15
the maximum of $1000 potentially available as a refund.
     In contrast, refundability is unimportant for higher income households. For
households with incomes of $60,001 and up, nearly all of the tax expenditure
comes from credits that would be received regardless of whether the AOTC was
refundable.
     So far we have emphasized the differences caused by income eligibility
changes between the HTC and the AOTC. However, the increased generosity
of the AOTC (four years rather than two years, a $2,500 maximum rather than
an $1,800 maximum) affected middle-income households who were never
limited either by the phase-out or by taxes due. For instance, for households
with $70,001 to $80,000 of income, tax expenditure rose by 92 percent between
2008 and 2009: from $183 to $352 million!
     Tables 6 through 8 replicate Tables 3 through 5 except that they are for
individuals aged 22 to 23. These students would still typically be dependents
if they were enrolled at least half-time. Therefore, for the "potential"
calculations, they are associated with the incomes of the filer on whom they
were dependent at age 17. For these 22 to 23 year olds, we find patterns very
similar to those for 19 to 20 year olds. Many more higher income students take
the credit because they are newly eligible; there is a dramatic increase in
credits for low-income students, entirely because they receive refunds; middle-
income students receive very substantial increases in credits owing to the
increased generosity of the AOTC; the take-up rate rises monotonically with
income.
     To see some of the interesting effects of the AOTC, one must examine
students who are too old to be dependent students. They were unlikely to be
eligible for the HTC in 2008 owing to its being available only for the first two
years of college. However, many are eligible for the AOTC's third and fourth
year. Moreover, the 25- to 26-year-olds are younger than the parents of
dependent students and they are therefore much more bunched at the low end
of the income distribution where refundability matters. Thus, for instance, the
potential tax expenditures on 25- to 26-year olds with $10,000 to $20,000 rises
from $100-128 million in 2008 to $160-226 million in 2009. Actual tax
expenditures on them rose from only $73 million in 2008 to $205 million in
2009. See Tables 9 and 10.13
     Finally, Tables 11 and 12 show potential and actual higher education tax
credits for 29- to 30-year-olds. Again, there are dramatic changes in potential
and actual credits for low income individuals. There is little action in the
middle or higher income ranges, however. This is because most 29- to 30-year-
olds who earn middle and higher incomes have completed their education (at
least their full-time education) and are eligible only for the TCLL whose


13
   For older students, we do not show a version of Tables 5 and 8 --that is, a table in
which we use the economic definition of refundability. This is because young,
independent filers owe so few taxes that the legislative and economic versions of the
refundable credit are very similar.

                                          16
formula does not change from 2008 to 2009.
    We do not show statistics for individuals older than 30 because our analysis
suggests that they were largely unaffected by the introduction of the AOTC.
As a rule, they are ineligible for the AOTC because they have too many years
of prior education and/or are too unlikely to enroll at least half-time.
    Summing up, the AOTC dramatically changed the nature of the federal
higher education tax credits. It made them available to low-income and higher
income households who were previously ineligible. It also greatly increased the
generosity of the credits for middle-income households who were never affected
by the phase-out and who were never limited by taxes due.

5 Take-Up of the Tax Credits and their Coincidence with
Calculations based on Third Party Reports
So far, we have presented calculations that could be used to compute very
rough take-up rates: one can divide actual tax expenditures by potential tax
expenditures. However, these numbers are somewhat deceptive because the
actual tax credit may be smaller or larger than what one would predict based
on third party reports (crucially, 1098t information). If some households take
a smaller and others take a larger tax credit than third party reports suggest,
the households will tend to cancel one another out. As a result, the crude take-
up rate that one could compute using the above tables is hard to interpret.
    In Appendix Table 2, we present more revealing measures of the
coincidence between actual credits and what one would predict based on third
party reports. As in the foregoing tables, we show a lower bound on the tax
credit computed from 1098t information by applying relative stringent criteria.
We also show an upper bound computed by applying generous criteria.
Appendix Table 2 is based on tax filers of all ages in 2011.
    For students who have simple attendance patterns and simple payments,
Form 1098t tends to generate information that entirely coincides with the true
information needed to calculate a tax credit. For instance, if a student attends
college full-time for four years in a row between the ages of 18 and 23 and his
family pays all the tuition itself, Form 1098t can be interpreted in a completely
straightforward way. However, intermittent attendance and scholarships and
grants may make the family better informed about the true information for tax
credit calculations than anyone relying of Form 1098t could be. In short, the
calculations based on the third party reports should not be regarded as the
"truth," but as what they are: the best available calculations given the
information readily available to the IRS.
    Using the stringent criteria, we find that 26 percent of actual and potential
tax credits in 2011 are within $500 of what one would calculate based on third
party reports. (Potential tax credits are those we compute based on third party
reports but that are not taken at all--not even in an amount smaller than the
calculation.) Another 24 percent are at least $500 greater than what one would
calculate based on third party reports. The remaining 50 percent are at least
$500 smaller than what one would calculate based on third party reports.

                                       17
    Using the generous criteria, we find that 24 percent of actual and potential
tax credits in 2011 are within $500 of what one would calculate based on third
party reports. 15 percent are at least $500 greater than what one would
calculate based on third party reports. The remaining 61 percent are at least
$500 smaller than what one would calculate based on third party reports.
    Regardless of whether we use the stringent or generous criteria, another
pattern emerges. Higher income people are more likely to have actual tax
credits that are aligned with third party reports. They are less likely to take
credits greater or smaller than the calculation based on third party reports.
There a few possible explanations. They may be more accurate tax preparers.
They may have more consistent attendance patterns which make the third
party reports more reliable. They may attend postsecondary schools that make
more accurate reports to the IRS.


6 The Causal Effects of the Tax Credits
6.1   Using Regression Kink Analysis at the Boundaries of the
Phrase Ranges to Identify the Causal Effects of the Tax Credits
In this section, we identify the causal effects of the tax credits by exploiting the
fact that the relationship between the credits and income changes at each
"edge" of the phase-out range. The estimates contained in this sub-section are
highly credible because it is very unlikely that any other factors that affect
college-going also just happen to change at exactly the same income numbers.
We are aware that the regression kink method has limitations. These are
discussed below.
    The logic of regression kink analysis is easy to see in figures. Suppose that
there is an underlying relationship between a household's income and its
members' propensity to attend college. This relationship could be the result of
many factors: richer parents might find it easier to pay for tuition but it might
also be that they are more educated themselves and therefore make more effort
to ensure that their children get a postsecondary education. The numerous
factors that combine to generate the relationship do not matter since all that
the regression kink method requires is that the combination of the other
factors generate a relationship with income that changes smoothly, not
sharply, at the exact incomes that form the edges of the phase-out range.
    Figure 8 shows a stylized example. Panel (a) shows what the college
attendance-income relationship might look like in the absence of the tax
credits. That is, panel (a) shows the effects of many factors--parents' ability to
pay for tuition, parents' education, secondary school quality--that affect college
attendance and that are correlated with parents' income. Panel (b) shows the
statutory relationship between the maximum value of the tax credits and
income. This statutory relationship is flat until income reaches the first edge
of the phase-out range. At that first kink, the slope of the credit-income
relationship becomes negative. At the end of the phase-out range, the
relationship abruptly levels out, producing a second kink.

                                        18
     If the tax credits have a causal effect on college attendance then we will see
kinks in the attendance-income relationship at exactly the income levels at
which the phase out begins and ends. Moreover, the changes in the slope of the
attendance-income relationship will mimic the changes in the slope of the tax
credit-income relationship at those two points. This is shown in panel (c),
which shows how the attendance-income relationship will appear if the credits
have positive causal effects on attendance. If, instead, the credits have no
causal effect, the attendance-income relationship will exhibit no change in
slope at the edges of the phase out range.
     Of course, many students do not qualify for the maximum tax credit
because they spend an insufficient amount on qualifying tuition and fees. We
might expect (and, in fact, we will see) that throughout much of the eligibility
range, higher income students tend to qualify for higher credits because they
spend more on tuition. If so, the credit-income relationship will look like that
in Figure 9 panel (a). It is upward sloping until it hits the first edge of the
phase-out range. It is then downward sloping until it hits the second edge of
the phase-out range. After that, the credit-income relationship is flat at zero
credit. Once again, we have a first kink at which the slope changes abruptly
in a negative direction and a second kink at which the slope changes abruptly
in a positive direction. Once again, if tax credits have a causal effect, the
attendance-income relationship will exhibit a negative change in slope at the
first edge of the phase-out range and a positive change in slope at the second
edge. See panel (b) of Figure 9.
     The regression kink method requires that we estimate two equations. In
a first stage, we estimate

(1)


and in a second stage we estimate a parallel equation which we illustrate with
attendance although we estimate it for other outcomes as well.

(2)
In the above equations, L is the lower limit of a phase-out range. The
summation term is a kth order polynomial in income.
     From the above equations, the regression kink estimate of the causal effect
of tax credits on attendance is:

(3)


    We employ similar equations to estimate causal effects at U, the upper
limit of each phase-out range:



                                        19
(4)


(5)


    1So far, we have used stylized figures to illustrate how the regression kink
method works. Now consider how data actually appear. Figure 10 shows the
empirical credit-income relationship in 2007 and in 2011 for students who are
dependents in households that file jointly. In both years, credits rise smoothly
with income until the first edge of the phase-out range. This sweeping curve
reflects higher income students' tendency to pay more tuition. At the first
edge, the relationship abruptly becomes very negative and nearly linear,
indicating that the phase-out formula is dictating the relationship. At the
second edge, the slope of the credit-income relationship abruptly changes again
from negative to flat. Thus, Figure 10 looks very much like the stylized
example in panel (a) of Figure 9.
     Although we have not shown it for reasons of conciseness, the credit-income
relationship looks very similar for every year from the introduction of the
credits though 2012. The relationship also looks similar for single filers, as
opposed to married couples filing jointly. There is always a sharp negative
change in the slope of the credit-income relationship at the lower edge and a
sharp positive change in the slope at the upper edge. Only the height of the
credit and location of the phase-out range changes.
     Figure 10 shows close-ups of the kinks in the empirical credit-income
relationship. These close-ups may seem unnecessary for displaying the kinks
because they are very obvious. However, the regression kink method can
depend on small changes in slopes at the edges of the phase-out range.
Therefore, close-ups are useful for examining the empirical relationships
between outcomes, like attendance, and income.
     We have seen that the credit-income relationship exhibits sharp kinks just
as in the stylized example. Do outcome-income relationships similarly match
what we would expect if the credits have causal effects? Figures 11 through 13
show that the answer is no. The students in Figure 11 correspond to those on
whom Figure 10 is based yet we see no change whatsoever in the slope of their
college attendance-income relationship at the edges of the phase-out range.
(The close-ups are helpful here.) Perhaps, however, students are not changing
whether they attend college but are changing where they attend college. The
tax credit might, for instance, allow them to attend a four-year college rather
than a two-year college. It might allow them to attend a college with higher
instructional resources. We look for evidence of such "upgrading" in Figures
12 through 14 but we see none. At the edges of the 2011 phase-out range, we
do not perceive changes in the slope of the four-year college attendance-income
relationship, the two-year college attendance-income relationship, or the
instructional resources-income relationship. Perhaps the tax credit changes


                                      20
the grants and scholarships a student receives rather than his attendance?
Figure 15 suggests not. It shows no perceptible changes in the slope of the
grants-income relationship at the edges of the phase-out range.14
      Of course, we should not rely exclusively on our visual ability to discern
changes in slopes at the edges of the phase-out range. Therefore, we show the
results of formal regression kink analysis in Tables 13 and 14.
      Table 13 shows estimates of the first stage equations--that is, estimates of
â1 from equations (1) and (4) above. Each equation is estimated for 19 and 20
year olds in the year mentioned using a bandwidth of plus or minus $3,000
around the location of the kink mentioned. The results shown are for a cubic
polynomial following the guidance given by Ganong and Jäger (2014).
Although we do not show alternative specifications, the first stage estimates
are, in fact, highly robust to our (i) changing the degree of the polynomial, (ii)
expanding the bandwidth around each kink as far as plus or minus $10,000,
(iii) focusing on older students, (iv) estimating the equations on years other
than 2007 and 2011.15
      Each estimated coefficient in Table 13 should be interpreted as the change
in the slope of the credit-income relationship that occurs at the kink
mentioned. Thus, for instance, -0.107 in the first row tells us that the slope of
the credit-income relationship decreases by about 11 cents per dollar at the
lower edge of the phase-out range for joint filers in 2011. This makes a great
deal of sense and corresponds closely to what we saw in the Figure 10 close-up.
The credit-income relationship is almost flat at a credit of about $2,200 as it
approaches the lower edge. The relationship then falls fairly linearly so that
the entire $2,200 goes to zero smoothly over a $20,000 income interval. This
means that, just from the figure, we expect the slope to fall from approximately
zero to approximately -0.11. This is exactly what it does. All of the estimated
coefficients in Table 13 can be similarly interpreted and line up similarly with
what we expect based on the credit formula.16 For context, we have included
a column showing the coefficient we would expect if credit-income relationship
were flat at the maximum possible credit when approaching the lower edge of
the phase-out range. Of course, students are not generally at the maximum
credit and the relationship need not be flat approaching the phase-out range.
Nevertheless, these expected coefficients are a reminder of the sign we expect
and the maximum magnitude consistent with the formula.


14
    For conciseness, we show certain outcome-income relationships for 2011 only.
However, they are available from the authors for all outcomes in all years.
15
   We do not mean that the estimated coefficients do not change. We expect them to
change with the year and the individuals' age because the credit formula that applies
changes with year and age. Rather, we mean that the estimated coefficients are always
close to what we expect based on the formula that applies.
16
   We do not show estimates for kinks at which there is insufficiently dense data. For
instance, there are insufficient independent, young filers at the upper edge of the single
and joint phase-out ranges.

                                           21
     We use selected data from the population of individuals to produce the
estimates in Table 13. Therefore, standard errors and p-values should not be
interpreted using a conventional sampling framework.              Moreover, the
regression kink method employs a specification that imposes very little
economic modeling so it is not easy to interpret the standard errors as
misspecification of the model as proposed by Abadie, Athey, Imbens, and
Wooldridge (2013).
     Robust-to-heteroskedasticity standard errors, which have been employed
in numerous studies with regression kink analysis have been shown to be far
too small. This is because regression kink estimates can be highly sensitive to
curvature in the underlying relationship between the outcome and the
assignment variable--income, in our case. Therefore, Ganong and Jäger (2014)
propose a permutation test based on estimating the regression kink equations
at placebo kinks where no kink in the relationship should exist.17 We do this
using as placebos 100 randomly selected incomes that are 3,000 to 7,000 dollars
plus or minus each actual kink.18 Armed with 100 placebo estimates for each
kink, we examine whether our estimate based on the actual kink falls outside
the 95% confidence interval generated by the estimates from the placebos. If
the estimate based on the actual kink passes this test, we show a check mark
below it in Table 13.
     All of the first stage estimates very easily pass the Ganong and Jäger test.
Thus, we are confident that the phase-out range gives us a strong environment
for testing the causal effects of the tax credits.
     Table 14 shows estimates of the second stage equations--that is, estimates
of ã1 from equations (2) and (5) above. Again each equation is estimated for 19
and 20 year olds in the year mentioned using a bandwidth of plus or minus
$3,000 and a cubic polynomial. Each estimated coefficient in Table 14 should
be interpreted as the change in the slope of the outcome-income relationship
that occurs at the kink mentioned. Thus, for instance, -0.000007 in the upper
left-hand cell should be interpreted as saying that the slope of the attending-
income relationship decreases by about 0.0007 percent per dollar at the lower
edge of the phase-out range for joint filers in 2011.
     However, there is little point in interpreting the estimated coefficients in
Table 14 because none of them passes the Ganong and Jäger permutation test.
That is, there are no discernable causal effects of the tax credits on any of the
following outcomes: attending postsecondary school at all, attending at least
half-time, attending a four-year college, attending a two-year college,
instructional resources, core educational resources, the "list" tuition and fees


17
  Interestingly, we independently devised essentially the same permutation test after
examining our initial regression kink results. However, Ganong and Jäger (2014)
wrote up the permutation test first and their paper contains numerous useful
results on issues we did not explore.
18
  Notice that the bandwidth of 3,000 around each of these placebos never overlaps an
actual kink.

                                         22
of the student's college, the grant and scholarships the student receives, and
the tuition the student pays. (The last eight outcomes are all conditional on
attending at all.)
     We cannot rule out effects of the tax credits that are too small to be
discernable. For instance, if a $1,000 tax credit were to increase attending by
0.1 percent, we would be unable to distinguish this effect from random noise.
Generally, though, we interpret the estimates in Table 14 as strong
confirmation of what the figures suggest: the tax credits have no or at most
extremely small causal effects on college-related outcomes in the vicinity of the
phase-out ranges.
     The advantage of regression kink analysis is that, so long as the
assumptions of the method are met, it produces estimates that are very
credibly causal. The disadvantage is that the estimates are relevant only for
households with incomes near the phase-out regions. Owing to the changes in
the phase-out ranges, especially the major rise in the ranges that accompanied
the AOTC, we have estimates for married joint filers that cover a rather wide
array of incomes: from about $107,000 to $180,000 in 2013 dollars. For single
filers, we have regression kink estimates than span incomes from about
$53,000 to about $90,000 in 2013 dollars. We find no causal effects of the tax
credits over these fairly wide regions.
     However, the phase-out range never occurs in the lower to middling
percentiles of the income distribution and, therefore, we cannot extrapolate
from the regression kink estimates to say that removing or reducing the tax
credits would have no or only a slight effect on college attendance by students
whose families have earnings at, say, the 50th percentile for their filing status.
There is no reason to think that the effects on them will be as modest as they
are around the phase-out range. Indeed, a policy maker who is trying to
minimize the causal effects of withdrawing a tax credit might choose to phase
it out among precisely those households who are likely to be unaffected. This
does not imply that all households would be similarly unaffected.

6.2    Using the Introduction of the AOTC to Identify the Causal
Effects of Tax Credits Across All Eligible Incomes
Because we cannot extrapolate our regression kink estimates to low and middle
income households, we turn to the introduction of the AOTC which, as we have
seen, sharply increased the generosity of the education tax credits for some
households. In this section, we employ the classic method of analyzing how the
change in college-going behavior, from cohort to cohort, is related to the change
in the tax credits they experience. Because the introduction of the AOTC
affected students across a very wide range of incomes, including poor students,
the estimates from this method have broad application.
    This method can be embodied in the simple equation:

(6)


                                       23
where ë1 is the coefficient of interest, there is a polynomial in income, and there
is a full set of year effects. Because we estimate this equation for individuals
of certain ages (such as 19), we do not include cohort effects which would be
redundant.
     Because the tax credits that the household actually takes may reflect its
response to the tax credits (for instance, receiving a larger credit because the
credit causes one to attend a more expensive school) and not just the policy-
driven change in the credits, we construct a simulated instrument for each tax
credit. A properly constructed simulated instrument embodies the policy-
driven change in the credit, holding the household's behavior constant. Thus,
our simulated instrument is the credit the household would receive if its
college-going choices were typical for a household of its income in a base year
(which we set to be 2008). These typical choices are run through the laws of
the actual year so that the instrument reflects the changes in the tax credit
parameters and only the tax credit parameters. An especially simple example
would be the following. Suppose that households with $50,000 of income and
one child aged 18 have a 50 percent probability of sending a child to college in
such a way as to fulfill the requirements of the HTC (and therefore the AOTC):
at least half-time enrollment, enrollment in a degree or certificate program,
and so on. Suppose that, conditional on its child enrolling, such a household
typically spends $4,000 on qualifying tuition and fees. Then, the simulated
instrument for the 2008 credit would be 50% × $1,800, and the simulated
instrument for the 2009 credit would be 50% × $2,500 in 2009.
     Of course, computing the simulated instruments is more complicated but
the essential elements are clear. For each level of income, we need the tax
credit qualifying variables: spending on tuition and fees, half-time enrollment,
taxes owed before the education credits, and so on.19
     With the simulated instruments, we have a simple first stage equation:

(7)


    When estimating equations (6) and (7), it is important to cluster the
standard errors to account for the fact that the tax credit policy is not


19
     For each potential student cohort (those who are 19 in 2008, say), we divide their
filers' income in each year into 300 quantiles for married filers and 300 quantiles for
single filers. We then find the mean of each qualifying variable for each quantile. We
use these means to construct the simulated instrument for the tax credits by running
them through the credit formulae that apply in each year. A student is assigned to a
quantile based on his filer's income when he is 17. After that, the filer's qualifying
variables are made to evolve with those of his quantile. This excludes all possibility of
endogeneity. We choose 300 quantiles because it puts about 5,000 households in each
quantile--enough households to generate precise measures of their average behavior.
Additional details are available from the authors.

                                           24
individual-specific. For instance, consider two households each of which spends
$4,000 on tuition in 2008. If both households have incomes below $96,000 and
owe at least $2,500 in taxes before credits, these households will experience the
same change in credits due to the introduction of the AOTC even if they have
quite different incomes--$60,000 and $95,000, say. To generate the clusters,
we run each household through the tax credit formulae in 2008 and 2009. We
put households in the same cluster if they receive identical tax credits when
they make the same college attendance and payment choices.
    The weakness of the simulated instrumental variables method, which is
often used to assess tax reforms, is that its estimates may reflect other events
that occur at the same time as the change in the tax credits and that affect the
same people who experience a change in tax credits. Given that the AOTC was
introduced as part of the stimulus package, one might worry that certain
households were either affected by the events that triggered the stimulus (the
financial crisis, the rise in unemployment) or by other components of the
stimulus bill. For instance, college enrollment has often been found to be anti-
cyclical owing to the decrease in opportunity costs (that is, labor earnings)
during downturns. So, we might expect enrollment to rise in 2009 regardless
of the credits. Or families who lost home equity in 2008 may have found it
harder to finance college.
    Despite these circumstances, we are fairly confident that our estimates
based on the introduction of the AOTC bear a causal interpretation. Our
confidence is based on three things. First, the AOTC increased tax credits not
just for low-income or high-income households but for both types of households.
Indeed, as we show below, the changes in the tax credits are not a simple
function of household income. Some "control" (unaffected or hardly affected)
households have high incomes; some have relatively low incomes. Some of the
most affected households have fairly high incomes; some have low incomes.
Our second reason for confidence is that trends in college-going behavior were
parallel before and after the law change, not just for students as a whole but
when we define groups who were more and less affected by the change in tax
credits. Our third reason for confidence is that this method produces results
that closely match the regression kink results for households in the income
ranges covered by those results.
    Figures 16 through 18 demonstrate our point that the changes induced by
the AOTC were not a simple function of income. To construct these figures, we
subtract each of the 2008 figures from section 2 from its 2009 counterpart.
This shows us the change in the tax credit available to a household with a
given amount of spending on tuition, for each level of income. For instance,
Figure 17 shows the change in the tax credit available to a household that files
jointly, that has no dependent other than the prospective student, and that
would spend $4,000 on qualified tuition and fees if its child were to attend
college. In zone (a) of the figure, we see that households with incomes up to
about $35,000 ($30,000 for third and fourth year students) experience a large
increase of about $1,000 in tax credits owing to the AOTC's refundability. In


                                       25
zone (b), households with incomes from about $40,000 to $96,000 experience a
modest increase of $500 if their student is in his first or second year. They
experience a very large increase of $1,700 if their student is in his third or
fourth year. In zone (c), households with incomes from $116,000 to about
$160,000 experience a tremendous increase of $2,500 in their tax credit
regardless of the year of their student. This is because they are above the
phase-out range for the TCLL and HTC but not for the AOTC. Finally,
households in zone (d) with incomes of $180,000 and above experience zero
change in the tax credits they could take.
     Figures 16 and 18 show similar change in tax credit graphs for households
who spend, respectively, $10,000 and $2,400 on tuition on fees. One can see
that the most and least affected households are somewhat different than in
Figure 17. Indeed, there is variation in treatment not only as we scan the
figures horizontally (across incomes) but also as we scan them vertically--
across the second versus third year of college. Below, we refer to zones a
through d in Figures 16 through 18 so we encourage readers to fix them in
their minds.
     In econometric terms, it is helpful to have all this variation in the location
of the most affected and least affected households because it means that the
treatment and control groups have fairly common support, in terms of the
income distribution. Put another way, we can compare high income households
who are greatly treated because they are just inside the top end of the new
phase out range with other high income households who experience no
treatment because they are just outside the top end of the phase out range. We
need not compare high-income households only to low-income households.
Similarly, we can compare upper-middle income households who are greatly
treated because they are just outside of the upper limit of the old phase out
range with households who are only modestly treated because they are just
inside the upper limit of the old phase out range. And so on.
     In addition, we gain a great deal of econometric common support from the
"vertical" differences due to the AOTC (but not the HTC) being available to
third and fourth year students.
     Although the variation in tax credits between 2008 and 2009 is too complex
to be reasonably described as differences-in-differences, the logic of our
empirical strategy is essentially that of differences-in-differences. That is, we
are simultaneously exploiting differences across cohorts and differences within
cohorts in the tax credits that apply to them. An important test of such a
identification strategy is whether the groups who are differentially treated by
the law change are on parallel trends prior to the law change. If they are on
trends that are fairly parallel, the method is usually reliable. If they are on
diverging trends, the estimates may spuriously reflect the divergence in their
preexisting trends.
     In Figures 19 through 23, we show trends in college attendance and other
outcomes by income group, where each group is set up to be as close as possible
to the edge of one of the zones mentioned above. Thus, in each figure, the panel


                                        26
for 19-year-olds has a group from the top of zone a ($25,000-35,000, experienced
a moderate increase in credits) whom one would naturally compare to the
bottom of zone b ($40,000-50,000, experienced only a slight increase in credits).
It also has a group from the top of zone b ($86,000-96,000, experienced only a
slight change) whom one would naturally compare to the bottom of zone c
($116,000-126,000, experienced an extremely large increase). It finally
contains a group from the top of zone c ($150,000-160,000, experienced an
extremely large increase) whom one would naturally compare to the bottom of
zone d ($180,000-190,000, entirely unaffected by the introduction of the AOTC).
     In all of Figures 19 through 23, the pairs whom we need to be on parallel
trends are on parallel trends as we approach 2008, both for 19-year-olds and
23-year-olds. All income groups are slightly affected by the business cycle, but
the effects tend to be parallel. Another way to see the parallel trends is to
group people by the change in tax credits that they experience if they behave
as they do in the base year. That is, the next figure is set up to show the
variation that will, through the simulated instruments, drive the estimates.
For instance, for 19-year-olds, the groups are 0 change, a $1 to $500 increase
in the simulated tax credit, a $501 to $750 increase, a $751 to $900 increase,
and a $901 and greater increase. Figure 24 shows the trends for attendance
and other outcomes for 19 year olds when individuals are grouped that way.
The figure demonstrates that people who were more and less affected by the
tax credit changes were not previously on divergent attendance trends prior to
the introduction of the AOTC. (We can show similar figures for other outcomes
and people of other ages.)
     Indeed, Figures 19 through 24 not only show parallel trends prior to the
AOTC. They show parallel trends right through the introduction of the AOTC.
That is, the figures provide little evidence that people who experienced much
larger increases in tax credit generosity had college outcomes that were any
different as a result.
     In Tables 15 and 16 we formalize this finding by showing estimates of
equations (6) and (7). Each regression contains a quintic polynomial in
adjusted gross income as well as a full set of year effects.20 To maximize
statistical power, we use the three years before and three years after the
introduction of the AOTC: 2006 through 2011. However, the results are very
similar if we use only 2008 and 2009. We show results for 19-year-olds and 23-
year-olds. The results for individuals of ages 20 through 22 and ages 24
through 26 are similar. As we have seen, older people are much less affected
by the AOTC so it is not worthwhile analyzing them.
     Table 15 shows the first stage regressions in which the actual tax credits
a person takes are regressed on her simulated instrument. There are multiple
columns only because the individuals over whom the first stage is estimated
varies slightly with the outcomes under study. Most of the coefficients for 19-



20
     The results are very similar if we use polynomials from a cubic upwards.

                                          27
year-olds are around 0.38. This suggests that, for every extra dollar that a
student would receive as a result of the AOTC's enactment if he were entirely
typical of his income group, a student actually receives about 38 cents. This
makes sense because the simulated instrument deliberately excludes variation
in actual tax credits that is potentially endogenous. (That is, the coefficient on
the simulated instrument is expected to be between 0 and 1 but well below 1
unless all individuals act in the same way as others with the same income.)
The crucial thing for the method is not, however, the coefficient but the
statistical power of the instrument. This it has in abundance. The t-statistic
for the coefficient on the simulated instrument is 1,190 to 1,512 for regressions
based on 19-year-olds. It is 533 to 669 for 23-year-olds. In other words, the
simulated instrument is such a strong predictor of actual tax credits that we
can estimate the effect of the tax credits with precision.
     Table 16 demonstrates that enacting the AOTC did not affect any college-
related outcome we study to a degree that is statistically significantly different
from zero. All of the t-statistics are far from conventional levels of statistical
significance such as 1.96. Moreover, about half of the coefficient estimates that
are not statistically significantly different from zero have an unexpected sign.
(For instance, the point estimates suggest that the tax credits make a student
less likely to attend a 4-year college or a college with generous instructional
resources.) Thus, there is no pattern that might tempt us to interpret the
statistically insignificant point estimates.
     We interpret the evidence in Table 16 as confirmation of Figures 19
through 23. They all suggest that the introduction of the AOTC generated very
little change in college attendance or other college-related outcomes.
     Using the same simulated instruments method, we have generated
separate estimates for relatively low income households (from $10,000 below
the upper edge of zone a to $10,000 above the lower edge of zone b), upper-
middle income households (from $10,000 below the upper edge of zone b to
$10,000 above the lower edge of zone c), and upper-income households (from
$10,000 below the upper edge of zone c to $10,000 above the lower edge of zone
d). Purely for reference (since we include all households in the analysis), these
income ranges are, for 19-year-olds in joint filing households, $25,000 to
$50,000, $86,000 to $126,000, and $150,000 to $190,000.
     In these regressions that allow effects to vary with income, we find results
that are fully consistent with those reported in Tables 15 and 16. That is, the
first stage of the method is very strong: the introduction of the AOTC greatly
increased tax credits taken. The second stage estimates consistently suggest
that the tax credits have no causal effect on college-related outcomes. Part of
the reason we do not present these results in tables is that they are already
fairly obvious from Figures 19 through 22. The reader will observe that the
two lowest income groups in those figures tend to track one another through
the enactment of the AOTC. Similarly, the two middle groups track one
another and the two highest groups track one another.
     Finally, it is noteworthy that the regression kink method and simulated


                                       28
instruments method confirm one another's results for households in the
vicinity of the phase-out ranges. That is, both methods suggest no or very
small causal effects of the tax credits on college outcomes.

7 Federal and Social Returns to the Investment in the Tax
Credits
We would like to compute various rate of return on investment calculations for
the tax credits. However, given that they appear to have little or no causal
effect on college-going, the exercise would be nugatory. Regardless of how we
make the calculation, we will find that the U.S. Treasury will recoup none of
the spending on the higher education tax credits through higher future tax
payments.
     Since the tax credits cannot generate effects on other outcomes interesting
to the federal government (such as crime) if they do not first affect educational
outcomes, we will also necessarily find that the federal government as a whole
will recoup none of the spending on the higher education tax credits.
     Finally, education can have social returns as well as private returns. For
instance, one person's education may improve that of her children or neighbors.
A more educated person may be a better civic participant. Nevertheless, the
mechanisms for social returns all rely on a policy actually affecting education
attainment in some way. Thus, regardless of how education generates social
returns, we will necessarily find that society will earn a zero return on the tax
credits.
     In 2014, the federal government and society spent $23 billion on tax
credits, an increase of about $15 billion or 177 percent since 2008 (in real
dollars). Since we closely study the period from 2006 onwards, our findings can
fairly confidently be interpreted as evidence that this increase in tax credits is
unlikely to be recouped.
     Because we do not have data to study the initial enactment of the tax
credits, we can be less confident about the $8.3 billion that the federal
government was already spending in 2008. That is, it is possible that this $8.3
billion has causal effects on collegiate attainment and will be recouped with
interest. However, there is at best weak evidence in favor of this possibility.
Neither the regression kink estimates from 2007 nor Long's estimates support
this interpretation. Moreover, such an argument would have to rely on the
idea that the $8.3 billion was targeted at precisely those households most likely
to be affected--that is, those with incomes of $40,000 to about $93,000 in 2008.
If this targeting story were correct, however, it would be surprising that we
find no evidence of effects either at the lower end of this range (upper zone a
to lower zone b) or the higher end of this range (upper zone b to lower zone c
where simulated instrument as well as regression kink estimates are
available). Nevertheless, we cannot rule out the possibility that the pre-AOTC
tax credits had substantial effects on collegiate attainment right in the middle
of this income range--$60,000 to $80,000, say. If this were to be the case, which
seems unlikely, it would suggest that the highest return on investment would

                                       29
be attained if the federal government were to focus higher education tax credits
on this specific income range, giving credits not much more generous than the
2008 HTC and TCLL.
       Overall, we conclude that there are shaky evidential foundations for
arguments based on the idea that the Treasury, federal government, or society
will recoup the tax credits with interest through higher education investments.
     Of course, none of this means that the tax credits are wasted. They are
simply a transfer from some individuals to others. If there is some way other
than higher education in which the people who receive the transfers employ
money in a way that is especially helpful to society or to the federal budget, the
tax credits may be somewhat recouped through this other channel. However,
we are not aware of clear hypotheses about channels other than higher
education.

8 Discussion and Conclusions
    There are at least four possible explanations for the tax credits' meager
effects on college-going: the credits are offset by decreased financial aid; the
credits are offset by increased tuition and fees; eligible individuals are not
liquidity constrained with regard to college-going; the credits are structured in
a way that minimizes their causal impact. Consider these explanations in
turn.
    If every increase in the generosity of the higher education tax credits is
offset by a corresponding decrease in financial aid, we would expect the credits
to have few or no effects on college. The tax credits would serve merely as a
transfer to state governments and private philanthropies that would have
provided the aid and can now use the funds for other purposes. However, we
find no evidence that grants received by students fall when the credits rise.
Thus, financial aid offset is very unlikely to be the reason why the tax credits
have few effects on college-going.
    There is a long-standing hypothesis (the "Bennett Hypothesis") that
increased federal support for higher education (in all forms) causes tuition to
rise, thereby limiting the effect on college-going. That is, the supply of higher
education might be inelastic so that the increased federal support would trigger
a price, not a quantity, response. The price response need not occur through
individual institutions raising their tuition. Students could be unable to find
seats at inexpensive public or non-profit colleges that are supply constrained.
They might enroll instead at for-profit schools that charge higher tuition.
However, we do not find any evidence that the tax credits induce students to
attend schools with higher list tuition or to pay higher tuition conditional on
attending. Thus, our results provide no support for the Bennett Hypothesis as
an explanation of the tax credits' inefficacy.
    If individuals are not liquidity constrained when making college choices,
they will exhibit approximately the same college-going behavior with or
without the tax credits. The credits will simply reduce their borrowing or
increase their saving. It may well be that households with incomes at or above

                                       30
the HTC/TCLL phase-out range are unconstrained. If they are, the regression
kink analysis will indicate no effects and the AOTC's great rise in the location
of the phase-out (from $96,000-116,000 to $160,000-180,000) will have
produced no effects in the simulated instrument analysis. A lack of liquidity
constraints is a less obvious explanation for the refundable AOTC's lack of
effect on low-income households. However, even they may be unconstrained
owing to their being eligible for grants (most obviously the Pell Grant), work-
study, and loans at interest rates well below what a truly private lender would
charge.21 While the Pell Grant and federal loans cannot cover the cost of
America's most selective non-profit colleges for a low-income student, such
colleges offer generous financial aid to low-income students who meet their
stringent academic criteria. Thus, all in all, we consider a lack of liquidity
constraints to be plausible explanation for the tax credits' inefficacy.
     The structure of the tax credits may also contribute to their inefficacy.
This possibility has been discussed since the debates that preceded the
enactment of the HTC and TCLL.22 First, a household receives a credit only
after spending money on tuition and fees. This timing guarantees that credit
takers are those who do not have liquidity constraints. Second, the tax filer
gets the credit, and the filer is very often not the student. This would not
matter if the filer and student shared unified liquidity constraints, but they
might not. For instance, a student might be liquidity constrained from
attending the college of his choice and his parents might leave him in this
position although they themselves are not liquidity constrained. If they get a
tax credit, his parents might buy a more expensive car or take out a smaller
mortgage. They are not obliged to use the money to relax the liquidity
constraints affecting their child. Third, the tax credits may not be terribly
salient at the times when families are making college-going decisions.
Although IRS materials on the credits are readily available, a family planning
its finances might overlook the credits because calculating them requires a
number of steps (see Davis 2002). Or, a family may discount the credits
because they are uncertain--they can depend on income that has not yet been
realized at the time when enrollment decisions are made.
     Because the tax credits have always had the same basic structure (timing,
recipient, information required for their calculation), we cannot readily assess
whether changing the credits' structure would change their efficacy.
Experiments in informing people about them are ongoing,23 but the structural
issues may go beyond a mere lack of information. The issues may be inherently
difficult to address through the tax system unless filers are given some means


21
   We mean a private lender who accounted for borrowing risk and had no government
guarantee to help enforce repayment.
22
   See, for instance, Lederman (1997), Hoxby (1998), Davis (2002), Long (2004),
Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2006), Kane (1997), Maag and Rohlay (2007), and Turner
(2011).
23
   The source is authors' personal communication with the researchers.

                                       31
to anticipate the credits and to pre-designate them for college expenses.
Devising such means is within the scope of what is practical--a sort of
"Advance" HTC, TCLL, or AOTC analogous to the Advance Earned Income Tax
Credit. However, only a small share of people who were eligible for the Earned
Income Tax Credit took it in the form of an advance, and the Advance Earned
Income Tax Credit was eliminated in 2010 because its disadvantages were seen
to outweigh its advantages.24
     Recall that at least some proponents of the higher education tax credits
suggested that they were simply intended as a middle-class tax cut. To this
point, we saw in Tables 3 through 12 that most of the tax expenditures
associated with the credits do go to middle-income households. This is less true
now, with the AOTC, than it was in 1999 through 2008. Nevertheless, middle-
income households remain the key recipients of the tax expenditures.
     It is far beyond the scope of this paper to evaluate the incidence or
efficiency of the higher education tax credits if we view them purely as middle-
class tax cuts, setting aside their links to education investments. However, it
is useful to make two points on the tax credits purely as tax cuts.
     First, the tax credits raise marginal tax rates by as much as 12.5 to 25
percentage points in the phase-out ranges. These are potentially important
marginal rate increases. On the other hand, the credits lower marginal tax
rates for households whose credits are limited by their taxes due. We can see
from Figures 1 through 6 that these households tend to be in the 15 percent tax
bracket. Nevertheless, over quite a wide region of the income distribution
(especially under the AOTC), the credits do not affect marginal tax rates but
only average tax rates. Thus, anyone investigating whether the credits change
taxable income (labor supply) of middle-income households should focus on the
minority of households whose marginal tax rates are affected.
     Second, the tax credits interact with state and local support for higher
education in a manner that generates horizontal differences in the tax cuts for
middle-income households who exhibit essentially the same behavior. For
instance, consider a state or locality that collects considerable sales tax revenue
and uses it to subsidize tuition at its public postsecondary institutions. Its
families would not pay much tuition because they have already paid "up front"
through sales taxes. They would receive smaller federal tax credits than
families with identical incomes who live in areas where public institutions have
the same total resources but where state and local governments choose to
subsidize tuition less by taxes collected "up front." This may seem like a
contrived example but it is not. State and local policies dominate tuition
setting in the U.S., and states differ greatly in the extent to which they
subsidize tuition through state and local taxes (Long 2004a). Since the federal
government is inevitably a minor player in higher education relative to the
states, it may not be possible to design horizontally equitable tax cuts through



24
     See General Accounting Office (2007).

                                             32
the means of higher education tax credits.

9 References
Abadie, Alberto, Susan Athey, Guido W. Imbens, and Jeffrey Wooldridge.
2013. "Finite Population Causal Standard Errors," Stanford University
typescript.

Bradford, David. 1984. Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform. Arlington, VA: Tax
Analysts.

Bulman, George. 2012. "The Effect of Access to College Assessments on
Enrollment and Attainment," University of California-Santa Cruz typescript.

Card, David, David Lee, Zhuan Pei, and Andrea Weber. 2012. "Nonlinear
Policy Rules and the Identification and Estimation of Causal Effects in a
Generalized Regression Kink Design." National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 18564.

Crandall-Hollick, Margot L. 2013. Higher Education Tax Benefits: Brief
Overview and Budgetary Effects." Congressional Research Service (R41967).

Crandall-Hollick, Margot L. 2012. "The American Opportunity Tax Credit:
Overview, Analysis, and Policy Options" (R42561).

Davis, Albert J. 2002. "Choice Complexity in Tax Benefits for Higher
Education," National Tax Journal, 50 (3): 509–538.

Dynarski, Susan M., and Judith E. Scott-Clayton. 2006. "The Cost of
Complexity in Higher Education: Lessons from Optimal Tax Theory and
Behavioral Economics," National Tax Journal, 59 (2): 319–356.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 1998. "Tax Incentives for Higher Education." in Poterba,
James M. (ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 12, 49–82. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Ganong, Peter and Simon Jäger. 2014. "A Permutation Test and Estimation
Alternatives for the Regression Kink Design," Harvard University typescript.

Joint Committee on Taxation. 2013. Estimates of Federal Tax Expenditures
for Fiscal Years 2012-2017 (JCS-1-13).

Joint Committee on Taxation. 2014. Estimates of Federal Tax Expenditures
for Fiscal Years 2014-2018 (JCX-97-14).



                                    33
Kane, Thomas J. 1997. "Beyond Tax Relief: Long Term Challenges to
Financing Higher Education," National Tax Journal 50 (2): 335–349.

Klasik, Daniel. 2013. "The ACT of Enrollment: The College Enrollment Effects
of State-Required College Entrance Exam Testing." Educational Researcher
42: 151-159.

LaLumia, Sara. 2012. "Tax Preferences for Higher Education and Adult
College Enrollment," National Tax Journal, 65(1): 59-90.

Lederman, Douglas. 1997. "The Politicking and Policy Making Behind a
$40-Billion Windfall," Chronicle of Higher Education, 44:14 (November 28).

Long, Bridget Terry. 2004a. "Does the Format of a Financial Aid Program
Matter? The Effect of State In-kind Tuition Subsidies," Review of Economics
and Statistics, 86(3): 767–782.

Long, Bridget Terry. 2004b. "The Impact of Federal Tax Credits for Higher
Education." in Hoxby, Caroline M. (ed.), College Choices: The Economics of
Which College, When College, and How to Pay For It. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press, 101–168..

Maag, Elaine, and Jeffrey Rohaly. 2007. "Who Benefits from the Hope and
Lifetime Learning Credit?" Tax Policy Center, Urban Institute and Brookings
Institution, Washington, DC.

National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education. Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System.
Enrollment, Finance, Residence and Migration, and Institutional
Characteristics files.  1996 through 2012 editions.           Electronic data.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, retrieved August 2014.

Stantcheva, Stefanie. 2014. "Optimal Taxation and Human Capital Policies
over the Life Cycle," Harvard University typescript.

Turner, Nicholas. 2012b. "Why Don't Taxpayers Maximize their Tax-Based
Student Aid? Salience and Inertia in Program Selection" The B.E. Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy 11.1.

Turner, Nicholas. 2012a. "Who Benefits from Student Aid? The Economic
Incidence of Tax-Based Federal Student Aid," Economics of Education Review.

Turner, Nicholas. 2011. "The Effect of Tax-based Federal Student Aid on
College Enrollment," National Tax Journal 64: 839-861.



                                      34
U.S. General Accounting Office. 2007. Advance Earned Income Tax Credit,
Low Use and Small Dollars Paid Impede IRS’s Efforts to Reduce High
Noncompliance (GAO-07-1110). Washington, DC: GAO Report to the Joint
Committee on Taxation.

U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service. 1999 to 2013.
Form 8863 and Instructions for Form 8863.

U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service. 2013. Statistics
of Income-2011: Individual Income Tax Returns, Publication 1304 (Rev. 08-
2013), Washington DC: Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue
Service.

U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service.           2014.
Deidentified electronic data.




                                    35
Figure 1




Figure 2




  36
Figure 3




Figure 4




  37
Figure 5




Figure 6




  38
Figure 7




  39
Figure 8




  40
Figure 9




  41
                                             Figure 10
the tax credit-income relationship in 2011
                 overall                                 close-up on the phase-out range




the tax credit-income relationship in 2007
                 overall                                 close-up on the phase-out range




                                                42
                                             Figure 11
the attendance-income relationship in 2011
       (attending at least half-time)                    close-up on the phase-out range




the attendance-income relationship in 2007
       (attending at least half-time)                    close-up on the phase-out range




                                                43
                                                    Figure 12
the four-year college-income relationship in 2011
        (conditional on some attendance)                        close-up on the phase-out range




                                                    Figure 13
the two-year college-income relationship in 2011
       (conditional on some attendance)                         close-up on the phase-out range




                                                       44
                                                          Figure 14
the instructional resources-income relationship in 2011
          (conditional on some attendance)                            close-up on the phase-out range




   the grants received-income relationship in 2011        Figure 15
          (conditional on some attendance)                            close-up on the phase-out range




                                                             45
Figure 16




Figure 17




   46
Figure 18




   47
                                  Figure 19
age 19        attending college at all by income group and year       age 23




                                    Figure 20
age 19                                                                 age 23
         attending college at least half time by income group and year




                                     48
                               Figure 21
age 19   attending four-year college (conditional on attending)   age 23




                              Figure 22
age 19                                                            age 23
         attending two-year college (conditional on attending)




                                  49
                             Figure 23
age 19   instructional resources (conditional on attending)   age 23




                                50
                                                       Figure 24
 Outcomes of 19-year-olds by year and the degree to which they were potentially affected by the introduction of the AOTC
               attending college at all                                          attending at least half-time




attending four-year college (conditional on attending)                instructional resources (conditional on attending)




                                                           51
                                                                  Table 1
                                               Parameters of the Higher Education Tax Credits


 year    HTC is equal to     TCLL is equal          HTC and         HTC and TCLL       AOTC is equal to     AOTC phase       AOTC phase out
        100% of first $x +   to 20% of first      TCLL phase       phase out range     100% of first $x +   out range for      range for
        50% of second $x      $x of tuition       out range for    for married joint   25% of second $x      single filers    married joint
          of tuition and     and fees where        single filers        filers           of tuition and                          filers
         fees where x is:         x is:                                                 fees where x is:

 1999         1,000              5,000           40,000-50,000     80,000-100,000
 2000         1,000              5,000           40,000-50,000     80,000-100,000
 2001         1,000              5,000           40,000-50,000     80,000-100,000
 2002         1,000              5,000           41,000-51,000     82,000-102,000
 2003         1,000              10,000          41,000-51,000     83,000-103,000
 2004         1,000              10,000          42,000-52,000     85,000-105,000
 2005         1,000              10,000          43,000-53,000     87,000-107,000
 2006         1,100              10,000          45,000-55,000     90,000-110,000
 2007         1,100              10,000          47,000-57,000     94,000-114,000
 2008         1,200              10,000          48,000-58,000     96,000-116,000
 2009         1,200              10,000          50,000-60,000     100,000-120,000           2,000          80,000-90,000    160,000-180,000
 2010         1,200              10,000          50,000-60,000     100,000-120,000           2,000          80,000-90,000    160,000-180,000
 2011         1,200              10,000          51,000-61,000     102,000-122,000           2,000          80,000-90,000    160,000-180,000
 2012         1,200              10,000          52,000-62,000     104,000-124,000           2,000          80,000-90,000    160,000-180,000
 2013         1,200              10,000          53,000-63,000     107,000-127,000           2,000          80,000-90,000    160,000-180,000

Source: Internal Revenue Service, Form 8863 and Instructions for Form 8863,1999 to 2013.




                                                                      52
                                                              Table 2
                                   Tax Expenditure Consequences of the Higher Education Tax Credits


                          Billions of Dollars of the Day                               Billions of 2014 Dollars (CPI-U adjusted)
                              Actual                         Estimated                           Actual                            Estimated
 Year    Nonrefundable      Refundable          Total           Total      Nonrefundable       Refundable         Total              Total
         Component of       Component      (Nonrefundable                  Component of        Component     (Nonrefundable
         Education Tax     of Education         plus                       Education Tax      of Education        plus
            Credits        Tax Credits       Refundable)                      Credits         Tax Credits      Refundable)
 1998         3.4                                3.4                            4.9                                4.9
 1999         4.8                                4.8                            6.8                                6.8
 2000         4.9                                4.9                            6.7                                6.7
 2001         5.2                                5.2                            6.9                                6.9
 2002         5.0                                5.0                            6.6                                6.6
 2003         5.8                                5.8                            7.5                                7.5
 2004         6.0                                6.0                            7.5                                7.5
 2005         6.1                                6.1                            7.4                                7.4
 2006         7.0                                7.0                            8.2                                8.2
 2007         6.9                                6.9                            7.9                                7.9
 2008         7.6                                7.6                            8.3                                8.3
 2009         10.8             7.6               18.4                           11.9              8.4              20.3
 2010         12.4             10.6              23.0                           13.4              11.5             24.9
 2011         12.4             11.5              23.9                           13.0              12.1             25.1
 2012         10.4             8.7               19.1           20.3            10.7              9.0              19.7              20.9
 2013                                                           20.1                                                                 20.4
 2014                                                           23.0                                                                 23.0
 2015                                                           24.3                                                                 24.3

Sources: The source for 1998 to 2011 in the "actual" columns is Table A in U.S. Department of the Treasury (2013). The source for 2012 in
the "actual" column is authors' calculations based de-identified IRS data. The source for 2012 and 2013 in the "estimated" column is Joint
Committee on Taxation (2013). The source for 2014 and 2015 in the estimated column is Joint Committee on Taxation (2014).


                                                                    53
                                                                    Table 3
                           Potential and Actual Higher Education Tax Credits among 19- to 20-year-olds, 2008 Tax Year

household income of     number of persons percent who appear potential tax expend         percent actually   their average non- tax expend on their
filer (assuming        (potential students) to qualify for a non- on non-refundable      assoc with a non-    refundable credit      non-refundable
dependent student)                              refundable credit   credits based on     refundable credit             (dollars)          credits for
                                                 based on tuition,   criteria in prior                                           (millions of dollars)
                                            half-time enrollment column and year in
                                             (HTC), AGI and tax college (millions of
                                                         liability           dollars)
                                                        min-max             min-max
0-10k                               604,667                 0-1%                     1                0%                                            0
10-20k                              886,106                 5-7%                12-19                 1%                    245                     2
20-30k                              902,946               16-23%               79-134                 7%                    631                    37
30-40k                              754,038               26-34%             163-270                 14%                  1,031                   105
40-50k                              624,855               34-42%             219-339                 20%                  1,220                   152
50-60k                              555,990               40-46%             202-293                 21%                  1,177                   138
60-70k                              487,247               37-41%             214-294                 24%                  1,360                   157
70-80k                              438,416               45-49%             244-323                 30%                  1,394                   183
80-90k                              390,349               51-55%             257-331                 35%                  1,419                   195
90-100k                             346,472               58-61%             253-320                 38%                  1,433                   190
100-110k                            307,661               64-67%             152-186                 29%                    944                    84
110-120k                            229,681               40-43%                20-24                 7%                    268                     4
120-130k                            167,373                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
130-140k                            148,353                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
140-150k                            122,893                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
150-160k                             92,244                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
160-170k                             83,036                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
170-180k                             70,097                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
180-190k                             58,702                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
190-200k                             49,268                    0%                    0                0%                                            0

Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data.




                                                                         54
                                                                     Table 4
                            Potential and Actual Higher Education Tax Credits among 19- to 20-year-olds, 2009 Tax Year

household   number percent who        potential tax percent who potential tax      percent        their tax expend     percent        their tax expend
income of          of    appear to expend on non-      appear to      expend on   actually     average     on their    actually    average     on their
filer       persons qualify for a       refundable qualify for a refundable tax assoc with        non-         non- assoc with refundable refundable
(assuming (potential          non- credits based on refundable credits based        a non- refundable refundable              a      credit credits for
dependent students) refundable criteria in prior credit based on criteria in refundable          credit credits for refundable    (dollars) (millions of
student)              credit based    column, half- on tuition, prior column        credit    (dollars) (millions of     credit                dollars)
                        on tuition, time, and year AGI and tax half-time and                               dollars)
                      AGI and tax         in college    liability year in college
                          liability     (millions of                 (millions of
                                           dollars)                     dollars)
                         min-max           min-max     min-max          min-max
0-10k       656,553             0%                 0     20-29%           96-158       0%                          0        8%         812           43
10-20k      974,541           4-7%            12-18      16-26%          112-210       1%          191             3        9%         771           64
20-30k      962,065        15-23%            75-123      20-30%          134-242       9%          518           44        12%         767           86
30-40k      794,527        26-35%           155-242      26-36%          147-238      17%          856          115        17%         784          104
40-50k      642,415        35-44%           207-294      34-42%          157-227      24%        1,053          161        22%         804          113
50-60k      559,497        43-50%           244-320      41-48%          171-226      29%        1,149          188        27%         824          123
60-70k      490,602        49-55%           262-324      47-53%          178-221      35%        1,213          206        32%         838          130
70-80k      437,815        55-60%           272-324      52-58%          182-217      40%        1,242          217        36%         850          135
80-90k      383,149        60-65%           249-290      57-62%          165-192      44%        1,194          202        40%         811          124
90-100k     331,337        58-62%           227-260      55-59%          149-171      44%        1,277          187        40%         866          114
100-110k    280,080        62-66%           210-238      60-64%          139-157      48%        1,293          173        44%         874          108
110-120k    230,018        66-70%           182-205      63-67%          121-136      50%        1,293          148        48%         883           98
120-130k    183,832        65-69%           152-170      65-69%          102-114      52%        1,332          127        52%         889           84
130-140k    152,113        68-72%           132-147      68-72%            88-98      54%        1,340          110        54%         894           73
140-150k    125,506        70-74%           114-126      70-74%            76-84      55%        1,349           94        55%         900           62
150-160k    104,543        71-75%            97-107      71-75%            65-71      57%        1,356           81        57%         905           54
160-170k     85,901        73-77%             62-68      73-77%            42-46      57%        1,035           50        56%         691           33
170-180k     71,190        74-77%             18-19      74-77%            12-13      53%          358           14        53%         239             9
180-190k     58,655             0%                 0          0%                0      0%                          0        0%                         0
190-200k     49,260             0%                 0          0%                0      0%                          0        0%                         0
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data.


                                                                          55
                                                                    Table 5
                  Defining as Refundable Only Those Tax Credits That Filer Would Not Obtain If the Credit Were Nonrefundable
                           Potential and Actual Higher Education Tax Credits among 19- to 20-year-olds, 2009 Tax Year

household number of potential tax potential tax expend          percent their average tax expend on        percent their average tax expend on
income of   persons expend on non-     on refundable tax actually assoc          non-     their non- actually assoc  refundable            their
filer     (potential    refundable       credits based on   with a non-   refundable     refundable          with a        credit   refundable
(assuming students)          credits      criteria in prior refundable          credit   credits for    refundable      (dollars)    credits for
dependent               (millions of column and year in          credit      (dollars) (millions of          credit                 (millions of
student)                   dollars)   college (millions of                                  dollars)                                    dollars)
                                                  dollars)
                          min-max                min-max
0-10k       656,553                1                96-157          0%                             0            8%           807              42
10-20k      974,541           12-19               111-210           1%            248              3            8%           769              63
20-30k      962,065          81-130               128-235           9%            428             36           13%           775              94
30-40k      794,527        188-282                114-198          17%          1,024            138           13%           803              81
40-50k      642,415        283-392                  80-129         24%          1,563            240            7%           827              35
50-60k      559,497        367-471                   48-75         29%          1,808            296            3%           838              15
60-70k      490,602        411-501                   29-44         35%          1,926            326            2%           846               9
70-80k      437,815        439-519                   15-22         40%          1,983            346            2%           836               6
80-90k      383,149        406-471                    8-11         44%          1,908            324            1%           828               3
90-100k     331,337        372-425                      4-6        44%          2,036            298            1%           835               3
100-110k    280,080        347-392                      2-3        48%          2,091            280            0%           833               1
110-120k    230,018        302-339                      1-2        50%          2,139            245            0%           850               1
120-130k    183,832        253-283                        1        52%          2,209            210            0%           836               1
130-140k    152,113        220-245                        1        54%          2,225            182            0%                             0
140-150k    125,506        189-209                        0        55%          2,239            156            0%                             0
150-160k    104,543        162-178                        0        57%          2,250            134            0%                             0
160-170k     85,901        103-114                        0        57%          1,721             84            0%                             0
170-180k     71,190           30-32                       0        53%            594             22            0%                             0
180-190k     58,655                0                      0         0%                             0            0%                             0
190-200k     49,260                0                      0         0%                             0            0%                             0

Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data. The definitions of nonrefundable and refundable used in this table are discussed in
the text as the "economic" definitions, useful for answering questions about the distribution consequences of the AOTC's refundability.


                                                                         56
                                                                    Table 6
                           Potential and Actual Higher Education Tax Credits among 22- to 23-year-olds, 2008 Tax Year

household income of     number of persons percent who appear potential tax expend         percent actually   their average non- tax expend on their
filer (assuming        (potential students) to qualify for a non- on non-refundable      assoc with a non-    refundable credit      non-refundable
dependent student)                              refundable credit   credits based on     refundable credit             (dollars)          credits for
                                                 based on tuition,   criteria in prior                                           (millions of dollars)
                                            half-time enrollment column and year in
                                             (HTC), AGI and tax college (millions of
                                                         liability           dollars)
                                                        min-max             min-max
0-10k                               513,558                 1-1%                     1                0%                                            0
10-20k                              612,923                 6-7%                11-16                 1%                    218                     1
20-30k                              680,673               14-18%                50-76                 5%                    553                    18
30-40k                              615,158               20-24%               88-134                 9%                    905                    50
40-50k                              535,309               25-29%             108-160                 12%                  1,052                    69
50-60k                              481,878               28-31%               94-133                12%                  1,041                    60
60-70k                              429,382               26-28%               98-132                13%                  1,156                    63
70-80k                              386,721               30-33%             108-142                 15%                  1,208                    70
80-90k                              344,359               35-38%             114-146                 17%                  1,249                    73
90-100k                             303,075               40-42%             112-141                 17%                  1,317                    67
100-110k                            259,567               43-46%                64-79                11%                    941                    26
110-120k                            200,386               27-29%                  9-11                3%                    230                     1
120-130k                            149,979                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
130-140k                            130,937                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
140-150k                            108,252                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
150-160k                             83,317                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
160-170k                             72,956                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
170-180k                             61,909                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
180-190k                             51,640                    0%                    0                0%                                            0
190-200k                             43,236                    0%                    0                0%                                            0

Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data.




                                                                         57
                                                                     Table 7
                            Potential and Actual Higher Education Tax Credits among 22- to 23-year-olds, 2009 Tax Year

household number of percent who        potential tax percent who potential tax      percent        their tax expend     percent        their tax expend
income of    persons appear to expend on non- appear to                expend on   actually     average     on their    actually    average     on their
filer      (potential qualify for a      refundable qualify for a refundable tax assoc with        non-         non- assoc with refundable refundable
(assuming students)            non- credits based on refundable credits based        a non- refundable refundable              a      credit credits for
dependent              refundable criteria in prior credit based on criteria in refundable        credit credits for refundable    (dollars) (millions of
student)              credit based     column, half- on tuition, prior column        credit    (dollars) (millions of     credit                dollars)
                        on tuition, time, and year AGI and tax half-time and                                dollars)
                      AGI and tax          in college    liability year in college
                           liability     (millions of                 (millions of
                                            dollars)                     dollars)
                          min-max           min-max     min-max          min-max
0-10k        517,376          0-1%                  1     11-20%            41-85       0%                          0        4%         826           18
10-20k       631,684          6-7%             11-15      10-18%            45-93       1%          182             1        6%         792           31
20-30k       680,586        14-18%             51-74      11-20%           54-110       7%          504           24         8%         788           42
30-40k       611,254        22-26%            96-135      13-22%           56-112      12%          885           64        10%         805           49
40-50k       522,568        27-31%           120-163      14-25%           54-108      15%        1,078           85        12%         822           51
50-60k       467,110        31-35%           133-179      15-27%           54-108      17%        1,161           92        14%         843           54
60-70k       415,083        32-37%           132-177      16-30%           52-104      19%        1,232           95        15%         861           54
70-80k       371,824        36-41%           139-180      17-32%           51-101      21%        1,270           99        17%         874           55
80-90k       325,842        40-44%           134-168      18-34%            45-91      23%        1,228           92        19%         830           50
90-100k      281,723        42-45%           126-153      17-33%            39-82      23%        1,316           86        19%         887           47
100-110k     239,392        45-48%           103-134      18-36%            36-74      24%        1,312           77        21%         893           44
110-120k     196,744        47-50%            60-102      19-37%            30-64      24%        1,290           61        22%         899           40
120-130k     155,762        19-38%             36-77      19-38%            24-52      24%        1,351           51        24%         902           34
130-140k     130,193        19-39%             32-68      19-39%            21-45      26%        1,359           45        25%         908           30
140-150k     107,384        20-40%             27-58      20-40%            18-39      27%        1,364           39        26%         910           26
150-160k      89,442        20-41%             23-49      20-41%            15-33      28%        1,369           34        27%         913           22
160-170k      73,893        20-41%             14-31      20-42%            10-21      27%        1,044           21        27%         698           14
170-180k      61,234        20-42%                4-9     20-42%               3-6     24%          364             5       24%         244             4
180-190k      51,035             0%                 0          0%                0      0%                          0        0%                         0
190-200k      42,677             0%                 0          0%                0      0%                          0        0%                         0
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data.


                                                                           58
                                                                    Table 8
                  Defining as Refundable Only Those Tax Credits That Filer Would Not Obtain If the Credit Were Nonrefundable
                           Potential and Actual Higher Education Tax Credits among 22- to 23-year-olds, 2009 Tax Year

household      number of potential tax potential tax expend      percent their average tax expend on        percent their average tax expend on
income of         persons   expend on     on refundable tax      actually         non-     their non- actually assoc  refundable            their
filer          (potential         non-      credits based on assoc with a  refundable     refundable          with a        credit   refundable
(assuming       students)  refundable        criteria in prior      non-         credit   credits for    refundable      (dollars)    credits for
dependent                      credits column and year in refundable          (dollars) (millions of          credit                 (millions of
student)                  (millions of   college (millions of      credit                    dollars)                                    dollars)
                              dollars)               dollars)
                             min-max                min-max
0-10k             517,376            1                  41-85         0%                            0            4%           817              18
10-20k            631,684       13-17                   44-92         1%           232              2            6%           785              30
20-30k            680,586       59-84                  47-104         7%           388             18            9%           791              47
30-40k            611,254     117-168                   38-84        12%           876             63           10%           817              50
40-50k            522,568     153-220                   23-54        15%         1,478            117            5%           824              20
50-60k            467,110     169-252                   13-33        17%         1,699            135            3%           832              11
60-70k            415,083     173-260                     7-20       19%         1,835            141            2%           808               8
70-80k            371,824     182-270                     4-10       21%         1,917            150            2%           796               5
80-90k            325,842     171-245                      2-6       23%         1,861            140            1%           759               3
90-100k           281,723     159-224                      1-3       23%         2,010            132            1%           763               1
100-110k          239,392     134-202                      1-2       24%         2,068            121            0%                             0
110-120k          196,744      88-161                      0-1       24%         2,128            100            0%                             0
120-130k          155,762      60-127                        0       24%         2,242             85            0%                             0
130-140k          130,193      53-111                        0       26%         2,257             75            0%                             0
140-150k          107,384       45-95                        0       27%         2,266             65            0%                             0
150-160k           89,442       38-80                        0       28%         2,275             56            0%                             0
160-170k           73,893       24-51                        0       27%         1,735             35            0%                             0
170-180k           61,234         7-14                       0       24%           615              9            0%                             0
180-190k           51,035            0                       0        0%                            0            0%                             0
190-200k           42,677            0                       0        0%                            0            0%                             0

Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data. The definitions of nonrefundable and refundable used in this table are discussed in
the text as the "economic" definitions, useful for answering questions about the distribution consequences of the AOTC's refundability.


                                                                         59
                                                                    Table 9
                           Potential and Actual Higher Education Tax Credits among 25- to 26-year-olds, 2008 Tax Year

household income of     number of persons percent who appear potential tax expend         percent actually   their average non- tax expend on their
filer (independent     (potential students) to qualify for a non- on non-refundable      assoc with a non-    refundable credit      non-refundable
student)                                       refundable credit    credits based on     refundable credit             (dollars)          credits for
                                                based on tuition,    criteria in prior                                           (millions of dollars)
                                           half-time enrollment column and year in
                                            (HTC), AGI and tax college (millions of
                                                         liability           dollars)


                                                       min-max                min-max
0-10k                            1,749,780              11-12%                 115-145                0%                                            0
10-20k                           1,676,196              12-13%                 100-128                9%                    493                    73
20-30k                           1,546,261              12-13%                 115-148               12%                    882                   158
30-40k                           1,075,742              13-14%                  90-110               12%                    942                   126
40-50k                             622,725              14-15%                   57-68               10%                  1,060                    69
50-60k                             358,434              13-14%                   18-22                7%                    857                    21
60-70k                             212,399                6-7%                   10-13                7%                    871                    12
70-80k                             127,190                8-9%                     8-9                8%                    870                     9
80-90k                              76,182              10-11%                     6-7                8%                    921                     6
90-100k                             45,302              14-15%                     4-6                6%                  1,047                     3
100-110k                            27,652              17-19%                     2-3                3%                    760                     1
110-120k                            17,023              20-22%                     0-1                1%                    176                     0
120-130k                            10,838                  0%                       0                0%                                            0
130-140k                             7,200                  0%                       0                0%                                            0
140-150k                             5,089                  0%                       0                0%                                            0
150-160k                             3,786                  0%                       0                0%                                            0
160-170k                             2,768                  0%                       0                0%                                            0
170-180k                             2,028                  0%                       0                0%                                            0
180-190k                             1,504                  0%                       0                0%                                            0
190-200k                             1,197                  0%                       0                0%                                            0

Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data.



                                                                         60
                                                                    Table 10
                            Potential and Actual Higher Education Tax Credits among 25- to 26-year-olds, 2009 Tax Year

household number of percent who         potential tax percent who potential tax percent             their tax expend     percent        their tax expend
income of     persons     appear to expend on non- appear to            expend on actually       average     on their    actually    average     on their
filer       (potential qualify for a      refundable qualify for a refundable tax assoc with        non-         non- assoc with refundable refundable
(independe students)            non- credits based on refundable credits based        a non- refundable refundable              a      credit credits for
nt student)             refundable criteria in prior credit based on criteria in refundabl         credit credits for refundable    (dollars) (millions of
                       credit based     column, half- on tuition, prior column       e credit   (dollars) (millions of     credit                dollars)
                         on tuition, time, and year AGI and tax half-time and                                dollars)
                       AGI and tax          in college    liability year in college
                            liability     (millions of                 (millions of
                                             dollars)                     dollars)
                           min-max           min-max     min-max          min-max
0-10k       1,783,401        11-12%           116-144       6-10%           81-140        0%                         0        7%         806           97
10-20k      1,737,221        12-13%           108-136        4-7%            52-90       11%         464           90         9%         767          115
20-30k      1,487,233        12-13%           122-155        4-6%            40-67       14%         874          179         8%         753           89
30-40k        992,906        13-14%            94-112        4-6%            27-44       14%         931          131         7%         755           53
40-50k        567,754        15-16%             60-71        4-7%            17-29       13%       1,009           74         6%         763           27
50-60k        328,623        16-18%             32-34        5-8%            12-20       10%         986           33         6%         761           15
60-70k        190,235         9-11%             13-17       6-10%              9-15      10%         987           18         6%         766             9
70-80k        111,311        12-14%             10-13       9-13%              7-12      11%         946           11         6%         758             5
80-90k         66,044        15-19%                6-8     12-18%               4-7      11%         879             6        6%         691             3
90-100k        39,555        16-18%                5-6       6-9%               2-3       8%         997             3        4%         762             1
100-110k       24,230        20-23%                3-4      8-12%               1-2       7%       1,008             2        4%         752             1
110-120k       15,245        25-28%                  2     10-15%               1-2       5%         902             1        4%         761             0
120-130k        9,532         9-13%                  1     12-19%                 1       3%       1,136             0        3%         770             0
130-140k        6,014        11-17%                  1     16-23%                 1       3%       1,098             0        3%         747             0
140-150k        4,236        13-20%                0-1     17-27%                 1       3%       1,126             0        3%         774             0
150-160k        3,233        15-21%                0-1     20-30%               0-1       2%       1,111             0        2%         733             0
160-170k        2,253        16-25%                  0     21-32%                 0       3%         891             0        2%         629             0
170-180k        1,577        19-29%                  0     25-38%                 0       2%         336             0        3%         225             0
180-190k        1,098             0%                 0          0%                0       0%                         0        0%                         0
190-200k          854             0%                 0          0%                0       0%                         0        0%                         0
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data.


                                                                           61
                                                                   Table 11
                           Potential and Actual Higher Education Tax Credits among 29- to 30-year-olds, 2008 Tax Year

household income of     number of persons percent who appear potential tax expend         percent actually   their average non- tax expend on their
filer (assuming        (potential students) to qualify for a non- on non-refundable      assoc with a non-    refundable credit      non-refundable
dependent student)                              refundable credit   credits based on     refundable credit             (dollars)          credits for
                                                 based on tuition,   criteria in prior                                           (millions of dollars)
                                            half-time enrollment column and year in
                                             (HTC), AGI and tax college (millions of
                                                         liability           dollars)
                                                        min-max             min-max
0-10k                             1,266,193               10-11%                13-16                  0%                                           0
10-20k                            1,231,808                 8-9%                   6-8                 4%                   485                    23
20-30k                            1,218,769                    9%                  7-9                 6%                   846                    67
30-40k                            1,015,033                9-10%                   6-8                 8%                   919                    73
40-50k                              719,290                  10%                   5-6                 7%                 1,006                    54
50-60k                              480,766                 8-9%                     2                 5%                   824                    21
60-70k                              339,227                    5%                  1-2                 5%                   850                    15
70-80k                              251,042                    5%                    1                 6%                   838                    13
80-90k                              182,012                    5%                    1                 6%                   872                    10
90-100k                             129,186                 5-6%                     1                 5%                   985                     6
100-110k                             91,350                    6%                    0                 3%                   772                     2
110-120k                             62,409                    5%                    0                 1%                   175                     0
120-130k                             44,319                    0%                    0                 0%                                           0
130-140k                             32,369                    0%                    0                 0%                                           0
140-150k                             24,390                    0%                    0                 0%                                           0
150-160k                             18,573                    0%                    0                 0%                                           0
160-170k                             14,311                    0%                    0                 0%                                           0
170-180k                             11,190                    0%                    0                 0%                                           0
180-190k                              8,729                    0%                    0                 0%                                           0
190-200k                              6,854                    0%                    0                 0%                                           0

Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data.




                                                                         62
                                                                    Table 12
                            Potential and Actual Higher Education Tax Credits among 29- to 30-year-olds, 2009 Tax Year

household number of percent who       potential tax percent who potential tax      percent        their tax expend     percent        their tax expend
income of    persons appear to expend on non-          appear to      expend on   actually     average     on their    actually    average     on their
filer     (potential qualify for a      refundable qualify for a refundable tax assoc with        non-         non- assoc with refundable refundable
(independ students)           non- credits based on refundable credits based        a non- refundable refundable              a      credit credits for
ent                   refundable criteria in prior credit based on criteria in refundable        credit credits for refundable    (dollars) (millions of
student)             credit based     column, half-   on tuition, prior column      credit    (dollars) (millions of     credit                dollars)
                       on tuition, time, and year AGI and tax half-time and                                dollars)
                     AGI and tax          in college    liability year in college
                          liability     (millions of                 (millions of
                                           dollars)                     dollars)
                        min-max            min-max     min-max          min-max
0-10k      1,306,053       10-11%            87-106        5-8%            51-83       0%           52                      4%         809           45
10-20k     1,324,729         8-9%             67-83        4-5%            33-53       5%          456           33         6%         778           57
20-30k     1,241,641        9-10%             74-93        3-4%            27-43       8%          816           83         5%         766           52
30-40k     1,012,705        9-10%             69-83        3-4%            20-33       9%          893           86         5%         765           41
40-50k       712,363       10-11%             52-60        3-4%            14-22       9%          966           63         5%         769           26
50-60k       476,820       10-11%             28-33        3-4%            10-15       8%          960           35         4%         768           16
60-70k       332,638         6-7%             16-20        3-4%              7-11      7%          957           23         4%         767           11
70-80k       243,360         6-7%             12-14        3-4%               5-8      8%          934           18         4%         769             8
80-90k       176,261         6-7%                8-9       3-5%               3-5      8%          864           13         4%         697             5
90-100k      123,810            6%               6-7       2-3%                 2      7%          957             8        3%         758             3
100-110k      87,667         6-7%                4-5       2-3%               1-2      5%          998             5        3%         769             2
110-120k      60,790            7%                 2       2-3%                 1      3%          884             2        2%         754             1
120-130k      42,072         2-3%                  1       3-4%                 1      2%        1,129             1        2%         759             1
130-140k      30,512         2-3%                  1       3-4%                 1      2%        1,155             1        2%         782             1
140-150k      22,745         2-4%                  1       3-5%                 1      2%        1,169             0        2%         782             0
150-160k      17,612         2-3%                0-1       3-5%               0-1      2%        1,182             0        2%         793             0
160-170k      13,391         3-4%                  0       3-5%                 0      2%          898             0        2%         604             0
170-180k      10,095         3-4%                  0       3-5%                 0      1%          338             0        1%         230             0
180-190k       7,951            0%                 0          0%                0      0%             0                     0%                         0
190-200k       6,112            0%                 0          0%                0      0%             0                     0%                         0
Source: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data.


                                                                          63
                                                                      Table 13
                                                     First Stage of Regression Kink Estimation
                            Changes in the Slope of the Credit-Income Relationship at the Edges of the Phase-Out Range

                                                                          coefficient we expect if all students at             estimated coefficient
                                                                           lower edge of phase-out qualified for
                                                                         maximum AOTC (2011) or HTC (2007)
dependents of 2011 joint filers                  lower kink                                                 -0.125                 -0.1074026*** T
dependents of 2011 joint filers                  upper kink                                                  0.125                  0.1146557*** T
dependents of 2011 single filers                 lower kink                                                 -0.250                 -0.2019312*** T
dependents of 2011 single filers                 upper kink                                                  0.250                  0.2164388*** T
independent 2011 single filers                   lower kink                                                 -0.250                 -0.2268326*** T
dependents of 2007 joint filers                  lower kink                                                 -0.090                 -0.0731243*** T
dependents of 2007 joint filers                  upper kink                                                  0.090                  0.0638205*** T
dependents of 2007 single filers                 lower kink                                                 -0.180                 -0.1386706*** T
dependents of 2007 single filers                 upper kink                                                  0.180                  0.1441341*** T
independent 2007 single filers                   lower kink                                                 -0.180                 -0.1156229*** T

Source: Authors' estimates based on de-identified IRS data. T indicates that the estimate passes the Ganong and Jäger (2014) permutation test at
the 5% level. *** indicates a Ganong and Jäger (2014) p-value of no more than 0.001. The estimates shown are for equations (1) and (4) in the text
using cubics for the polynomials. Households with incomes plus or minus $3,000 around each kink are included.




                                                                        64
                                                                     Table 14
                                                    Second Stage of Regression Kink Estimation
                            Changes in the Slope of Outcome-Income Relationships at the Edges of the Phase-Out Range

                           attending attending at attending a attending a attending a instructiona           core "list" tuition tuition and      grants
                           at all (any  least half       4-year      2-year      1-year l resources educational and fees of fees student         student
                               1098t)        time       college     college     college of student's resources of     student's         paid    received
                                                     (cond'n on (cond'n on (cond'n on        college    student's        college
                                                   attendance) attendance) attendance)                    college
dependents of      lower   -0.000007 -0.000018 -0.000006          0.000003    0.000004     0.071056     0.144720      0.143040     0.006100     0.016414
2011 joint filers kink               X          X             X           X           X            X            X              X           X           X
dependents of      upper   -0.000007 -0.000008 -0.000024          0.000021    0.000003 -0.054728        0.201426 -0.054842 -0.055844           -0.027458
2011 joint filers kink               X          X             X           X           X            X            X              X           X           X
dependents of      lower   -0.000043 -0.000045 -0.000080          0.000067    0.000013 -0.017826 -0.076237 -0.186003 -0.158227                 -0.039391
2011 single filers kink              X          X             X           X           X            X            X              X           X           X
dependents of      upper   -0.000002    0.000017      0.000068 -0.000078      0.000010     0.086454     0.127346      0.052391     0.124465     0.021564
2011 single filers kink              X          X             X           X           X            X            X              X           X           X
independent 2011 lower     -0.000001 -0.000005 -0.000048          0.000047    0.000000     0.034621 -0.059597 -0.058494 -0.139827              -0.044528
single filers      kink              X          X             X           X           X            X            X              X           X           X
dependents of      lower   -0.000012 -0.000016        0.000001 -0.000002      0.000001     0.023902     0.407249 -0.034750         0.241871     0.018055
2007 joint filers kink               X          X             X           X           X            X            X              X           X           X
dependents of      upper    0.000004 -0.000005 -0.000016          0.000018 -0.000002 -0.071761          0.007405 -0.147745 -0.201568           -0.031292
2007 joint filers kink               X          X             X           X           X            X            X              X           X           X
dependents of      lower    0.000005    0.000001      0.000010 -0.000017      0.000007     0.041122     0.050035 -0.206478         0.038334     0.028287
2007 single filers kink              X          X             X           X           X            X            X              X           X           X
dependents of      upper    0.000006    0.000012      0.000025 -0.000027      0.000002     0.058673 -0.017263         0.048465     0.021211    -0.065977
2007 single filers kink              X          X             X           X           X            X            X              X           X           X
independent 2007 lower     -0.000003    0.000002      0.000050 -0.000045 -0.000005         0.056424     0.056902      0.080008     0.073536     0.019659
single filers      kink              X          X             X           X           X            X            X              X           X           X

Source: Authors' estimates based on de-identified IRS data. X indicates that the estimate fails the Ganong and Jäger (2014) permutation test at the
5% level. In fact, none of the Ganong and Jäger (2014) p-values suggest that any of the estimates is at all close to being statistically significant
different from zero. The estimates shown are for equations (2) and (5) in the text using cubics for the polynomials. Households with incomes plus or
minus $3,000 around each kink are included.




                                                                           65
                                                                       Table 15
                                              First Stage of Simulated Instrumental Variable Estimation
                                             Effect of Policy-Based Tax Credit on Actual Tax Credit Taken

                                                                        first stage regression for...
                                               age 19                                                                  age 22
               attend college      attend 4-    instructional       "list"      tuition attend college      attend 4-    instructional      "list"   tuition
                   at all (any year, 2-year, resources and tuition and paid and             at all (any year, 2-year, resources and       tuition paid and
                  1098t) and          1-year core educational     fees of       grants     1098t) and          1-year core educationaland fees of    grants
               attend college         college     resources of student's      received attend college          college     resources of student's received
                at least half- (conditional student's college     college                at least half- (conditional student's college    college
                          time on attending)                                                       time on attending)
coefficient on       0.300***       0.373***         0.380*** 0.375*** 0.380***               0.257***       0.361***         0.367*** 0.363*** 0.368***
pure policy-
based tax
credit
(simulated
instrument)
robust                 <0.001         <0.001           <0.001     <0.001        <0.001          <0.001          0.001            0.001     0.001     <0.001
clustered std
error
t-statistic             1,512          1,202            1,190      1,214         1,386              669            533             533        539       619
p-value               <0.0001        <0.0001          <0.0001    <0.0001       <0.0001         <0.0001        <0.0001          <0.0001 <0.0001      <0.0001
quintic                     yes           yes             yes         yes           yes              yes           yes             yes        yes        yes
polynomial
in income
full set of                 yes           yes             yes         yes           yes              yes           yes             yes        yes        yes
year effects
number of         33,198,780 13,444,991            12,792,374 13,639,755 17,847,816        23,783,288       7,915,372        7,670,236 8,016,694 10,600,587
observations
Source: Authors' estimates based on de-identified IRS data. We show robust clustered standard errors and t-statistics associated with the estimated
coefficients shown in the first row. *** indicates a p-value of no more than 0.001. Each cluster is a group of tax filers who receive identical higher
education tax credits if they make the same college attendance and payment choices. The estimates are based on equation (7) in the text. They are
for 19- and 22-year-olds in the 3 years before and after the introduction of the AOTC (2006 through 2011).



                                                                            66
                                                                      Table 16
                                             Second Stage of Simulated Instrumental Variable Estimation
             Effect of Tax Credits on Collegiate Outcomes, 19 and 22-Year-Olds, 3 Years Before and After the Introduction of the AOTC

                                                                second stage regression for 19-year-olds...
                    attending     attending      attending 4- attending 2- instructional                 core   "list" tuition    tuition and        grants
                 college at all    college at    year college     year college   resources of    educational      and fees of    fees paid by   received by
                  (any 1098t)     least half- (conditional on (conditional on       student's    resources of       student's         student       student
                                        time       attending)      attending)         college       student's          college
                                                                                                      college
estimated           0.000014       0.000014         -0.000009       0.000010       -0.017421       -0.031501      -0.023057        -0.030099      0.025649
coefficient on
tax credit
robust              0.000137       0.000136         0.000068       0.000064        0.020863        0.033153        0.030556        0.031756       0.051689
clustered
standard error
t-statistic             0.10            0.10           -0.14            0.15          -0.84           -0.95           -0.75            -0.95          0.50
number of         33,198,780      33,198,780      13,444,991      13,444,991     12,792,374      12,792,374      13,639,755       17,847,816    17,847,816
observations

                                                             second stage regression for 22-year-olds...
estimated            -0.000016      0.000097       -0.000065     0.000067       -0.026581       -0.044069          -0.032052   -0.033826     -0.001832
coefficient on
tax credit
robust                0.000020      0.000255        0.000096        0.000090        0.035438        0.053032        0.045294    0.046040      0.016842
clustered
standard error
t-statistic               -0.79         0.38             -0.68           0.75           -0.75           -0.83           -0.71       -0.73         -0.11
number of           23,783,288    23,783,288        7,915,372       7,915,372      7,670,236       7,670,236       7,670,236  10,600,587   10,600,587
observations
Source: Authors' estimates based on de-identified IRS data. We show robust clustered standard errors and t-statistics. Each cluster is a group of tax
filers who receive identical higher education tax credits if they make the same college attendance and payment choices. The estimates are based on
equation (6) in the text. They are for 19- and 22-year-olds in the 3 years before and after the introduction of the AOTC (2006 through 2011).




                                                                           67
                                       Appendix Table 1
                   College Assessment Taking and Scores by Household Income
                                  19 and 20 Year Olds in 2008

household           took any college assessment        average math score      average verbal score
income                     (ACT, SAT, or PSAT)                (SAT scale)               (SAT scale)
category
0-10k                                     35.0%                       458                       452
10-20k                                    35.4%                       436                       429
20-30k                                    39.0%                       444                       437
30-40k                                    43.1%                       457                       451
40-50k                                    47.5%                       470                       466
50-60k                                    51.6%                       481                       476
60-70k                                    54.6%                       489                       484
70-80k                                    58.7%                       496                       491
80-90k                                    63.1%                       503                       497
90-100k                                   67.6%                       510                       503
100-110k                                  72.8%                       516                       509
110-120k                                  74.4%                       522                       514
120-130k                                  75.9%                       527                       518
130-140k                                  80.3%                       533                       523
140-150k                                  82.5%                       538                       528
150-160k                                  83.3%                       542                       532
160-170k                                  85.7%                       546                       535
170-180k                                  87.2%                       550                       539
180-190k                                  89.9%                       553                       541
190-200k                                  89.9%                       556                       544

Notes: Individuals who were 19 or 20 years old in 2008 are associated with the 2008 income of the
filer of whom they were a dependent at the age of 17. All scores are converted to the SAT© scale.




                                                  68
                                                          Appendix Table 2
     Expenditures on Tax Credits that Coincide More and Less with Third Party Reports, tax filers of all ages in 2011, billions of $2011

              using minimum/stringent assumptions on 3rd party reports          using maximum/generous assumptions on 3rd party reports
household tax expenditures tax expenditures        actual and potential tax tax expenditures tax expenditures       actual and potential tax
income    on credits within on credits that are     expenditures on credits on credits within on credits that are   expenditures on credits
category      $500 of those at least $500 more (including those not taken)      $500 of those at least $500 more (including those not taken)
            based on third than those based that are at least $500 less       based on third than those based that are at least $500 less
              party reports      on third party than those based on third       party reports      on third party than those based on third
                                        reports               party reports                               reports              party reports
0-10k                  0.38                0.56                        1.07              0.41                0.44                       1.68
10-20k                 0.74                1.25                        1.45              0.81                1.02                       2.22
20-30k                 1.22                1.19                        2.01              1.36                0.87                       2.85
30-40k                 0.72                0.73                        1.42              0.81                0.53                       2.06
40-50k                 0.66                0.55                        1.27              0.75                0.39                       1.83
50-60k                 0.52                0.38                        1.05              0.59                0.25                       1.52
60-70k                 0.45                0.52                        0.94              0.50                0.43                       1.35
70-80k                 0.45                0.34                        0.91              0.50                0.26                       1.29
80-90k                 0.43                0.41                        0.79              0.47                0.34                       1.11
90-100k                0.40                0.17                        0.65              0.44                0.11                       0.90
100-110k               0.33                0.14                        0.51              0.35                0.10                       0.72
110-120k               0.20                0.08                        0.37              0.21                0.05                       0.53
120-130k               0.12                0.04                        0.27              0.12                0.02                       0.40
130-140k               0.11                0.04                        0.24              0.11                0.02                       0.34
140-150k               0.09                0.05                        0.20              0.09                0.04                       0.29
150-160k               0.08                0.03                        0.17              0.08                0.01                       0.25
160-170k               0.05                0.02                        0.12              0.05                0.01                       0.17
170-180k               0.01                0.00                        0.04              0.01                0.00                       0.06
180-190k               0.00                0.00                        0.00              0.00                0.00                       0.00
190-200k               0.00                0.00                        0.00              0.00                0.00                       0.00
total                  6.98                6.51                       13.48              7.68                4.88                      19.56
Notes: Authors' calculations based on de-identified IRS data. The important third party report for these calculations is Form 1098t.



                                                                     69
