NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SECULAR STAGNATION:
THE LONG VIEW
Barry Eichengreen
Working Paper 20836
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20836

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015

Prepared for the ASSA Annual Meetings (Boston, January 2-5, 2015). I thank Joseph Root for careful
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Barry Eichengreen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Secular Stagnation: The Long View
Barry Eichengreen
NBER Working Paper No. 20836
January 2015
JEL No. E00,N1
ABSTRACT
Four explanations for secular stagnation are distinguished: a rise in global saving, slow population
growth that makes investment less attractive, averse trends in technology and productivity growth,
and a decline in the relative price of investment goods. A long view from economic history is most
supportive of the last of these four views.

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu

Secular Stagnation: The Long View
Barry Eichengreen1
January 2015
What does history have to say about the dangers of secular stagnation? History doesn’t
actually “say” anything, but it points to observations, patterns, and discrepancies between past
predictions and outcomes that may be helpful for formulating answers to such questions.
Historical investigation is complicated by competing definitions and hypotheses. Here I
define secular stagnation as a downward tendency of the real interest rate, reflecting an excess of
desired saving over desired investment, resulting in a persistent output gap and/or slow rate of
economic growth. I distinguish four tendencies that might explain such a phenomenon: a rise in
savings rates due to the emergence of emerging markets; a decline in investment rates due to
reflecting a dearth of attractive investment opportunities, a decline in the relative price of
investment goods, and a decline in the rate of population growth.
Modern discussions of secular stagnation point to the decline in real interest rates since
1980. Thus, two Bank of Canada researchers writing in 2006 (Brigitte Desroches and Michael
Francis 2006) highlight the decline in long-term real interest rates in the G7 countries “over the
past 25 years.”2 IMF (2014) observes that “real interest rates worldwide have declined
substantially since the 1980s.” While there are hints that recent movements may, in part, reflect
mean reversion (Desroches and Francis write of how real interest rates have declined “to levels
not seen since the 1960s”), there is little consideration of the long-term record.3

1

Prepared for the ASSA Annual Meetings (Boston, January 2-4, 2015). I thank Joseph Root for careful research
assistance.
2
Desroches and Francis infer inflation expectations by estimating an autoregressive process based on the historical
behavior of inflation. The IMF estimates an autoregressive process using rolling windows and, alternatively, utilizes
survey data.
3
Note however that Laubach and Williams (2003) extend the picture back to the 1960s.

1

Figure 1 shows nominal and real interest rates for the United States over the last two
centuries: the yield on ten-year constant-maturity government bonds with and without
adjustment for realized consumer price inflation, where the adjustment involves subtracting a
seven-year moving average of CPI inflation (the current year and past six).4 For much of the 19th
century, when the U.S. was on the gold standard, the nominal interest rate may be more
informative, insofar as inflation was a random walk with expectation zero.5 The figure points to
an alternative interpretation, namely that the decline in real interest rates starting in the 1980s is
mean reversion after the exceptional period of high interest rates and inflation that preceded it.
Turning to explanations, recent discussion highlighting the possibility of a rise in the
global savings rate emphasizes high savings rates in emerging-market economies. This was of
course the focus of Ben Bernanke’s (2005) “global savings glut” hypothesis and Alan
Greenspan’s (2005) “conundrum” of anomalously low long-term interest rates (another
incarnation of the same phenomenon considered here). Compared to the advanced economies,
emerging markets are financially underdeveloped, forcing households to substitute brute-force
accumulation for portfolio diversification. The public sector provides little in the way of a social
safety net, encouraging precautionary saving for contingencies and old age. Central banks and
governments in emerging markets rely on reserve accumulation for insurance against financial
shocks. In many cases, low old-age dependency ratios make for high levels of life-cycle savings.
The implication is that as the share of global GDP accounted for by emerging markets has risen,
so too have global savings rates.

4

For the portions of the 1830s and 1840s when there was no federal debt, New York State canal bonds are used. It
makes very little difference to the picture when a five-year moving average is substituted and when the ex post real
interest rate is displayed as a five- or seven-year moving average.
5
Some would argue that the price level was mean reverting under the gold standard – that inflation should have
given rise to expectations of subsequent deflation. The empirical relevance of the argument is disputed by Summers
(1983).

2

Modern analyses focus on the period since the mid-1990s, the first point in time when the
vast majority of emerging markets and developing countries increased their output faster than the
United States. But for some countries it is possible to consider longer intervals. Historians of
the 19th-century United States (e.g. Frank Lewis 1983), for example, have pointed to the
country’s high immigration and low old-age dependency rates as explanations for relatively high
savings rates that allowed it, unlike other countries with extensive infrastructure needs, to meet
these without relying extensively on foreign capital. This 19th century “savings glut” explains
how it was that interest rates remained low despite pressure for capital deepening from biased
technological change. Analysts of other countries, such as John Hobson (1909), were concerned
in this period about the problem of “underconsumption” (read “oversaving”), attributable to the
increasing concentration of wealth and income in the hands of the “1 per cent.”6
Figure 2 shows data on global savings rates from the early 20h century through 2013.
The pre-1970 estimates are assembled from national sources. These are GDP weighted average
across countries of domestic investment rates (using 2005 GDP in purchasing power parity
terms).7 While there is some evidence of an upward trend over the long term (interrupted by the
two world wars and the Great Depression), one has to look hard to see any evidence of a growing
savings glut after 1980, as opposed to a temporary bulge in the period of high Chinese savings
from the turn of the 21st century to the financial crisis.8

6

Hobson pointed to imperialism and colonialism as creating an outlet for the resulting excess saving, analogous to
how Hansen (1938) pointed to the end of the frontier era as closing off a vent for excess savings some 30 years later.
7
National savings rates are, of course, the sum of domestic investment and the current account balance, but current
accounts sum to zero across countries (in principle if not always in the data). The global current account
discrepancy and gaps in country coverage mean that what is shown here is necessarily an approximation.
Alternatively, the country data can be weighted by current year GDP in purchasing power parity terms from the
Maddison data base. While these show basically the same pattern, data are available only for a subset of countries.
8
By limiting their analysis to the period since the early 1980s, Grigoli, Herman and Schmidt-Hebbel (2014) are able
to consider a wider range of countries. Their evidence and conclusions are consistent with mine here.

3

Estimates of historical investment rates tend to derive from data on the output of
investment-goods industries, and the further one goes back in time the more investment is likely
to go through the informal sector or reflect household production (as with fencing, field clearing,
swamp clearing and barn raising in the agricultural sector) and therefore be missed by such
methods. For a very few countries like the United States, historians have augmented the output
of capital goods sectors with estimates of home manufacturing and the value of farm
improvements made with farm materials in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Figure 3 shows the
estimates of Robert Gallman (1966) spliced to the standard national accounts data since 1925.9
The U.S. in the 19th century displays the behavior familiar from 21st century emerging markets,
with investment rates rising from 16 per cent in 1834-43 to 28 per cent in 1899-1908.
Subsequently, U.S. savings rates headed back down. This is a hint as to what is likely to happen
in emerging markets as populations age and capital/labor ratios approach equilibrium levels. It
suggests that even if high global savings are a factor in current low real interest rates, they may
not remain so indefinitely.
A second popular explanation for the low level of real interest rates is a decline in the
relative price of investment goods (think cheapening of personal computers). The same
investment projects can be pursued, it is hypothesized, by committing a smaller share of GDP,
and any additional projects that might be rendered attractive by this lower cost of capital are not
enough to offset the decline in the investment share. With less investment spending chasing the
same savings, the result can be lower real interest rates and, potentially, a chronic excess of
desired saving over desired investment.

9

Gallman’s estimates are also adjusted for changes in net claims against foreigners (Table 3, column 2). I eliminate
this adjustment, since I am concerned with savings rates here. Refinements that reduce the estimated investment
rate slightly without changing the trend over time are in Gallman (1986).

4

IMF (2014) has examined changes in the relative price of investment in the advanced
economies since 1980. It documents a downward trend that then levels off in the early 21st
century.10 In explaining this movement, it points to the work of Robert Gordon (1990), who
emphasizes the role of research and development that is embodied in cheaper, more efficient
investment goods. Finally, the IMF asserts that any induced increase in the volume of
investment was insufficient to offset the negative impact of this trend on real interest rates.
There is little dispute that research and development activity has grown in the long run
time and that it has been disproportionately embodied in investment goods. But there is less
agreement on when this trend began or how long it is likely to persist. Focusing on the United
States, Jonas Fisher (2006) argues that the real price of equipment, which is closely related to the
real price of investment goods, has been falling since the early 1950s, but that its average rate of
decline accelerated in the early 1980s, coincident with the appearance of the downward trend in
real interest rates.
Why there should have been this sharp break in the early 1980s, however, is not clear.
There is no obvious change in the level or composition of R&D spending between the quarter
centuries before and after this date.
It may shed additional light on these issues to consider the relative price of investment
goods in the long run in countries like the United States for which we have long time series.
Figure 4 shows the available data from Kuznets (1961) and the national income and product
accounts after 1929.11 We see that while the relative price of investment goods rose as well as
fell for significant periods, there is a sharp fall in recent decades. One interpretation would

10

Buiter, Rahbari and Seydl (2014), focusing on the U.S., extend the comparison back to 1970, showing that the
investment deflator grew on average by only 3.3 per cent per annum over the subsequent period, compared to 3.7
per cent for the GDP deflator.
11
Spliced using the overlapping 1929 observation.

5

situate the break around 1980 (coincident with the timing of the fall in real interest rates, the cost
of capital being an important component of the cost of investment goods). Another
interpretation would put the break around 1950, with an interruption in the 1970s, investment
goods being energy intensive and the ‘seventies being the period of the oil shock. Data for 11
now-advanced countries from William Collins and Jeffrey Williamson (2001) show the same
thing (Figure 5).
A limitation of the evidence is that these series are not adjusted for product quality
improvement, unlike studies for the post-World War II period which attempt to do so. Figure 6
shows Gordon’s quality-adjusted series through 1983 extended for two additional decades on the
assumption that the same relationship between the adjusted and unadjusted series that holds
through 1983 continues to hold thereafter.12 As expected, this makes the post-World War II
decline in the relative price of investment look even more dramatic.
Evidently, R&D is not embodied more easily and fully in investment goods than
consumption goods in all times and places. The presumption behind “the Baumol effect” – that
consumption goods, and in particular that portion provided by the service sector, are difficult to
mechanize and therefore become relatively more expensive over time – may not hold in the
future as it has in the recent past. Even if the post-1980 decline in the relative price of
investment goods is part of the explanation for the concurrent decline in real interest rates, there
is no ruling out that it may be reversed in the future.
A third possible explanation for secular stagnation, due originally to Alvin Hansen
(1938), is that the rate of investment is being dragged down by a low rate of population growth,
as first the advanced economies and now emerging markets undergo the transition to slower rates
12

Regressing Gordon’s quality adjusted series on the NIPA series yields a coefficient of 0.57 with a t-statistic of 14
and an R-squared of 0.86.

6

of natural increase. The logic of Hansen and his followers was that slower population growth
meant that capital had less additional labor with which to work on the margin, resulting in lower
returns and lower investment. What Hansen did not emphasize was that slower population
growth and greater longevity also imply lower savings rates on life-cycle grounds. Charles
Goodhart and Philipp Erfuth (2014) question on this basis whether slower labor force growth in
the advanced economies has contributed to the recent decline in real interest rates; they predict
that as population growth and savings rates continue to fall, real interest rates will head back up.
The historical data do not show any clear correlation between the growth rates of
population and GDP, whether the sample is global or limited to the now-advanced countries. My
own work with Molly Fifer (2002) suggests that increases in old-age dependency ratios have
approximately equal negative effects on savings and investment rates and minimal impact on real
interest rates and the current account of the balance of payments.
A fourth popular if controversial explanation for low interest rates and the slow growth
with which they are evidently associated is a dearth of attractive investment opportunities. This
was, of course, the original conjecture of Hansen (1938), undermined by subsequent experience.
More recently, Robert Gordon (2012) has argued that the returns to innovation in the United
States, measured in terms of the impact on GDP growth, have slowed since the 1970s. Gordon
associates periods of relatively high investment and growth with key technological clusters:
steam and railroads in the early 19th century; electricity, chemicals, petroleum and the internal
combustion engine from the late 19th century through the mid-20th centuries; and computers and
related technologies since the 1960s. He argues that the slowdown in U.S. productivity growth
starting in the 1970s reflects the relatively limited impact of this third, computer-centered cluster,
aside from its application to retailing, wholesaling and finance centered in the decade 1995-2005.

7

There is little disputing the historical record. Productivity and GDP growth were slower
before the late 19th century than subsequently. Productivity growth again slowed in the United
States starting in the 1970s, the visible acceleration in 1995-2005 notwithstanding.
But different economic historians will have different views about what this history
implies for the future. In thinking about the impact of a cluster of innovations on output and
productivity growth, I like to distinguish two dimensions of the technology in question, which I
refer to as “range of applicability” and “range of adaptation.” Range of applicability refers to
the number of different sector or activities to which the key innovations can be productively
applied. Thus, the steam engine, the key innovation at the center of the first industrial
revolution, had only a limited impact on output and productivity growth because for many years
its productive application was limited to the textile industry and railways, which accounted for
only a relatively small fraction of economic activity (as documented by Nicholas Crafts 2002).
Electricity had a larger impact on output and productivity growth because it was possible to
apply the technology to a wide range of manufacturing industries, to the household sector and
elsewhere within decades of its development. The “computer revolution” of the second half of
the 20th century again had a relatively limited impact on economy-wide rates of output and
productivity growth because its productive application was largely limited to finance, to
wholesale and retail trade, and to the production of computers themselves.
This perspective suggests that the implications for output and productivity growth of the
next cluster of innovations will depend importantly on their range of applicability. Optimists
point to the fact that currently promising innovations include new tools (quantum computers),
materials (graphene) and processes (genetic modification) which, by their nature, would seem to
have a broad range of potential applications. They point to the scope for robotics to supplement

8

human brain- and muscle-power in a wide range of activities. They point to the Internet of
Things as promising to connect embedded devices across the economy. This is not a prediction,
but a suggestion to look to the range of applicability of new innovations when thinking about the
prospects for output and productivity growth in the medium term.
Range of adaptation refers to how comprehensively economic activity must be
reorganized before positive impacts on output and productivity growth materialize, In addition,
the greater the required range of adaptation, the higher the likelihood that growth may slow in
the short run, as costly investments in adaptation are sunk and existing technological
complementarities are disrupted (see Andreas Hornstein and Per Krusell 1996).
Thus, the steam engine had an immediate positive impact on output and productivity in
textiles because until the 1830s its application was largely limited to textiles and a few other
activities like pumping water from coal mines that did not require widespread reorganization of
economic activity elsewhere in the economy. Similarly it had little tendency to depress
productivity growth in the short run because it did little to disrupt existing technological
complementarities, such as they were. In contrast, electricity and the internal combustion engine
required much more widespread adaptations before their positive impact on productivity could
be felt (see Christiano Ristuccia and Solomos Solomou 2014). Networks of roads and
transmission lines had to be built. Urban geography had to be redrawn and a wide range of
economic activities had to be relocated (see Frank Fetter 1924). Factory production had to be
systematically reorganized (see Paul David 1990). In the meantime existing technological
complementarities were disrupted. These facts are invoked to explain why productivity growth
in the U.S. lagged from the 1890s, from when this “second industrial revolution” dates, to the
1920s, by which time much of this adaptation had finally taken place.

9

Here some observers will point to the fact that productivity growth in the United States
has been disappointing in recent years as having positive implications for the future. A wide
variety of connected activities and sectors, such as health care, education, industrial research and
finance, are being disrupted by the latest wave of new technologies. Even while expensive
investments are being sunk, existing technological complementarities are being disturbed. As a
result, productivity growth has had a tendency to disappoint. But once a broad range of
adaptations is complete, productivity growth will accelerate. The current slow rate of
productivity growth is, in this view, a harbinger of better things to come.
Again, this is not a prediction but a suggestion to look to the range of adaptation required
in response to the current wave of innovations when seeking to interpret our slow rate of
productivity growth and when pondering our future.

10

References
Bernanke, Ben (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,”
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Virginia (10 March).
Buiter, Willem, Ebrahim Rahbari and Joe Seydl (2014), “The Long-Run Decline in Advanced
Country Investment,” London: Citigroup (12 June).
Collins, William and Jeffrey Williamson, “Capital Goods Prices and Investment, 1879-1950,”
Journal of Economic History 61, pp.59-94.
Crafts, Nicholas (2002), “The Solow Productivity Paradox in Historical Perspective,” CEPR
Discussion Paper no. 3142 (January).
David, Paul (1990), “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern
Productivity Paradox,” American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings 70 pp.355-361.
Desroches, Brigitte and Michael Francis (2006), “Global Savings, Investment, and World Real
Interest Rates,” Bank of Canada Review (Winter 2006-7), pp.3-17.
Eichengreen, Barry and Molly Fifer (2002), “The Impact of Population Aging on the Balance of
Payments Between North and South,” in Horst Siebert ed,, Economic Policy for Aging Societies:
The Issues, Amsterdam: Springer.
Fetter, Frank (1924), “The Economic Law of Market Areas,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
38, pp.520-529.
Fisher, Jonas (2006), “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment Specific Technology
Shocks,” Journal of Political Economy 114, pp.413-451.
Gallman, Robert (1966), “Gross National Product in the United States, 1834-1909,” in Dorothy
Brady ed., Output, Employment and Productivity in the United States After 1800, New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research, pp.1-90.
Gallman, Robert (1986), “The United States Capital Stock in the 19th Century,” in Stanley
Engerman and Robert Gallman eds., Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.165-214.
Goodhart, Charles and Philipp Erfuth (2014), “Demography and Economics: Look Past the
Past,” Global Macro Analyst, New York: Morgan Stanley (8 October).
Gordon, Robert (1990), The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Gordon, Robert (2012), “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six
Headwinds,” NBER Working Paper no. 18315 (August).
Greenspan, Alan (2005), “Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan” Committee on Banking,
Jousing and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate (16 February).

11

Grigoli, Francesco, Alexander Herman and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (2014), “World Saving,” IMF
Working Paper 14/204 (November).
Hansen, Alvin (1938), Full Recovery or Stagnation, New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Hobson, John (1909), The Industrial System: An Inquiry into Earned and Unearned Income,
London: Longmans, Green.
Hornstein, Andreas and Per Krusell (1996), “Can Technology Improvements Cause Productivity
Slowdowns?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 11, pp.209-259.
International Monetary Fund (2014), “Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates,” World
Economic Outlook (April), chapter 3.
Kuznets, Simon (1961), Capital in the American Economy: Its Formation and Financing,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Laubach, Thomas and John Williams (2003), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,” Review
of Economics and Statistics 85, pp.1063-1070.
Lewis, Frank (1983), “Fertility and Savings in the United States 1830-1900,” Journal of Political
Economy 91, pp.825-840.
Ristuccia, Christiano and Solomos Solomu (2014), “General Purpose Technologies and
Economic Growth: Electricity Diffusion in the Manufacturing Sector Before WWII,” European
Review of Economic History 18, 227-247.
Summers, Lawrence (1983), “The Nonadjustment of Nominal Interest Rates: A Study of the
Fisher Effect,” in James Tobin ed,, A Symposium in Honor of Arthur Okun, Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution, pp.201-241.

12

Figure 1. Long-Run US Interest Rates

Figure 2. Secular Trend in Global Savings Rate

13

Figure 3. Long-Run US Investment Rate

Figure 4. Secular Trend in the US Relative Price of Investment

14

Figure 5. Secular Trend in the Relative Price of Investment

Figure 6. Long-Run Trend in Quality-Adjusted Relative Price of Investment

15

