NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIGHTING THE LAST WAR:
ECONOMISTS ON THE LENDER OF LAST RESORT
Richard S. Grossman
Hugh Rockoff
Working Paper 20832
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20832

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015

This paper was prepared for the Norges Bank conference, “Of the Uses of Central Banks: Lessons
from History,” Oslo, June 5-6, 2014. Michael Bordo, Øyvind Eitrheim, an anonymous referee, and
our discussant Charles Goodhart made many helpful suggestions. Jessica Scheld provided able research
assistance. We are responsible for the remaining errors. Grossman acknowledges financial support
from the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation. The authors received an honorarium from
Norges Bank for writing this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Richard S. Grossman and Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Fighting the Last War: Economists on the Lender of Last Resort
Richard S. Grossman and Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 20832
January 2015
JEL No. B0,N2
ABSTRACT
In this paper we trace the evolution of the lender of last resort doctrine—and its implementation—from
the nineteenth century through the panic of 2008. We find that typically the most influential economists
“fight the last war”: formulating policy guidelines that would have dealt effectively with the last crisis
or in some cases the last two or three. This applies even to the still supreme voice among lender-of-last-resort
theorists, Walter Bagehot, who wrestled with the how to deal with the financial crises that hit Britain
between the end of the Napoleonic Wars and the panic of 1866. Fighting the last war may leave economists
unprepared for meeting effectively the challenge of the next war.

Richard S. Grossman
Department of Economics
Wesleyan University
Middletown, CT 06459
and Institute of Quantitative Social Science, Harvard University
rgrossman@wesleyan.edu
Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu

1. Introduction
In this paper we trace the evolution of lender of last resort (LOLR) doctrine—and its
implementation—from the nineteenth century through the panic of 2008. There are, of
course, many excellent histories of the LOLR, for example, Bordo (1990), Humphrey
(1989, 1992), Goodhart (1999), Capie and Wood (2006), Kindleberger and Aliber
(2011), and Bignon, Flandreau, and Ugolini (2012). Inevitably, we will cover many of the
same experiences and ideas as these authors, but we hope to draw attention to some
patterns in the way ideas about the LOLR have emerged from historical experience that
have not received as much attention as we believe they should.
In the next section we define a LOLR and identify some of the important
controversies. In section 3 we recount the evolution of the Bank of England as LOLR
and in section 4 that evolution in other countries. Section 5 then discusses ideas of the
LOLR focusing especially on Bagehot’s Lombard Street. Section 6 discusses the Great
Depression and section 7 the contributions of R.G. Hawtrey, Milton Friedman and Anna
J. Schwartz, and Ben Bernanke to the theory of the LOLR. In sections 3-7, our focus is
on the provision of money to calm a financial panic that is already underway. In section
8 we address “rescue operations”: bailouts of individual firms with the idea of preventing
a financial panic from starting. Section 9 discusses the subprime crisis and section 10
concludes.

3

2. The Lender of Last Resort: Definitions and Controversies
What is a lender of last resort? Economists have offered many definitions.
Thomas Humphrey (1992, 571) put it this way: “The term ‘lender of last resort’ refers to
the central bank’s responsibility to accommodate demands for high-powered money in
times of crisis, thus preventing panic induced contractions of the money stock.” In
Manias, Panics, and Crashes Charles P. Kindleberger (1978, 261) tells us, however,
that “[t]he lender of last resort stands ready to halt a run out of real and illiquid financial
assets into money by making more money available.”
At the heart of both definitions is the notion of a “run” or “panic” and the damage
it can do. The classic banking panic was characterized by a sudden widespread fear
that “hard cash” (i.e., specie when there was a metallic monetary standard, fiat currency
when there was not) would not be available when needed, leading holders of bank
notes or deposits to try to withdraw their funds as quickly as possible. The potential for a
damaging run is inherent in fractional reserve banking: since banks only hold cash
accounting for a portion of deposits, if all depositors demand their cash at once only a
fraction can be paid. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) was the first of a long line of papers
analyzing the inherent instability of the banking system within a formal model.
The two definitions of the LOLR differ, however, in terms of the range of events
that would warrant intervention. Humphrey, evidently, would limit the LOLR’s actions to
a relatively narrow swath of the financial sector, perhaps to just the banking sector, and
would focus on the goal of maintaining the stock of money. Kindleberger’s definition
goes beyond the familiar case of commercial bank depositors attempting to convert
deposits into cash. His “Real and illiquid financial assets” would include real estate,
4

stocks and bonds, reserves of raw material, and so on. For Kindleberger, a collapse of
farm prices or a crash on the stock market might require action by a LOLR. The range
of markets and institutions that should be protected by the LOLR remains one of the
fundamental controversies in the theory of the LOLR.
The “contagion of fear” (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, 308) that ignites a run
might be based on bad economic news, such as the decline of a key agricultural price
or the failure of an important company that endangered the soundness of the banking
system. Alternatively, it might be based on a false rumor that, for example, that an
unsuccessful speculation had put an important segment of the financial sector at risk.
In the classic analogy someone yells “fire” in a crowded theater and everyone rushes to
the exit hoping that they won’t be the one consumed by the fire. The panic may have a
factual basis (someone may have detected the start of a potentially damaging electrical
fire) but it might be based on an unfounded rumor (the person who yelled fire was
mistaken).
There is no doubt that historically financial crises, especially banking panics,
have been associated with severe economic contractions. Why panics cause so much
distress, however, is still a matter of controversy. In some cases the inability to
complete transactions – to pay workers or suppliers of raw materials for example –
clearly depressed economic activity in the short-run (James, McAndrews, and Weiman
2013). Monetarists point to contractions in the money stock produced by decreases in
the money multiplier as the main causal channel (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, Cagan
1965). Note that Humphrey’s definition expressly stresses the role of the LOLR in
preventing contractions in the stock of money. In response, Keynesians have pointed to

5

waves of pessimism that depress investment spending (Temin 1976). And Bernanke
(1983) argued that banking panics could depress economic activity by raising the cost
of financial intermediation.
Typically, we think of the central bank as the institution making more money
available during a panic; however, Kindleberger’s definition, rightly in our view, leaves
open the institutional identification of the LOLR because other institutions have often
played this role, including governments, individual or groups of private banks, and
wealthy individuals. In the recent American crisis both the Treasury and the Federal
Reserve played important roles in meeting the crisis, and private banks such as Bank of
America and JPMorgan Chase were brought into the policy response. Kindleberger and
Aliber (2011, 311) would go even further, suggesting that a legislative action, repeal of
the Sherman Silver Purchase Act in 1893, should be counted as lender of last resort
operations.
The money that the LOLR can make available in a crisis depends on the
underlying monetary regime. At one extreme is a major country with a central bank that
creates fiat money. In the event of a bank run the central bank can print whatever
amount is needed no matter how large the demand. The central bank may worry that
money creation will lead to inflation or an asset price bubble, but not that it will run out of
money. At the other extreme is a country on the gold standard where the central bank’s
reserves are limited to its holdings of gold. In those circumstances, the central bank
must husband its reserves. A rumor that the central bank itself is running short of
reserves may intensify a crisis.

6

Once a run on the banking system is underway, the experts agree that the LOLR
needs to step in and bring the run to a halt. The only disagreement is over the terms on
which additional funds should be made available. Some traditional theorists, Walter
Bagehot in particular, suggested that the LOLR should set stiff terms: interest rates
should be high and no compromise should be made on the quality of the collateral
required. Kindleberger and Aliber (2011, 224-5), on the other hand, suggest that it is
wrong for the LOLR to be so exacting, and that the important thing is for the LOLR
intervene to stop the crisis before it spreads.
Perhaps the most significant disagreement is over whether the LOLR can and
should intervene to prevent panics from developing in the first place. Historically, panics
have often been precipitated by the failure of an important financial institution. If the
LOLR could have stepped in and somehow “rescued” the failing institution before it had
a chance to fail, it might have prevented the ensuing panic. The question then becomes
how widely the LOLR should roam in its search for firms in need of rescue. Should it
provide assistance only to solvent banks, as Bagehot implied, or should it rescue the
insolvent as well? Should it stick to banks, financial institutions in general, or should it
rescue any business or government agency that it believes is so “systematically
important,” to use the currently fashionable term, that its failure might trigger a financial
panic?
In the following two sections we will sketch the development of the LOLR in
various countries. Then in sections 5, 6 and 7 we examine how the thinking of
economists and policy makers about the proper role for the LOLR has evolved over

7

time. In Section 8 we focus on the thinking about rescue operations. Section 9 address
the subprime crisis. And section 10 draws some general conclusions.

3. The evolution of the Bank of England as LOLR
Although the Bank of England was the first institution in the world to act as LOLR
on a consistent basis, its evolution into that role was neither direct nor quick. The Bank
was granted a charter as England’s first limited liability joint stock bank in 1694 in return
for a substantial loan to the crown. The charter was renewed nine times between 1697
and 1844, typically in return for a fresh loan or an improvement in the terms of its
outstanding loans (Broz and Grossman 2004). With the passage of the second
rechartering act (establishing its third charter) in 1708, the Bank was granted an
exception to the law prohibiting firms of more than six persons from operating a bank,
effectively giving it a monopoly on joint stock banking in England and Wales, a privilege
that persisted into the 19th century.
Despite its quasi-public character as the government’s banker and privileged
position as England’s only joint stock bank, the Bank of England was universally
regarded as a private institution with limited responsibility beyond its shareholders.
Nonetheless, Ashton (1959, 112) asserts that the Bank expanded its discounts during
18th century stringencies, and Lovell’s (1959) statistical analysis of the period 17581798 demonstrates that the Bank did expand its discounts in response to both the level
and change in the level of commercial bankruptcies.

8

One factor that may have complicated the Bank’s willingness and ability to
function as LOLR was its responsibility to maintain the rate of exchange between the
pound and gold, that is, adherence to the gold standard. This requirement gave the
Bank an incentive to conserve its gold holdings at the precise moment when, as LOLR,
it should have been lending freely. This conflict seemed to impair the Bank’s actions as
a LOLR during the crisis of 1793, when, according to Baring ([1797] 1993, 20-21),
“…the Directors caught the panic; their nerves could not support the daily and constant
demand for guineas (i.e., gold); and for the purpose of checking that demand, they
curtailed their discounts.” Thus, the Bank reduced its lending and discounting in order
to preserve its gold holdings (Clapham, 1945, I, 261). The failure of the Bank to act as
LOLR led the government to take on that role by issuing Exchequer bills to merchants
on the security of commodities of all kinds (Thomas 1934, 26).
The conflict between the Bank’s evolving role as LOLR and its commitment to
maintain gold convertibility arose again during the crisis of 1797. Contrary to the Bank’s
1694 charter, which forbade it from lending to the government without the consent of
Parliament, Chancellor of the Exchequer William Pitt tapped the Bank for funds by
discounting Treasury Bills. The continual borrowing led the Bank’s gold reserve to fall
from over £6 million in 1795 to about £1 million in 1797. With the outbreak of the crisis
in February 1797, the government issued an order prohibiting the Bank – against its
wishes – from redeeming its notes in gold. The suspension of the gold standard would
last until 1821.

9

Although, the Bank of England’s reaction to the crisis of 1793 was tentative,
Bagehot (1924 [1873], 52) describes the response to the crisis of 1825 as more surefooted:
The way in which the panic of 1825 was stopped by advancing money has been
described in so broad and graphic a way that the passage has become classical.
“We lent it,” said Mr. Harman [a former governor], on behalf of the Bank of
England, “by every possible means and in modes we had never adopted before;
we took in stock on security, we purchased Exchequer bills, we made advances
on Exchequer bills, we not only discounted outright, but we made advances on
the deposit of bills of exchange to an immense amount, in short, by every
possible means consistent with the safety of the Bank, and we were not on some
occasions over-nice. Seeing the dreadful state in which the public were, we
rendered every assistance in our power.” After a day or two of this treatment, the
entire panic subsided, and the 'City' was quite calm.
Despite the Bank’s activism in 1825, its behavior in 1836 was again timid. As financial
pressure increased in 1835, the Bank decided not to make advances on bills that had
been endorsed by note-issuing joint-stock banks. This was no doubt partly a
consequence of the Bank’s displeasure that the 1833 rechartering act had eliminated its
monopoly on joint stock banking in London. During the summer of 1836, the Bank
further decided to reduce substantially the amount of its holdings of bills accepted by
the major merchants in Anglo-American trade (Collins 1972, 52). Upon a deputation
from the Bank of Liverpool, the Bank of England relaxed its policy, and again agreed to
permit the discounting of American bills drawn against the actual transfers of goods.
The Bank of England became much less hesitant as LOLR in subsequent crises,
particularly those following the enactment of the Bank Charter Act of 1844, called Peel’s
Act after Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel. In theory, this legislation should have made it
more difficult for the Bank to act as LOLR. Among its other provisions, the law split the
Bank into two departments, an Issue Department, which was to assume responsibility

10

for the note issue (and, hence, maintaining convertibility into gold), and a Banking
Department, which was to carry on the rest of the Bank’s business. The Act permitted
the Bank to issue £14 million in notes backed by securities, the so-called “fiduciary
issue.” Any additional notes beyond the fiduciary issue were to be back one-for-one by
gold, thus hampering the Bank’s ability to expand the note issue—in the absence of a
corresponding increase in the gold reserve—in times of crisis. And, in fact, opponents
of the Act, including Thomas Tooke and John Fullarton, raised this objection during the
debate over the legislation. Fullarton argued that an increase of notes should be
permitted in time of emergency, warning that the arrangement “…must have the very
effect of disabling [the Bank of England] for the performance of what has hitherto been
considered the duty of the Bank in time of difficulty and pressure” (Fetter 1965, 187191).
Peel understood the constraints of the new law and privately acknowledged that
it might be necessary to suspend the Act in time of emergency. A new pattern emerged
following the law’s passage in 1844: during the crises of 1847, 1857, and 1866, the
Government encouraged the Bank to violate Peel’s Act by exceeding its fiduciary limit
and, in return, sent the Bank a letter promising that it would introduce a bill in Parliament
indemnifying the Bank for any violations of the law: such a law was enacted in 1857, but
was not needed during the crises 1847 or 1866.
The rigidity in the law regarding the quantity of notes issued can be seen as a
protection against an overexpansion of the note issue. Peel, however, believed that
would be possible for the Bank to act as LOLR despite the law. Following the crisis of

11

1847 Peel, now in opposition, congratulated the Government on their handling of the
crisis:
My confidence is unshaken that we are taking all the precautions which
legislation can prudently take against the recurrence of a monetary crisis. It may
recur in spite of our precautions, and if it does, and if it be necessary to assume a
grave responsibility for the purpose of meeting it, I daresay men will be found
willing to assume such responsibility (Andréadès 1909, 329n).
Thus, in Peel’s view, the LOLR should be constrained in its note issue in normal times,
but should have the flexibility to expand its note issue during an emergency.
The second half of the 19th century saw three crises in Britain that highlight the
distinction between a LOLR operation and a bailout and the difficulties faced by policy
makers in navigating them. Financial upheavals of 1866, 1878, and 1890 were each
centered on a key—and to use modern terminology—systematically important financial
institution: Overend, Gurney, and Company; the City of Glasgow Bank; and Baring
Brothers, and Company.
Overend, Gurney had its origins in a firm of Norwich wool merchants, which
eventually became established a country bankers. The company later merged with a
firm of London bill brokers and grew to such status, according to the Times of London
(May 11, 1866), that it could, “. . . rightly claim to be the greatest instrument of credit in
the Kingdom.” The relationship between Overend, Gurney and the Bank of England
had long been hostile and, when Overend collapsed in 1866 leading to widespread
panic, it appealed to the Bank of England for assistance. The Bank denied the
particular request on the grounds that the firm did not have adequate security; however,
the Bank did increase its discounting activities, in line with its role as LOLR. It is unclear
whether the City of Glasgow Bank—which failed largely due to fraud—approached the

12

Bank of England, but it did request assistance from the association of Scottish bankers,
which denied the request on the grounds that bank’s affairs were well beyond repair.
The Baring crisis erupted in 1890 when Baring Brothers, an old established firm
of merchant bankers, failed. Baring’s had long been London’s leading lender to Latin
America, particularly Argentina and Uruguay. When Argentina’s land boom collapsed
leading to a run on its banking system, the market for Baring’s substantial portfolio of
Latin American debt securities dried up. The threat of an international run on Baring’s
would also have called Britain’s commitment to the gold standard in question, and so
when Baring’s directors approached the Bank of England with a request for assistance,
the Bank reacted with alacrity. The Bank immediately ordered an audit in order to
determine whether, given enough time, Baring’s currently illiquid assets would be
sufficient to eventually pay off its liabilities. Convinced that it was—and accompanied
by an assurance from the government that it would also absorb some of the cost of the
liquidation of Baring’s, should it not prove true—Bank of England governor William
Lidderdale set about assembling subscribers to a guarantee fund which would be called
on if the Bank-supervised liquidation of Baring’s assets was not sufficient to meet its
liabilities. Lidderdale placed the Bank of England’s name at the top of the list for £1
million and set about coaxing, cajoling, and, in some cases, even threatening potential
subscribers. All of this was done before news of Baring’s difficulties became public. By
the time the story became known, the guarantee fund was already fully subscribed and
no panic materialized. The Baring rescue surely spared Britain a banking crisis and,
potentially, a run on the pound.

13

The Baring Crisis was by no means the first time that the Bank of England had
provided funds for individual firms. In 1801 the Bank had lent to Hibberts, Fuhr, &
Purrier on guarantees from 13 firms including Baring Brothers & Co. In 1836-37 the
Bank loaned to several firms that had run into difficulties while financing trade with the
United States. Aid was provided to Sir James Esdaile, Esdaile, Grenfell, Thomas & Co.
on the guarantee of several private bankers. Aid was also provided to the three W’s –
Wiggin, Wildes, and Wilson – for a time, although they were eventually allowed to fail.
And aid was provided to W. & J. Brown & Co., which received a total of almost
£2,000,000, about £5.6 billion in today’s money using GDP as the inflator
(www.measuringworth.com). Still it was the relief of Baring in 1890 that brought the
Bank’s practice of lending to individual firms to arrest an incipient panic clearly into
focus.1

4. Lenders of Last Resort elsewhere in the 19th and early 20th century
Other central banks acted as LOLR during the nineteenth century, although none had
as much time to grow into this role as the Bank of England. In 1890 the Bank of
Japan—just eight years after its establishment—provided liquidity during a stock market
crisis, preventing the collapse of a large number of banks (Tamaki 1995, 66-67). Under
the leadership of Governor Jacques Lafitte, the Banque de France—which had only
been established in 1800—loaned freely during the crisis of 1818 acting as “an intuitive
lender of last resort.” This mantle was, however, only temporary, since, “[t]hereafter,
1

This paragraph is based on Hidy (1946).

14

the Bank of France forgot the lesson…” When a downturn in the textile industry led to a
financial crisis ten years later, the Bank responded by restricting its lending. The crisis
was only stemmed after syndicate of six Paris banks stepped in to provide funds
(Kindleberger 1984, 279). The Banque was consistent in this attitude for many years,
refusing to intervene during the failures of the Crédit Mobilier in 1868 or the Union
Générale in 1882. It did, however, provide a loan for the Paris Bourse in 1882 (White,
2007). And it intervened when the Comptoir d’Escompte was on the point of failure in
1889 by authorizing a large loan on behalf of the Banque and persuading several large
banks to guarantee the loan (Hautcoeur, Riva, and White 2013). Kindleberger and
Aliber (2011, 218) argue that the Comptoir d’Escompte was bailed out not because of
any change of heart by the Banque, but because it was thought that a second large
bank failure in the span of seven years might have destroyed the credibility of the
French financial system. According to Plessis (1995, 11), during the late 19th and early
20th century the Banque de France considered itself to be in competition with the large
deposit banks, although it was
…willing ‘to help Trade and Treasury’ by making capital available to them—in so
far as it could. On an ad hoc basis, it helped banks with temporary difficulties
(such as Société Générale in early 1914), but had no intention of fully taking on
the role of lender of last resort.

LOLR facilities emerged rapidly in response to worldwide financial crisis of 1857,
sometimes by central banks acting alone, other times in concert with governments.
Although many major commercial centers were hard hit during this crisis, the disruption
was especially severe in Hamburg. As an important center for trade between
Scandinavia, northern Germany, Britain, and the Americas, the expansion in the issue
15

of Hamburg bills of exchange in the years leading up to the crisis left it particularly
vulnerable when the crisis struck (Wirth 1874, 373ff.). Hamburg’s government, after
debating whether to increase its note issue, with the potential consequence of a
depreciation of its silver-backed currency, created a new bank to discount mercantile
trade bills. This new bank was funded with securities deposited by the Treasury, as well
as government-borrowed silver.
By contrast, the Bank of Prussia refused to lend the required silver during the
crisis. Assistance came from Austria, which was on an inconvertible paper standard
and was thus happy to lend 10 million marks banco (the securities deposited by the
Treasury accounted for 5 million marks banco) at interest. The arrival of the train
carrying the silver (Silberzug) from Austria is said to have calmed the crisis almost
immediately (Flandreau 1997, 750; Kindleberger and Aliber 2011; Ahrens 1986).
Elsewhere in northern Europe, governments and central banks responded
vigorously to the crisis of 1857. The Denmarks Nationalbank unilaterally extended the
maturity on all Hamburg bills it held by three months and the quantitative limit on its
note-issue was abolished. Sweden and Norway contracted large state loans to tide the
markets over the crisis (Jensen 1896, 380; Times of London, December 7, 1857). And
the Nederlandsche Bank undertook the role of LOLR during the 1857 crisis by “lending
freely at a penalty rate,” as Bagehot’s advice would later be formulated: the bank raised
its discount rate sharply (from between 3 and 4 percent to 7 percent), and discounted
freely against good collateral. As it noted in its annual report on the year:
We decided to enlist all our forces in an effort to allay the crisis; (…) while we did
increase the interest rate, we equally let it be known far and wide that we did not
lack in strength and that anyone who could pledge good collateral might count on
the support of our institution (Vanthoor 2005, 48-49).
16

In subsequent crises, the focus shifted from governments to central banks. In
Finland, the government acted as LOLR during the late 1870s and early 1880s, when
the state took the unusual action of approving loans to the banks in order to alleviate
their liquidity problems—a role it reprised during a crisis at the turn of the century. It
was the Bank of Finland, however, that rescued Kansallis-Osake-Pankki in the early
1890s and provided selective support to banks during the 1931 crisis (Herrala 1999; 712; Capie, Goodhart, Fischer, and Schnadt 1994, 137). The Norges Bank (1899) and
Sweden’s Rikabank (1897) also adopted the role of LOLR later in the 19th century
(Capie, Goodhart, Fischer, Schnadt 1994, 124, 147). Taking on this role may have
been facilitated by the fact that both of these banks were developing a clearing system
among domestic banks around this time, allowing them to directly affect the level of
reserves.
The Banca d’Italia, established in 1893, developed into a LOLR shortly after the
turn of the 20th century, adopting Bagehot’s principle of lending freely during the crisis
that struck in 1906—going so far as to refer to Bagehot by name in its 1907 Report and
Accounts. After having taken a similar action in 1910, the Bank’s annual report stated:
“At that particular time, what was important to the Italian business community was not
so much to obtain funds at reasonable conditions, but to know that credit was still
available for good risk transactions. And the Bank did not fail to provide this type of
credit” (Wood 2000, 208-209).
A set of private institutions took on the role of LOLR in United States during the
nineteenth century: the bank clearinghouse. Clearinghouses of one sort or another
have existed in many times and places; they are institutions that provide a central
17

location where representatives of individuals or firms can meet to settle claims against
one another, thus reducing the time, effort, and cash necessary to do so. For example,
if A owes B 10 and B owes C 10, the debts can be cleared with one payment from A to
C, rather than two payments (A to B and B to C). If A owes B 10, B owes C 10, and C
owes A 10, the account can be settled with no payment whatsoever, rather than three
individual payments of 10.
American bank clearinghouses settled a variety of claims, including banknotes,
checks, drafts, and bills of exchange during the nineteenth century. They also set rules
for the behavior of member banks, including limiting deposit rates and setting prices on
claims to be traded. Unlike the central banks discussed above, American bank
clearinghouses were entirely private, owned by the banks themselves. The New York
clearinghouse was officially formed in 1853, although Albert Gallatin—who had been
Secretary of the Treasury under presidents Jefferson and Madison--had suggested the
formation of clearinghouses as early as 1831. Clearinghouses were subsequently
formed in Boston (1856) and Philadelphia (1858). Clearinghouses were not only
established in large banking centers, but also in smaller banking markets including
Topeka, Kansas and St, Joseph, Missouri (Cannon 1900; 1910).
Clearinghouses took on special importance during crises (Gorton 1985, 280-281;
Cannon 1900, 1910; Timberlake 1984). At the outbreak of a panic the clearinghouse
would authorize the issuance of clearinghouse loan certificates, a sort of reserve
currency. A bank facing a shortfall of cash could apply to the clearinghouse loan
committee for certificates, against which the bank would submit a portion of its
securities portfolio as collateral. Certificates were issued with maturities of from one to

18

three months, carried an interest charge, and were issued in large denominations. They
could then be used in place of cash in the clearing, allowing banks to keep more cash
on hand to satisfy depositors’ demands.
American clearinghouses worked, in some ways, like the Bank of England during
crises, creating liquidity in the form of loan certificates during emergencies. The loan
certificates were the joint obligations of the members of the clearinghouse, so that if the
security posted as collateral was not sufficient to redeem the loan, the liability fell upon
the surviving members of the clearinghouse. Like the Bank of England, the
clearinghouses issued additional liquidity on the security of collateral, and discounted
the collateral as warranted.
The operations of the clearinghouses differed from the Bank of England in a
number of important respects. Because the clearinghouses were private institutions,
operating without any government supervision or regulation or public responsibilities,
they did not require legislative approval to increase the supply of money or reserves
beyond some government-imposed limit. The Bank of England, although a private,
profit-making institution, had a legal obligation to maintain a certain level of gold
reserves.2 Despite their purely private nature, clearinghouse members were
nonetheless willing to offer—at least temporarily--credit to insolvent banks. They may
have done this because, as financial market participants themselves, they were attuned
to the destructive potential of systemic risk.
2

The exact nature of the Bank of England status vis-à-vis the institutions of government varied across
time. Speaking of the Bank in 1781, the Prime Minister Lord North said that it was “…from long habit and
usage of many years…a part of the constitution” (Clapham 1945, I, 174). On the other hand, Sayers
(1976, 14) Sir Otto Niemeyer commented more than a century later that “it was a Treasury tradition that
when the Permanent Secretary [of the Treasury] visited the Bank of England, about once in 12 months,
he took a taxi because he was not quite sure where the Bank was.” To which Sayers adds: “picturesque
hyperbole, but indicative.”

19

Second, at least in earlier crises, the clearinghouse created liquidity only in the
form of large-denomination clearinghouse loan certificates, which were used solely for
inter-bank clearing, unlike Bank of England notes which served both as reserves and
also as a circulating medium. In the later crises of 1893 and 1907, however, American
clearinghouses went even further, issuing small denomination loan certificates, which
circulated among the public. These issues amounted to approximately $100 million, or
2.5 percent of the total outstanding money stock, in 1893 and $500 million, or about 4.5
percent of the money stock, in 1907 (Gorton 1985, 282). The issuance of a “private”
currency without official sanction soon attracted the attention of the government.
Following the crisis of 1907, the Aldrich-Vreeland Act (1908) confined the power to
authorize the issue of emergency currency to the Secretary of the Treasury.
Finally, clearinghouses differed markedly from Bagehot’s ideal of a lender of last
resort in their willingness and ability to micro-manage banking affairs during crises.
Clearinghouses often directed loans from healthy banks to ailing banks during periods
of financial turbulence. Banks that were in poor condition were usually not allowed to
fail during crises, but were expelled for failing to repay loans after the panic had ended,
generally leading to their failure (Gorton 1985). Thus, although the clearinghouse
fulfilled the classical role of the lender of last resort, it also appears to have instituted
elements of a bailout, by directing credit to ailing institutions, and added the powers of a
regulator, with the authority to discipline poorly behaving banks.

20

5. The Lender of Last Resort: The idea takes shape
The theory of the lender of last resort developed in response to the financial crises
outlined in the previous sections, but the theory, it must be said, did not progress
rapidly. The ideas of theorists writing decades ago, in a few cases writing more than a
century ago, still appear relevant and are still debated by today’s experts. In the
following sections we describe the evolution of thinking about the lender of last resort.
We focus first on ideas about what should be done once a panic has begun; what
should be done once the forest fire is well underway and flames are leaping from tree to
tree; after that we look at “rescue operations” intended to prevent individual failures from
igniting panics, that is, how to spot the stroke of lightning and burning tree that left
unattended might set the whole forest ablaze.

5.1 From Adam Smith to Henry Thornton
As usual Adam Smith is a good place to start a review of economic doctrines. In the
Wealth of Nations Smith points out that even in his day the Bank of England played a
unique role in supplying credit to merchants, especially during times of stress in
financial markets. The Bank, according to Smith,
…upon several different occasions, supported the credit of the principal houses,
not only of England, but of Hamburgh and Holland. Upon one occasion, in 1763,
it is said to have advanced for this purpose, in one week, about 1,600,000£; a
great part in bullion. I do not, however, pretend to warrant either the greatness of
the amount or the shortness of the time. (Smith 1981 [1776], II.ii.85, 320).3

3

Estimates of this sum in today’s dollars would range from £190 million pounds using a retail price index
as the inflator to £17.3 billion using the share of GDP (www.measuringworth.com).

21

The failure of the Ayr Bank in Scotland was a pivotal moment in the Crisis of
1772. Smith may well have been aware of many of the details. According to Checkland
(1975, 130-1), in a last desperate effort to avoid bankruptcy the Ayr Bank sent a
delegation, which included the Duke of Buccleuch--a shareholder who was being
advised by Smith (Smith had been his tutor), to negotiate a loan from the Bank of
England. The Bank of England offered £300,000, but the terms were so stiff that the Ayr
Bank refused the loan. Shortly after, the Ayr Bank closed its doors, accelerating the
panic: a Lehman Brothers moment.
These manoeuvers clearly read like LOLR operations. Smith’s opinion, although
admittedly discerned by reading between the lines, appears to be that the role of LOLR
“goes with the territory.” The Bank of England was given special privileges which led to
its becoming England’s dominant financial institution, in exchange for which it was
expected to support the government and the merchant community in their times of
need. It must be admitted, however, that Smith did not address the key issue, or at least
what for us would be the key issue: whether this arrangement was a good thing
(Rockoff 2013, 320-21).
The term lender of last resort was first used, it is commonly held, by Sir Francis
Baring (1797) in “Observations on the establishment of the Bank of England.” The
French Revolution had provoked financial crises in 1793 and 1797. The 1793 crisis
affected the British country banks, but the 1797 crisis, triggered by the French landing in
Wales, was a larger crisis that produced a suspension of gold payments by the Bank of
England as well as many interior banks, although apparently not by the Scottish banks.
Baring used the French legal term for a court of last appeal, denier resort, and seems to

22

have used it much like Smith, as a description of the economic facts of life: once a loan
request had been turned down by everyone else, the last resort was the Bank of
England. Baring offered three recommendations for meeting the current difficulties: a
prohibition on the issue of demand notes and deposits by the country banks (notes or
deposits paid at a later date were OK), making the notes of the Bank of England legal
tender, and limiting the total note issue of the Bank of England.
Henry Thornton (1802) provided what appears to be one of the first clear
statements of the case for a LOLR.4 The crisis of 1793 was relieved in part, Thornton
(1807,40) tells us, by the issue of exchequer bills – government bills that merchants
could obtain by pledging private securities.
That fear of not being able to obtain guineas, which arose in the country, led, in
its consequences, to an extraordinary demand for bank notes in London; and the
want of bank notes in London became, after a time, the chief evil. The very
expectation of a supply of exchequer bill, that is, of a supply of an article which
almost any trader might obtain, and which it was known that he might then sell,
and thus turn into bank notes, and after turning into bank notes might also
convert into guineas, created an idea of general solvency.
This was certainly a LOLR operation, but one carried out by the Treasury, not the Bank
of England. In 1797 the Bank, according to Thornton (1802, 59-78), reduced its note
issue in response the crisis to protect its reserve, but in so doing increased the severity
of the crisis. The right thing to do was to increase its note issue during a panic.5
Thornton also saw danger from overexpansion of the Bank of England’s note issue
during the Napoleonic suspension. At the end of his masterpiece Thornton (1807

4

See Hetzel (1987) for a detailed study of Thornton.

5

Thornton (1807 [1802], 78) took the Bank to task for acting “according to what seems likely to have been
the advice of Dr. A. Smith in the case.” But as we indicated above, Smith did not provide a clear
statement of what he thought the Bank of England should do in financial crises. Thornton’s criticism,
rather, is based on deductions from some of Smith’s conclusions in other contexts.

23

[1802], 248-49) offered a prescription for the Bank of England to follow--both in normal
times and in panics--that even now would be considered sound advice for a central
bank.
To limit the total amount of paper issued, and to resort for this purpose,
whenever the temptation to borrow is strong, to some effectual principle of
restriction; in no case, however, materially to diminish the sum in circulation, but
to let it vibrate only within certain limits; to afford a slow and cautious extension of
it, as the general trade of the kingdom enlarges itself, to allow of some special,
though temporary, increase in the event of any extraordinary alarm or difficulty,
as the best means of preventing a great demand at home for guineas, and to
lean to the side of diminution, in the case of gold going abroad, and of the
general exchanges continuing long unfavourable, this seems to be the true policy
of the directors of an institution circumstanced like that of the Bank of England.

5.2 Bagehot’s Lombard Street
Britain suffered financial crises in 1810, 1815, 1819, 1825, 1837, 1839, 1847, 1857, and
1866. But it was the crises of 1825, 1847, 1857, and 1866 that provided the raw
material for what is still the most influential text on the LOLR: Bagehot’s Lombard Street
(1873). Bagehot (1873) thought that the crises of 1793 and 1797 lay too far in the past
to provide much instruction, that the crises of 1815 and 1819 occurred during the
restriction of gold payments and therefore raised a different set of issues, and that the
crises of 1837 and 1839, although severe, did not “terminate in a panic.”
Bagehot’s policy prescription, what is often referred to as “Bagehot’s rule,” was
“that in time of panic it [the Bank of England] must advance [lend] freely and vigorously
to the public out of the reserve.” This plan, however, was subject to two important
qualifications. “First, that these loans should only be made at a very high rate of

24

interest.” And “Secondly, that at this rate these advances should be made on all good
banking securities, and as largely as the public ask for them” (Bagehot 1873, 187-88).
In a recent series of lectures Ben Bernanke put it this way:
He [Bagehot] had a dictum that during a panic central banks should lend freely to
whoever comes to their door; as long as they have collateral, give them money.
Central banks need to have collateral to make sure that get their money back,
and that collateral has to be good or it has to be discounted. Also, central banks
need to charge a penalty interest rate so that people do not take advantage of
the situation; they signal that they really need the money by being willing to pay a
slightly higher interest rate. If a central bank follows Bagehot’s rule, it can stop
financial panics. (Bernanke 2013, 7).
To fully understand Bagehot’s rule, it is necessary to understand the institutions
that Bagehot took for granted. Bagehot was prescribing for a particular patient, and did
not warrant that his medicine, and the dosage he recommended, would provide a
satisfactory outcome in all patients. The most important of these institutions was the
gold standard. Adherence to the gold standard had become an article of faith accepted
by the business community and most other segments of the community, and
maintaining the gold standard was perhaps the highest priority for monetary policy.
Bagehot fully supported Britain’s commitment to gold and opposed bimetallism when it
became an issue in the 1870s. "England, Bagehot wrote, has a currency now resting
solely on the gold standard, which exactly suits her wants, which is known throughout
the civilized world as hers, and which is most closely united to all her mercantile and
banking habits” (Bagehot 1877, 5, 613). A fiat money regime was also well known to
Bagehot: after all that was the regime which had prevailed in Britain from 1797 to 1819
when specie payments were suspended as a result of the Napoleonic Wars. Bagehot
specifically rejected basing his prescription for the lender of last resort on the financial

25

crises that had occurred during those years because “the problems to be solved were
altogether different from our present ones” (Bagehot 1873, 190).
The Bank of Englandwas the holder of the main reserve of gold. The joint stock
banks and other participants in the money market looked to the Bank of England to
provide them with gold when necessary and so held minimal reserves. Bagehot
believed, moreover, that the Bank of England itself often held an inadequate reserve,
and it was part of his purpose to persuade the Bank to make every effort to maintain a
reserve commensurate with its responsibilities.
It was possible, Bagehot understood, to imagine alternative institutional
arrangements. In an oft-quoted passage Bagehot appears to have endorsed the
theoretical superiority of free entry in banking.
But it will be said – What would be better? What other system could there be?
We are so accustomed to a system of banking, dependent for its cardinal
function on a single bank, that we can hardly conceive of any other. But the
natural system – that which would have sprung up if Government had let banking
alone – is that of many banks of equal or not altogether unequal size (Bagehot
1873, 66).
But Bagehot goes on to argue that turning the clock back and starting over with a free
banking system was unwise if not impossible. People trusted the current system, and
trust was a valuable form of what today would be called “social capital” that took long
time to accumulate. So Bagehot’s goal was to make the existing institutions work better,
not to propose some alternative set of institutions that might work better, if they could be
adopted at all, only after a long transition period.
Bagehot’s first qualification to his rule, that emergency loans be made at high
interest rates, followed in part from the dependency of the British banking system on the
Bank of England’s limited reserves. High interest rates during a panic would discourage
26

merchants from borrowing simply to fortify their own reserve positions, thus reducing the
reserve at the Bank of England. Since the public followed the Bank of England’s reserve
and was alarmed when it fell to low levels, it was important to protect the reserve even
during a panic.
The rate should be raised early in the panic, so that the fine may be paid early;
that no one may borrow out of idle precaution without paying well for it; that the
banking reserve may be protected as far as possible (Bagehot 1873, 187-88).
The case for raising the rate of interest during the panic was especially strong during a
panic in which an “internal drain” (gold was flowing from the banking system to the
public) was combined with an “external drain” (gold was flowing abroad). Bagehot
believed that internal drains and external drains tended to arrive at the same time (Mints
1945, 191). And Bagehot was insistent that when that happened the right medicine was
a high rate to end the outflow of gold combined with liberal lending. Here is Bagehot’s
(1873, 56) recommendation.
Before we had much specific experience, it was not easy to prescribe for this
compound disease [an external drain combined with an internal drain]; but now
we know how to deal with it. We must look first to the foreign drain and raise the
rate of interest as high as may be necessary. Unless you can stop the foreign
export, you cannot allay the domestic alarm ... Very large loans at very high rates
are the best remedy for the worst malady of the Money Market when a foreign
drain is added to a domestic drain.
While it is clear that Bagehot believed that a high rate was especially important in
the face of an external drain, it is a mistake to think that he recommended a high rate
only in the case of an external drain. Recall that in summarizing his rule, Bagehot (1873,
188) recommended a high rate during panics without a further qualification that a high
rate would be appropriate only when an external drain was present. A second
consideration is that Bagehot approved of the Bank’s handling (after a bad start) of the

27

Panic of 1825, a panic that Bagehot (1873, 54) regarded as “entirely internal.” At the
height of the panic in December 1825 the Bank of England raised the Bank Rate from 4
percent to 5 percent, the legal maximum.
Sometimes, as in the quote from Bernanke, Bagehot’s high rate is described as a
penalty rate, a term that Bagehot himself did not use. If penalty is being used simply as
a synonym for high, Bagehot’s prescription, obviously, is unchanged. Bagehot, as we
showed above, explained his high rate as a fine for excessive timidity. However, some
writers who have used the term penalty have suggested that Bagehot meant a rate that
was higher than the very high market rates that prevailed, typically, during financial
panics. But as Goodhart (1999) and Bignon, Flandreau, and Ugolini (2012) show, this is
going too far. Bagehot thought of his rate in instrumental terms: one that would be
recognized as high by pre-crisis standards and that was high enough to discourage
hoarding of reserves.
Under a fiat standard the urgent need to protect the reserve that so concerned
Bagehot would disappear. There might still be reasons to lend at a high rate, for
example to discourage borrowing for the purpose of speculative investments, or In the
event of an external drain to protect the reserve of foreign currency. It is clear, however,
that the accumulation of a large gold reserve, or the transition to a fiat standard, would
alter the costs and benefits of raising rates during a panic. It is not at all clear, therefore,
that Bagehot would have recommended a high rate for a central bank in a financial
crisis under these circumstances. As we will see below, Friedman and Schwartz thought
that the Federal Reserve had made a mistake in keeping its lending rate too high during

28

the Great Contraction when the Federal Reserve, although adhering to the gold
standard, had what Friedman and Schwartz considered an abundance of reserves.
Similarly, Bagehot’s recommendation that the Bank of England lend only against
good collateral was based on another important feature of the existing economic
landscape: almost all of the securities circulating in the marketplace would be good
under ordinary circumstances. The Bank of England could provide general relief by
insisting on good collateral and only a very few potential borrowers would be excluded.
Bagehot (1873, 188) put it this way.
The amount of bad business in commercial countries is an infinitesimally small
fraction of the whole business. That in a panic the bank, or banks, holding the
ultimate reserve should refuse bad bills or bad securities will not make the panic
really worse; the 'unsound' people are a feeble minority, and they are afraid even
to look frightened for fear their unsoundness may be detected.
What if a speculative boom had proceeded so far that a substantial amount of securities
were suspect? What if the unsound firms were not a “feeble minority” but rather a
substantial minority? The costs and benefits of insisting on good collateral would be
altered and the benefits of lending to some potential borrowers who lacked good
collateral would be higher. Under a fiat standard, moreover, the costs of accepting weak
collateral would be lower because there would be no need to sell securities to replenish
the reserve. Again it is not at all clear that under these alternative institutional realities
Bagehot would have insisted that lending be limited to amounts that could be backed by
good collateral. If the unsound people were more than a “feeble minority” it might be
necessary to lend to some of them to calm a panic.
Bagehot’s concept of LOLR, it is important to note, did not include other modes
of rescuing the banking system, namely bailing out individual institutions or more drastic

29

rescue measures, such as nationalizing the banking system (Grossman 2013, chapter
4).Capie (2002, 310) illustrateshow a LOLR would work in theory (and often did work in
practice) if it followed prescriptions religiously..
The mechanism can be thought of as the central bank with a discount window
that is of frosted glass and is raised just a few inches. Representatives of
institutions could therefore appear at the window and push through the paper
they wanted discounted. The central bankers would return the appropriate
amount of cash, reflecting the going interest rate. The central banker does not
know, nor does he care, who is on the other side of the window. He simply
discounts good quality paper or lends on the basis of good collateral.
The identity, creditworthiness, and importance of the borrower are completely irrelevant
to the process—the LOLR merely lends against sound collateral. We will return to the
theory and practice of rescue operations below.

6. The Great Depression and the absence of a LOLR in the U.S.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average started 1928 at 200. By September 1929, it had
reached 380, the final leg of the bull market of the roaring twenties. But it began to fall,
and on October 28, (Black Monday) and October 29 (Black Tuesday) lost over 25% of
its value. The stock market crash drastically altered expectations and produced a
decline in spending on consumer durables (Romer 1990). The New York Federal
Reserve reacted to the immediate effects of the crash by supplying additional funds to
New York banks so that they could make loans to brokers and dealers of securities. But
it did not address the macroeconomic trends set in motion by the stock market crash. In
the following three years the American banking system suffered from wave after wave
of bank failures. According to Friedman and Schwartz (1963, 299) more than a fifth of
the commercial banks in the United States … suspended operations because of
30

financial difficulties.”6 The stock of money (M2) fell 35 percent between 1930 and 1933.
To be sure, the monetary base rose, but not nearly enough to reverse the decline in the
stock of money, and other quantitative measures of the banking system.
Many explanations have been put forward for the failure of the Federal Reserve
to act as LOLR, all of which probably highlight some part of the full story. Friedman and
Schwartz (1963, 412-16) argued that a lack of effective leadership was key. Benjamin
Strong, the governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and a dominant figure
in the early years of the Federal Reserve System had recognized that a banking panic
called for aggressive open market purchases. But Strong died in 1928, and no one with
the same grasp of the problem and a similarly forceful personality emerged to take his
place. The governors of the regional banks, moreover, had secured an increase in the
membership of the Open Market Committee, reducing the potential for decisive action.
Temin (1989) and Eichengreen (1992), on the other hand, stressed the constraints, real
and psychological, imposed by the gold standard. And Wheelock (1991) and Meltzer
(2003) argued that flawed policy doctrines hampered the Federal Reserve. The Federal
Reserve tended to rely on borrowed reserves – what Meltzer called the “Riefler-Burgess
doctrine” after the developers of the theory – and nominal interest rates as indicators of
monetary policy: Low bank borrowing and low nominal rates signifying that monetary
policy was easy. Since borrowing and nominal rates were low in the early 1930s, the
Federal Reserve assumed that it was doing all it could to abort the slide.
One could also ask whether outside experts on banking and finance pressured
the Federal Reserve to change course. Some did, but opposition to Federal Reserve

6

Some of these banks were reopened after the emergency had passed; in some cases without major
changes in their balance sheets, and in some cases after major reorganizations.

31

policy was a minority cause. Perhaps the weightiest outside expert was O.M.W.
Sprague, the author of the classic History of Financial Crises under the National
Banking System (1910). Had he campaigned for a vigorous response to the Depression
by the Federal Reserve, especially if he had been joined by a chorus of other experts,
he might have made a difference. But Sprague never saw any part of the banking
failures of 1930-33 as a financial crisis requiring LOLR action. The problem may have
been that the developments that defined a financial panic in earlier crises, and that
Sprague had discussed at length in his classic, were absent in 1930-33 (Rockoff 2012).
In 1907 for example, as shown in figure 1, the commercial paper rate rose sharply at the
same time that the banking crisis in New York was ignited by the failure of the
Knickerbocker Trust; nothing like that happened in November 1930 when Caldwell and
Company failed and December 1930 when the Bank of United States failed. In
retrospect economists have identified these failures as important, but an economist
looking to short-term interest rates to measure the temperature of the money market
would not have identified them as such.
The banking crises of the 1930s came to a head with the wave of “bank holidays”
announced by state and local governments during the interregnum between the election
of President Roosevelt in November 1932 and his assumption of office in March 1933.
Once in office Roosevelt took several actions that ended the crisis. First he turned the
mounting tide of state and local bank holidays into a National Bank Holiday. During the
holiday, the Roosevelt administration explained, the banks would be inspected and the
sound banks would be allowed to reopen. The administration also announced legislation
creating federal deposit insurance. These reforms – which were neither LOLR

32

operations nor bailouts of individual firms, but something more dramatic – seem to have
quieted the storm and there were few bank failures in the United States during the
remainder of the 1930s.
In the wake of this colossal meltdown a number of important financial reforms
were introduced. Some were aimed at strengthening the banking system and making
future panics unlikely. These included the separation of commercial banking from
investment banking, the creation of the Securities and Exchange Commission to
regulate securities brokers and insure that investors had accurate information about the
securities they were buying, and the regulation of interest on bank deposits, among
others.7 Other reforms were aimed explicitly at strengthening the capacity of the
Federal Reserve to act as LOLR. The Board of Governors was made the dominant
division of the system to prevent conflicts between the regional banks and the Board
from thwarting effective action. The Federal Reserve, moreover, was given legal
authority to lend to non-member banks and in “exceptional and unusual circumstances”
to non-banks.
The Great Depression may have begun in the United States – not all scholars
are agreed – but it soon spread to Europe. The Europeans were suffering from some of
the same problems as the United States. Falling farm prices, for one thing, undermined
European banks with a strong presence in agricultural areas just as they did in the
United States. But it is also likely that the fears generated by the stock market crash on
Wall Street and the bank failures in other parts of the United States simply jumped over
international boundaries. In May 1931 the Kreditanstalt, the largest private bank in
7

These reforms left the banking system more stable, but also more constrained and less competitive.
The rollback of this regulation contributed to financial instability that emerged in the 1970s and 1980s.
Grossman (2010, 251-259).

33

Austria failed. The panic then spread quickly to Germany. The Danatbank, one of the
largest German Banks, failed on July 13th and German banks were closed on the 14th
and 15th. The pressure then hit Britain. In August John Maynard Keynes recommended
a major devaluation. In September Britain left the gold standard, ending a connection
that had been established after the end of the Napoleonic wars. Many other countries,
particularly those in the British Empire, followed Britain off gold and established a
relationship between their own currency and the pound. As a result the world was
effectively divided into two blocs: a sterling bloc led by Britain and a gold bloc led by the
United States.
Various attempts based on international cooperation were made to stop the
downward spiral in Europe, but for political reasons – after all this was happening only a
decade after the end of World War I – they proved insufficient (Kindleberger 1978, 194201). When the Kreditanstalt’s difficulties were revealed the Austrian government turned
to the League of Nations which then turned to the Bank for International Settlements.
Credits from a number of countries were arranged, but these were soon exhausted.
When the run shifted to Germany credits were arranged from the Bank of England, the
Bank of France, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, but again not in sufficient
amounts to quench the panic. When the run shifted to Britain private and government
credits were arranged, but again in insufficient amounts. When New York experienced
an external drain of gold, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York raised its discount
rate, probably stanching the drain but further undermining the economy.
The appropriateness of monetary policy during the remainder of the Great
Depression continues to be a matter of debate. In the United States after 1933 the stock

34

of money rose at a fairly rapid rate except during the “recession within the depression”
in 1937-38. The outbreak of World War II produced a radically different monetary policy.
The federal government ran large deficits to finance the war effort and the Federal
Reserve froze the prewar interest rates on government bonds; buying any bonds not
taken by the private sector at the prewar price. Between 1930 and 1933 the stock of
money fell 11.7 percent per year; between 1933 and 1941 it rose 8.3 percent per year;
and between 1941 and 1945 it rose 17.6 percent per year, doubling in four years.
The Federal Reserve entered the postwar era with its powers as LOLR greatly
enhanced for several reasons, although for the better part of the next half century, these
powers would not be called upon. (1) As noted above, reforms during the 1930s had
centralized power within the Federal Reserve Board, giving it increased authority to deal
with incipient panics. (2) A chastened Federal Reserve had learned important lessons
about the danger of allowing banks to fail. To be sure, the rise to dominance of
Keynesian economics meant that the potential for monetary policy to influence the
macro-economy was downplayed. Nevertheless, there was an understanding that
permitting the fear of bank failures to spread among depositors had been a mistake.
And (3) The United States had accumulated large stocks of gold, and under the Bretton
Woods system the U.S. dollar had become the hegemonic currency. There was little
danger that a fear of running out of reserves would prevent the Federal Reserve from
quenching a potential panic.

35

7. The Impact of the Great Depression on the doctrine of LOLR
The Great Depression produced some rethinking of the role of the central bank as
LOLR. This rethinking was more limited than might be expected. Bagehot’s Lombard
Street still remained the touchstone in discussions of the doctrine of LOLR. Here we
briefly review three of the most important contributions that reflected the impact of the
Great Depression: R.G. Hawtrey’s (1932) the Art of Central Banking, Friedman and
Schwartz’s (1963) A Monetary History of the United States, and Ben Bernanke’s
“Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation of the great depression”
(1983).

7.1 R.G .Hawtrey: the Art of Central Banking
Although Francis Baring deserves credit for first describing the Bank of England as the
dernier resort, it was R.G. Hawtrey’s The Art of Central Banking (1932) that propelled
the English term “lender of last resort” into the mainstream of economic discussion. A
Google Ngram (Figure 2) shows that specific phrase “lender of last resort” first came
into widespread use in the 1930s. And a search of Google Books, and a search of
JSTOR (where the term also emerges in the 1930s) suggest that Hawtrey’s (1932) The
Art of Central Banking was a major source.
Indeed, Hawtrey’s book was a milestone in the development of the theory of the
LOLR. Hawtrey, like Bagehot, saw the need for the LOLR to lend freely in a financial
panic, although on good collateral. Hawtrey thought that central banks in his day could

36

attack a panic more easily than the Bank of England in Bagehot’s day because they
could issue fiat currency in denominations the public would find acceptable, something
that in practice the Bank of England had been prevented from doing in the nineteenth
century. But the Crisis of 1931, Hawtrey thought, was something new. International
withdrawals were of such magnitude that they could drive countries off of the gold
standard. The Austrian government had addressed the problem of internal panic when it
guaranteed the deposits of the Kreditanstalt, and the German government had done
likewise when it guaranteed the deposits of Danatbank. But the problem of external
drains could not be addressed in this way (Hawtrey 1932, locations 3828-70). The
events of 1931, in short, were like the run on an individual bank, but were “a run on the
entire banking system of a country” (Hawtrey 1932, locations 3936-42). What was
needed then, Hawtrey argued, was an international lender of last resort (Hawtrey 1932,
locations 3942-47). This idea appears to be new, or at least given a decisive boost, by
Hawtrey (de Boyer des Roches and Solis Rosales 2011). Finding or creating an
institution that could become the international lender of last resort, Hawtrey warned,
would not be easy. The Bank for International Settlements was, as far as Hawtrey could
see, the best existing candidate. But turning it into an effective international lender of
last resort would require changes in both the balance sheet of the Bank for International
Settlements and its leadership.

7.2 Friedman and Schwartz: A Monetary History of the United States
Banking panics play a central role in Friedman and Schwartz’s A Monetary History of
the United States. Several of the panics -- in 1873, 1893, 1907, and 1931 – were

37

associated with severe economic contractions. During the earlier crises there was no
central bank in the United States. What little LOLR actions there were, were carried out
by the U.S. Treasury, private banks and clearinghouses, and private individuals.
But while Bagehot, Hawtrey, and others saw the need for the central bank to
maintain gold payments, Friedman and Schwartz now emphasized maintenance of the
stock of money. Their analysis followed from a model of the economy based on the
demand for and supply of money. The demand for money was determined by GDP and
the proportion of GDP that people wanted to hold as money, which in turn was a
function of interest rates, expected inflation, and other variables – the quantity theory of
money. The supply of money was determined by the amount of high-powered money
and the money multiplier. The latter in turn was a function of the deposit-currency ratio
of the public and the deposit-reserve ratio of the banking system, with the supply of
money rising when either of these determinants rose.
In this framework there is a straightforward interpretation of a banking panic.
When people fear the safety of their bank deposits they withdraw cash from banks: the
deposit-currency ratio falls. Banks would also attempt to increase their liquidity by, say,
refusing to renew loans: the deposit-reserve ratio would also tend to fall, although in
theory there is some ambiguity because in the first instance a withdrawal of currency
from a bank would raise the deposit-reserve ratio. If the amount of high-powered money
did not change during the panic, the stock of money would fall, and with it GDP. This
framework then, provides a clear set of symptoms to look for in a banking panic: a
decline in the deposit-currency ratio, a decline in the deposit-reserve ratio and, hence, if
no offsetting actions were taken, a decline in the stock of money.

38

Table 1 shows what happened in 1873, 1884, 1890, 1893, 1907, (the major
crises under the national banking system), and 1931 (the first under the Federal
Reserve). The panic years are marked in bold. In each case, except for the mild panic in
1890, there was a decline in the stock of money in the panic year or the following year:
1.8 percent from 1873 to 1874, 6.5 percent from 1892 to 1893, 3.4 percent from 1907 to
1908, and 6.2 percent from 1930 to 1931. These decreases were exceptional – the
stock of money normally rose -- and driven mainly by decreases in the money multiplier.
Figure 3, based on Friedman and Schwartz’s monthly data, shows what
happened in 1931. The pattern is similar to the earlier panics: The deposit-currency
ratio drops precipitously after the failure of the Bank of United States, the trigger for the
crisis. (More on this failure below). The deposit-reserve ratio also falls, although not as
precipitously, and there may have been a slight downward trend in the ratio before the
banking crisis.
The establishment of the United States Postal Savings System in 1910 provides
another variable that measures the presence of fear about the safety of deposits in
commercial banks. Figure 4 which plots the amount of postal savings also shows that
the financial panic began at the end of 1930. It resembles the famous hockey stick, with
the bend at the end of 1930. In short, whether we use the determinants of the stock of
money or postal savings as metrics, it is correct to view the crises of 1930-1933, and
especially the crisis of 1930-31, as the same sort of malady that had hit the economy in
1873, 1893, and 1907.
Friedman and Schwartz then offer, implicitly, an alternative to Bagehot’s rule.
The central bank should inject sufficient high-powered money to the banking system to

39

offset the decline in the deposit-reserve and deposit-currency ratios and maintain the
stock of money. If velocity was affected presumably they would support a further
increase in the amount of high-powered money to offset any decline in velocity.
Friedman and Schwartz (1963, 407) did argue, however, that even a policy
based solely on Bagehot’s rule would have produced far better results than the policy
actually followed. Here is how they put it.
The actions required to prevent monetary collapse [in the early 1930s] did not
call for a level of knowledge of the operation of the banking system or of the
workings of monetary forces or of economic fluctuations which was developed
only later and was not available to the Reserve System. On the contrary, as we
have pointed out earlier, pursuit of the policies outlined by the System itself in the
1920's, or for that matter by Bagehot in 1873, would have prevented the
catastrophe. The men who established the Federal Reserve System had many
misconceptions about monetary theory and banking operations. It may well be
that a policy in accordance with their understanding of monetary matters would
not have prevented the decline in the stock of money from 1929 to the end of
1930. But they understood very well the problem raised by a panic attempt to
convert deposits into currency, and provided ample powers in the Act to deal with
such a panic. There is little doubt that a policy based solely on a thorough
perusal of the hearings preceding the enactment of the Federal Reserve Act and
a moderately informed understanding of them would have cut short the liquidity
crisis before it had gone very far, perhaps before the end of I930.
Allan H. Meltzer’s recent history of the Federal Reserve reinforces Friedman-Schwartz
on this point. In his final summary of policy in the 1930s Meltzer (2003, 729) writes that:
Bagehot’s work was known at the time. Senior officials referred to him but they
did not follow his advice. They tried to protect the gold reserve, and at crucial
times did not function as a system.
The difference between Bagehot and Friedman-Schwartz can be seen in particular with
respect to interest rates and open market operations. Recall that Bagehot, with one eye
always on the Bank of England’s reserve, recommended high interest rates even during
an internal drain. But when criticizing Federal Reserve policy in 1931 Friedman and
Schwartz (1963, 395) go in the opposite direction.
40

True, during the height of the internal and external drain in October, it [the
Federal Reserve] permitted its discounts and its bills bought to rise sharply. But
this was at the initiative of the member banks, in spite of sharp rises in the rates
on both, and was a result of the desperate situation of member banks because of
the double drain. As we have seen, even after the height of the crisis, the New
York Bank reduced bill buying rates only gradually and kept them above market
rates, so bills bought declined rapidly. The System took no active measures to
ease the internal drain, as it could have done through open market purchases.
Evidently, Friedman and Schwartz concluded that given the abundant reserves of the
Federal Reserve, and the possibility that formal legal restraints would have been lifted if
they had asked for it, the need to protect the Federal Reserve’s gold reserve should
have been ignored in favor of increasing the stock of money.8
In the ensuing decades Bagehot’s idea of calming panics by free lending, and
Friedman and Schwartz’s idea that the stock of money had to be prevented from falling
remained fundamental to thinking about the lender of last resort. Perhaps the most
intense debate was about how aggressively the central bank should turn to lender of
last resort actions. The aggressive view is exemplified by Kindleberger’s Manias,
Panics, and Crashes (1978). Kindleberger believed that market economies often went
off the rails, and needed government interventions to get them up and running again.
Although it is hard to reduce Kindleberger’s wide ranging essay to a simple formula, it
appears that Kindleberger’s conclusion was that the social costs of untreated financial
crises were extremely high and that central banks should therefore generally err on the
side of intervention. Anna Schwartz in a well-known essay entitled “Real and pseudofinancial crises” took the other side arguing that asset price bubbles could be allowed to
burst and insolvent financial firms be allowed to fail without endangering the payments

8

On this point also see Nelson (2013).

41

mechanism, the latter being the appropriate object in need of protection by the lender of
last resort.

7.3 Ben Bernanke and the Cost of Financial Intermediation
There have been many criticisms of the Friedman and Schwartz interpretation of the
Great Depression, as well as many defenses. The criticism, or more accurately the
addition, with the most resonance for the doctrine of the LOLR has proved to be
Bernanke (1983). Here Bernanke argued that there was more to the financial side of the
Great Depression than the decline in the stock of money. The failure or near failure of
many financial institutions ruptured long-term relationships between lenders and
borrowers, increasing the “cost of credit intermediation.” Potential borrowers who could
not go to the institution they had long depended on might (after a time consuming
search) find another lender with sufficient reserves to make a loan, but the borrower
could not then offer adequate proof of his or her character, his or her commitment to
fulfill long-term financial contracts. The trust between borrower and lender that had been
built up over a long period of time was missing. In effect the cost of financial
intermediation had risen. The potential borrower might make up for the lack of trust by
offering collateral. But the decline in asset prices produced by the Depression made it
hard to collateralize new loans. The persistence of the Great Depression in this analysis
reflected the time it took to rebuild borrower-lender relationships shattered by the initial
financial crisis.
The implication of Bernanke’s analysis for the LOLR was that simply maintaining
or increasing the stock of money, although a good thing to do, was not enough. The
42

increased demand for money produced by the financial crisis might be fully slaked, and
yet the economy would not be able to recover because important borrower-lender
relationships had been severed. Therefore, it was important for the LOLR to preserve
important lending institutions, and to funnel credit to borrowers who could not utilize
their normal sources of credit. In the 2008 crisis as we will show below, Bernanke
followed through on this vision by creating the Term-Asset Backed Loan Facility, for
borrowers cut off from their traditional sources of credit. Eventually, the Facility lent
about $70 billion (Nelson 2013, 76-7).

8. Rescue Operations
Bagehot’s main concern was with what the Bank of England should do once a panic
was underway. He recognized a stage preceding the full-blown panic that he referred to
as an “incipient panic” when financial markets were anxious and a panic was likely. In
those circumstances he thought that the Bank of England needed to be especially
vigilant about protecting its reserve because the reserve would be needed when
incipient panic turned to panic. Bagehot never tells us how to distinguish an incipient
panic, when the right policy was for the bank to conserve its reserve, from an actual
panic when the right policy was to lend the reserve freely. He appears to have thought
that it would be obvious (Rockoff 1986). But was there nothing that the central bank
could do except to keep its powder dry? In 1890 during the famous Baring Crisis,
discussed in greater detail in section 3, the Bank of England famously took action to
prevent a panic from starting. Baring, an important investment bank, was on the verge
43

of insolvency as a result of poor investments in Argentina. A consortium of lenders,
which included the Rothchilds, was organized by the Bank of England to guarantee
Baring’s liabilities, successfully forestalling a panic. Clearly the Bank and other leading
firms feared a panic if Barings was allowed to go under, but would there have been a
panic if the firm had been allowed to go under?9
Indeed, whether the failure of a single firm could trigger a panic in the absence of
fundamental strains in the financial system remains an unsettled question. On the one
hand, many explanations for panics stress the buildup of distortions in the financial
system, and this emphasis suggests that the failure of a particular firm is merely an
epiphenomenon. Once a panic becomes inevitable, it cannot be stopped merely by
rescuing a single firm. If one firm is rescued, another will fail and start the panic. Some
examples of theories that emphasize the buildup of distortions are Calomiris and Gorton
(1991), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), and Schularick and Taylor (2012), or to take an
older example, Mitchell (1941). We don’t mean to go to the extreme of suggesting that
these authors would completely discount a role for individual failures, merely that their
analyses stress the buildup of fundamental strains rather than idiosyncratic events.
On the other hand, another class of explanations for panics stresses the inherent
instability of a fractional reserve banking system. In that view a dramatic event can
produce a cataclysmic banking contraction even when distortions are absent. Banks
promise to pay cash on demand. But banks only hold a fractional reserve because on
an ordinary day only a small percentage of depositors will want cash. But if alarm about

9

There are, of course, many examples of troubled financial institutions being bailed out by the
government because of the perceived cost of permitting the firm to fail. Among the earliest bailouts on
record are those of Australia’s Bank of New South Wales in 1826, the Banque de Belgique in 1838-39,
and Cologne’s A. Schaaffhausen Company in 1848.

44

the liquidity of the bank takes hold, there will be a run on the bank, and the bank will be
forced to break its promise to its depositors. If fear about all the banks takes hold, a fullblown panic will result.
Diamond and Dybvig (1983) were the first to provide a formal model of a fragile
banking system prone to runs. Their initial effort has produced a large literature
extending, modifying, and criticizing their original model. In the Diamond-Dybvig model
government policies such as deposit insurance or a commitment to freeze deposits in
the event of a run can prevent panics from occurring. Some of the difficulties that can
arise in models of this type are illustrated by Ennis and Keister (2009), who show that
although the most efficient policy ex ante is for the central bank to commit to a policy of
freezing all deposits in the event of a panic, the most efficient policy ex post is to allow
exceptions to the freeze for people in need. Knowing that this will be the policy actually
followed may increase the probability of run. Goodhart and Huang (1985) model the
rescue choice itself, and illustrate the tradeoff between the cost in terms the increase of
moral hazard created by the rescue of a large financial institution and the benefit from
reducing the risk of a financial panic.
The two approaches – fundamental distortions and inherent fragility – are not, of
course, mutually exclusive. It may be that true that distortions built up in the economy
are bound to produce a severe contraction, and yet it may still be possible that
additional random events determine whether a panic is added to the contraction. There
may be a fire in a crowded auditorium, and that may mean that many people will be
overcome by smoke, but it is still possible to imagine two outcomes. In one, someone
rises quietly, politely asks their neighbors to excuse them, and begins walking toward

45

the exit, leading to an orderly evacuation. In the other, someone yells fire, a panic
ensues, and the crush of people trying to leave magnifies the damage done by the fire.
In any case the idea that the failure of a large bank can start a panic, although
often questioned, remains an important folk theorem for financial historians. Bagehot,
for one, believed that the financial system in his day was inherently fragile and that the
failure of an important financial firm could trigger a panic.
Such accidental events [that trigger panics] are of the most various nature: a bad
harvest, an apprehension of foreign invasion, the sudden failure of a great firm
which everybody trusted, and many other similar events, have all caused a
sudden demand for cash (Bagehot 1873, 118).
The Baring crisis (1890) is the iconic example of successful intervention to
prevent a potentially damaging failure. The astute American expert on financial crises,
O.M.W. Sprague (1909, 401), noted that the practice of central banks had been
broadened by the Baring Crisis to include the rescue of banks that were “not hopelessly
insolvent” in order to prevent crises. The Bank of England’s response to the Baring
episode, to reiterate, did not fit the mold of classical LOLR operations described by
Bagehot for three reasons. First, the Bank of England acted proactively; typically,
LOLRs provide liquidity only after a crisis emerges. Second, the Bank of England’s
response involved providing a guarantee, rather than actual liquidity: in this sense, the
Bank’s actions were more like an ex post provision of deposit insurance, guaranteeing
Baring’s liabilities. Finally, the Bank did not act alone. It was the main organizer of the
rescue, but because it was not the sole participant—and also had an explicit
government commitment as a fiscal backstop—it was able to do so while at the same
time limiting its potential loss on the operation. Although Bagehot’s formulation did not
exclude the possibility of a syndicated rescue, it did not envision it. But, as Sprague
46

noted, it was practice that had changed, not theory. Economists have never enunciated
a clear prescription of how a central bank should respond to the information that a large
financial institution was about to fail.
The failure of the Bank of United States in December 1930 plays an important
role in Friedman and Schwartz’s history of the Great Depression. This failure, they
argue, was of special importance because it was the first large bank in New York to fail
during the Great Contraction, and possibly because its name misled some people into
believing that it was sponsored by the federal government, although in fact it was an
ordinary commercial bank chartered by the state of New York. As shown in Figure 3,
both the deposit-reserve ratio of the banking system and the deposit-currency ratio
head down after the failure, thus accelerating the decline in the stock of money.
In a long footnote in A Monetary History Friedman and Schwartz (1963, 309)
described the efforts to save the bank. The plan was to merge the bank with several
others in New York and to inject $30 million provided by the clearing house banks. It
would not have been the sort of emergency lending described by Bagehot in Lombard
Street, but it would have been similar to the rescue organized by the Bank of England in
the Baring crisis and in earlier crises. In A Monetary History Friedman and Schwartz
(1963, 310 n. 9) provide only hints as to why the plan fell apart. They report a
recollection by one of the participants, Jackson Reynolds, the President of First National
Bank and of the Clearing House Association, who thought that the effects of the closure
would be “local.” And they report the recollection of another participant that the
representatives of the Clearing House were concerned about the Bank of the United

47

States’ real estate investments. In modern parlance the beliefs were that the bank was
not “systemically important” and not solvent.
In some of his popular writings and most importantly in his 1980 TV series, “Free
to Choose,” Friedman went further in pointing to the failure of the Bank of United States
as the trigger for the crisis and in identifying the reasons why it was allowed to close. He
began Episode Three, “Anatomy of a Crisis,” his story of the Great Depression, with
scenes in which he is filmed looking up at the building that was the former home of the
Bank of United States.10 This was where the crucial event occurred, Friedman tells the
viewer, which turned a recession that was already severe because of the stock market
crash into a crisis.11 He goes on to explain that the bank served mainly Jewish
merchants on the Lower East Side of New York, the famous starting point for many poor
Jewish immigrants. Anti-Semitism, Friedman suggested, was the reason why the
Clearing House failed to rescue of the Bank of United States. Rumors fueled by antiSemitism, he added may even have contributed to the runs on the bank that had so
weakened it that a rescue was necessary. In the end, Friedman and Schwartz (1963,
355) noted that the Bank had paid well when it was liquidated and that the Bank was
probably therefore a good candidate for a rescue.
Friedman’s contentions about the role of anti-Semitism have been vigorously
challenged and defended (Temin 1976, 90-93, Lucia 1985, Friedman and Schwartz
1986b, O'Brien1992, and Trescott 1992). But while Friedman and Schwartz evidently
believed that Bank of United States should have been rescued because its failure had
10

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SWVoPrntBso.

11

The book that accompanied the television series, Friedman and Friedman (1980, 80-82), gives a
starring role to the failure of the Bank of United States.

48

disastrous effects and because it was in fact a sound bank they do not state explicitly,
as far as we can tell, what they think should have been done if in fact the Bank had
been clearly insolvent.
There were many important potential failures in the postwar period. Some were
allowed to go to bankruptcy without a government sponsored bailout, and yet these
failures did not produce financial panics. The failure of Equity Funding Corporation of
America in 1973 and of Drexel Burnham Lambert in 1990 are examples. Perhaps these
failures did not have systemic effects because the dominant narratives about them in
the business press stressed corruption and made them appear to be outliers. In any
case, the belief based on the reactions to the failure of the Bank of United States in
1930 or the Knickerbocker Trust in 1907, and earlier examples, was that the failure of
an important firm could trigger a damaging panic and led to several government
rescues.
In June 1970 the Penn Central Railroad declared bankruptcy. There was a
widespread fear that the failure of Penn Central to make good on its borrowings in the
commercial paper market would ignite a panic. The Federal Reserve then took several
actions designed to prevent a panic including open market purchases to increase the
stock of money. Friedman (1970) was critical of this rescue operation. In his view, there
was little danger of a banking panic. Failures of industrial firms, in Friedman’s view,
were distinctly different from failures of financial firms, and only the latter could
precipitate a panic. As long as the payments system was protected by a LOLR or
deposit insurance there was no need, in his view, to bail out an industrial firm. In 1974,
however, there was a major bankruptcy within the banking system: Franklin National

49

Bank. The Federal Reserve provided an emergency loan and later the Federal Deposit
Insurance Company stepped in as receiver. In this case, Friedman (1974) was more
sympathetic to the need for government action, but at the same time he expressed
confidence that there was no danger of a financial panic because the presence of
deposit insurance would prevent the sort of contagion of fear that undermined the
banking system in 1931-33.
In 1984 Continental Illinois, the nation’s eighth largest bank failed because of
losses on investments in energy loans made by Penn Square Bank of Oklahoma. The
Federal Reserve and Federal Deposit Insurance Company cooperated in creating a
bailout plan that included replacement of the bank’s management. Friedman and
Schwartz (1986a) thought that the bailout had been handled well, and used it as an
example of the ongoing danger of contagion in banking that created a need for
government involvement in banking. Thus, it would appear that Friedman and Schwartz
had moved to the position that the potential failure of large institutions within the
banking system needed to be addressed by the authorities in a way that would minimize
the danger of a panic-inducing bankruptcy. A fire department was needed, but not every
fire needed to be extinguished; only those that threatened to ignite a major
conflagration.12

12

See Nelson (2013) for a further description of Friedman’s ideas about the LOLR and the extent to
which they were implemented after the crisis in 2008.

50

9. The Subprime crisis
It has become commonplace for journalists to describe to the sub-prime mortgage crisis
as the “worst financial crisis since the Great Depression” (Grossman 2013, 137).
Google Trends shows a sharp increase in media references to “Great Depression”
following the failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 (Eichengreen 2012, 289).
Journalists are not alone in this regard. When Christina Romer asked President
Obama’s chief of staff Rahm Emmanuel why she, an economic historian, was chosen to
chair the president’s Council of Economic Advisers rather than someone with a policy
background, Emanuel replied: “You’re an expert on the Great Depression, and we really
thought we might need one.”13
The similarities of the sub-prime crisis with the Great Depression were not lost on
chairman of the Federal Reserve at the time the crisis erupted, Ben Bernanke.
Bernanke, as discussed above, was an expert on the Depression.(Bernanke 2000).14 In
1992 as a member—although not yet chair--of the Fed’s Board of Governors, Bernanke
spoke at the 90th birthday celebration for Milton Friedman who, along with Anna
Schwartz, famously wrote about how misguided Federal Reserve policy had worsened
the Great Depression. In his remarks, Bernanke addressed Friedman and Schwartz
directly: “You’re right, we did it. We’re very sorry. But thanks to you, we won’t do it
again.”15 Thus, it is clear that at the very highest levels of the Federal Reserve and the

13

http://newscenter.berkeley.edu/2011/10/11/romer-talk-offers-young-academics-solace-sense-andsecrets/
14
And, in its wake, penned a series of lectures on the Federal Reserve and the crisis (Bernanke 2013).
15

http://www.federalreserve.gov/BOARDDOCS/SPEECHES/2002/20021108/

51

executive branch, there was little doubt about the severity of the crisis and a strong
awareness of the consequences of inaction.
The sub-prime crisis, like the majority of financial crises during the last 200 years,
resulted from the collapse of a boom-bust economic cycle (Fisher 1932, 1933, Minsky
1982, Calomiris and Gorton 1991, Reinhart and Rogoff 2009, Kindleberger and Aliber
2011, and Schularick and Taylor 2012). The boom had a number of causes, among
them expansionary fiscal policy (i.e., three tax cuts along with increased spending to
fund wars in Afghanistan and Iraq) and excessively loose monetary policy. The situation
was made worse by wholly inadequate regulation and supervision, particularly of the
sub-prime mortgage market and the new funding instruments used to speed the flow of
funds to low quality mortgages. The collapse of house prices left a large volume of
mortgages under water, a number of home-owners unable to service their debts, and
many intermediators holding distressed—often denoted “toxic”—assets, the value of
which were dubious, threatening many institutions, including banks, investment banks,
as well as institutions such as insurance giant AIG, which had insured a substantial
amount of toxic assets.
On the one hand, the extraordinary relief efforts included actions well beyond
those envisioned by Bagehot. Through a variety of programs falling under the main
category of the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), the Treasury, with assistance
from the Federal Reserve, purchased preferred stock, equity warrants, and provided
assets guarantees to a variety of financial institutions.16 Another segment of the TARP
program provided funds to restructure General Motors and Chrysler. In addition, the
16

These initiatives included the Capital Assistance Program, the Capital Purchase Program, the
Community Development Capital Initiative, the Asset Guarantee Program, and the Targeted Investment
Program.

52

amount of deposits covered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation was raised to
$250,000 from $100,000.
On the other hand, some of the programs established under the auspices of the
Federal Reserve were similar in spirit to those prescribed by Bagehot, providing credit
for money market mutual funds in danger of being unable to meet depositor
withdrawals, issuers of commercial paper, primary dealers (broker-dealer counterparties
to the Federal Reserve in Open Market Operations), to depository institutions (through
the Term Auction Facility), and by lending out high-quality Treasury securities from the
System Open Market Account against the collateral of good (but, presumably less
credit-worthy than Treasury securities), much as exchequer bills had been used to quell
the panic in 1793. In addition, the Fed provided currency swap lines with international
central banks, in order to avoid a shortage of dollars on international markets. To quote
a central banker from a previous century, the Fed “… lent it by every possible means
and in modes […] never adopted before and … [was] not on some occasions overnice.”17
The defining moment in the crisis was the failure of Lehman Brothers on
September 15, 2008. The U.S. economy had already contracted and an atmosphere of
near panic prevailed in financial markets. But the failure of Lehman Brothers
precipitated a full blown financial panic and accelerated the decline in the economy.
Why did the failure of Lehman Brothers have major consequences? Partly, it was the
characteristics of Lehman Brothers itself. A large and once highly regarded Wall Street
investment bank, its failure naturally undermined confidence in the financial system as a

17

This is a description of the Bank of England’s behavior during the crisis of 1825, quoted in Bagehot
(1873, 52).

53

whole. If Lehman Brothers could not be trusted, who could be? It was also partly due to
the order in which the crisis events had occurred. Other firms had gotten into trouble
and had received aid. In March 2008 the Federal Reserve provided financing to help
JPMorgan Chase acquire the troubled investment bank, Bear Stearns. In July The
Federal Reserve Board and the Treasury authorized lines of credit for the Federal
National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation (Freddie Mac). On September 7 Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were
essentially nationalized. But on September 15 Lehman Brothers, another troubled
investment bank, was simply allowed to fail, while American International Group, which
had sold credit protection against a large volume of now toxic assets, was bailed out by
the Federal Reserve in return for a nearly 80 percent share in the company. These
apparently contradictory decisions raised questions about the willingness or the ability
of the government to act as LOLR, and that may well have been the final precipitant of
the panic. Andrew Ross Sorkin (2009, locations 10,283-91, of 13,296) put it this way in
his detailed history of the financial crisis.18
They offered a safety net to Bear Stearns and backstopped Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac but allowed Lehman to fall into chapter 11, only to rescue AIG soon
after. What was the pattern? What were the rules? There didn’t appear to be any,
and when investors grew confused – wondering whether a given firm might be
saved, allowed to fail, or even nationalized – they not surprisingly began to panic.
There has been some debate about why Lehman Brothers was allowed to fail. The
Federal Reserve has maintained that it lacked the legal authority to rescue Lehman
Brothers because Lehman was insolvent; Lehman Brothers simply lacked securities that
could adequately collateralize sufficient loans. On the other hand, more than a few

18

Anna Schwartz made a similar argument (Ryssdal 2009).

54

observers have suggested that political considerations also played a role. As the crisis
progressed the government came under increasing pressure to end what appeared to
the public to be simply handouts to the richest Americans. Shortly before the collapse of
Lehman Brothers, Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson purportedly told Ben Bernanke
and Timothy Geithner at the Federal Reserve: “I can’t be Mr. Bailout” (Sorkin 2009,
locations 5,055-10 of 13,296).19 But the question for the future is whether Lehman
should have been bailed out, and in what circumstances in general, if any, should
apparently insolvent institutions be rescued.
For Friedman and Schwartz (1963) the stock of money was the crucial variable.
As can be seen in Figure 5, the growth rate of M2 (Friedman and Schwartz’s preferred
measure of the stock of money) decelerated after the collapse of Bear Stearns and
Lehman Brothers. The rate of change of money with a zero maturity (MZM) actually
became negative. However, this was despite a massive increase in the amount of highpowered money by the Federal Reserve. In the year following the failure of Lehman
Brothers the St. Louis Fed’s estimate of the adjusted monetary base rose 66 percent.
The Federal Reserve was certainly responding in the direction approved by Friedman
and Schwartz, even if they were not able to keep the monetary aggregates completely
on track. Whether even more could have been done is a worthwhile question, but one
that would have to be addressed in another paper.

19

That said, the first version of the bailout bill that Paulson sent to Congress was 840 words long, would
have authorized $700 billion in spending to buy toxic assets, and made the Secretary of the Treasury
immune from oversight by the courts or Congress. The text of the proposal read, in part, “Decisions by
the Secretary pursuant to the authority of this Act are non-reviewable and committed to agency discretion,
and may not be reviewed by any court of law or any administrative agency.”
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/21/business/21draftcnd.html?_r=1

55

It did not take long for the crisis to stimulate discussion and policy
recommendations. The major legislative response to the crisis was the Dodd–Frank
Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, an 848-page, 360,000-plus word law
enacted in 2010. This law’s provisions, too numerous to outline here and not completely
finalized, include measures to coordinate financial stability oversight, provide for orderly
liquidation of failing financial institutions, increase oversight of securities transactions,
and establish more stringent consumer protections. There have been numerous
complaints the financial sector that the regulatory burden of Dodd-Frank is too heavy,
although it is far too soon to know if benefits the stability-enhancing and consumer
protection provisions outweigh the regulatory burdens.
In the wake of the crisis Goodfriend (2012) drew attention to the large
discretionary power exercised by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury during the
crisis and suggested that Congressional approval be required for large scale “bridge
loans” to financial intermediaries or for purchase of private securities. Meltzer (2013,
413) pointed out that the Federal Reserve has never followed Bagehot’s advice and
announced the LOLR policies it intended to follow during the next crisis. Meltzer’s
recommendation is that the Federal Reserve announce the types of collateral it would
accept in emergencies, and impose capital requirements that would rise (up to a limit)
with the size of the institution. One is entitled, however, to be skeptical and to question
whether any announced policy that would lead to costs being imposed on politically
influential sectors could be adhered to in the midst of a crisis, particularly if it was felt
that the failure of a particular firm could substantially worsen a crisis that was already
underway. It will be “another Lehman Brothers” is a potentially powerful argument. Gary

56

Gorton (2012), on the other hand, has suggested that because each crisis is unique and
arrives so suddenly that it is impossible to follow rules announced before the crisis hits.
Some guidelines might be possible – don’t try to liquidate financial institutions during a
panic is his suggestion – but overall he is skeptical about the possibility of announcing
credible policy rules that will be followed.
Another mechanism for reducing the likelihood—and potential impact—of a
crisis—is through enhanced shareholder liability. This can be achieved by turning debt
holders into equity participants when capital levels fall to a predetermined level through
contingent convertible securities (Cocos), has been suggested by Flannery (2010).
Historically, enhanced shareholder liability has been achieved by issuing “uncalled
liability.” For example, in 19th century Britain, shares were typically issued with a stated
nominal share value, only a portion of which was paid in at issue. Thus a £50 share in a
firm might have been issued with only £40 paid-in, meaning that shareholders could be
called upon to pay in an additional £10 in the case of failure or, more generally, at the
discretion of the management (Jefferys 1946). Grossman and Imai (2013, 141) note
that uncalled liability was more common and extensive in sectors where leverage was
high and the physical assets were either meager or inaccessible to creditors.
In the United States during the 19th century, bank shares were frequently issued
with “double liability.” Under double liability, when a the bank failed, shareholders would
not only lose the total amount that they had invested in the shares, but would also be
liable for an amount equal to the value that shares had been worth at their initial
offering. In some states, shareholders were liable for twice the initial value of the
shares (i.e., so-called “triple liability”); in other states, shareholder liability was unlimited

57

(Grossman 2001, 2007). Flannery (2010), White (2010), and Grossman and Imai
(2010) have suggested that the liability of shareholders in financial institutions be
increased, thus increasing the incentive of shareholders to monitor banks while allowing
the Fed and FDIC to protect other stakeholders. Despite these and other suggestions
no consensus has emerged about the best way forward.

10. Conclusions
The theory of the LOLR evolved in response to financial crises. Typically, economists
looked back at the most recent crisis—and occasionally the one or two before that—in
order to formulate guidelines that would have prevented that crisis, and that, they hope,
might prevent the next one. That was true for Adam Smith, who studied the crises of
1763 and 1772, Henry Thornton, who studied the crises of 1793 and 1797, Walter
Bagehot, who studied the crises of 1825, 1847, and 1866, Friedman and Schwartz, who
studied the crises of 1873, 1893, 1907, and 1930, and Ben Bernanke, who studied the
banking crises of the 1930s. Alas, this program has not led to rapid progress. In most
branches of economics, the literature cited is primarily of recent vintage; but when it
comes to the LOLR, Bagehot’s Lombard Street, published in 1873, still reigns supreme.
Economists it turns out are like the generals, always fighting the last battle: as we have
seen, economists have begun, tentatively, to come up with guidelines based on the
most recent crisis that will provide government officials with new and better ways to
handle financial panics. Clearly, more rethinking of the LOLR doctrine is needed.
Perhaps like the military, central banks need to make “war plans” for meeting different
58

types of threats although, as noted above, such plans may be difficult to implement in
the face of an actual panic. In the meantime, policymakers will need to make do with the
older plans of Thornton, Bagehot, Friedman and Schwartz, Bernanke, et. al. Perhaps,
there is no general rule to follow and central banking in financial crises will remain, as
R.G. Hawtrey suggested, an art rather than a science.

59

References
Ahrens, Gerhard 1986. Krisenmanagement 1857: Staat Und Kaufmannschaft in
Hamburg Während Der Ersten Weltwirtschaftskrise. Hamburg: Verlag Verein für
Hamburgische Geschichte.
Andréadès, Andreas Michael 1966. History of the Bank of England, 1640-1903. New
York: August M. Kelley.
Ashton, T. S. 1959. Economic Fluctuations in England, 1700-1800. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Bagehot, Walter. 1891 [1877]. Some Articles on the Depreciation of Silver and on
Topics Connected with It. London: H. S. King & Co. Reprinted in Morgan, Forrest,
ed., The Works of Walter Bagehot, vol. 5. Hartford: The Travelers Insurance Co.
———. 1924 [1873]. Lombard Street: A description of the money market. 14th ed.
London: William Clowes and Sons, Limited.
Baring, Sir Francis,. 2007 [1797]. Observations on the establishment of the Bank of
England; and on the paper circulation of the country. In The lender of last resort.
eds. Forrest H. Capie, Geoffrey E. Wood. London: Routledge.
Bernanke, Ben. 2013. The Federal Reserve and the financial crisis. Princeton NJ:
Princeton University Press.
———. 2012. Some reflections on the crisis and the policy response. Speech delivered
at "Rethinking Finance," a conference sponsored by the Russell Sage Foundation
and the Century Foundation. April 13 ed. New York.
———. 2000. Essays on the Great Depression. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press.
———.1983. “Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation of the great
depression.” The American Economic Review 73 (3) (Jun.): pp. 257-276.
Bignon, Vincent, Marc Flandreau, and Stefano Ugolini. 2012. Bagehot for beginners:
The making of lender-of-last-resort operations in the mid-nineteenth century.
Economic History Review 65 (2) (05): 580-608.
Bordo, Michael D. 1990. The lender of last resort: Alternative views and historical
experience. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review 76 (1) (January):
18-29.
Broz, J. Lawrence and Richard S. Grossman. 2004. "Paying for Privilege: The Political
Economy of Bank of England Charters, 1694-1844." Explorations in Economic
History 41(1): 48-72.
60

Cagan, Phillip. 1965. Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money,
1875-1960. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Gary Gorton. 1991. The origins of banking panics: Models,
facts, and bank regulation. In Financial markets and financial crises. Ed. R. Glenn
Hubbard, 109-173A National Bureau of Economic Research Project Report; Chicago
and London; University of Chicago Press.
Cannon, James Graham 1900. Clearing-Houses; Their History, Methods and
Administration. New York: D. Appleton and Company.
Cannon, James Graham 1910. Clearing Houses. Washington: Government Printing
Office.
Capie, Forrest 2002. "The Bank of England as a Mature Central Bank." The Political
Economy of British Historical Experience, 1688-1914. Eds. Donald Winch and
Patrick O'Brien. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 295-318.
Capie, Forrest, Charles Goodhart, Stanley Fischer, and Norbert Schnadt. 1994. The
Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Capie, Forrest, and Geoffrey Edward Wood. 2006. The lender of last resort. New York:
Routledge.
Checkland, S. G. 1975. Scottish banking: A history, 1695-1973. Glasgow: Collins.
Clapham, John H. 1945. The Bank of England: A History (2 volumes). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Cline, William R., and Joseph E. Gagnon. 2013. Lehman died, Bagehot lives: Why did
the fed and treasury let a major wall street bank fail. Institute for International
Economics: Policy Brief(September): 1-13.
Collins, Michael 1972. "The Langton Papers: Banking and Bank of England Policy in the
1830s." Economica 39 (153): 47-59.
de Boyer des Roches, Jerome, and Ricardo Solis Rosales. 2011. R. G. Hawtrey on the
national and international lender of last resort. European Journal of the History of
Economic Thought 18 (2) (05): 175-202.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and
liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91 (3) (Jun.): 401-19.
Eichengreen, Barry. 1992. Golden fetters: The gold standard and the great depression,
1919-1939NBER Series on Long-Term Factors in Economic Development; New
York and Oxford:; Oxford University Press.
61

———. 2012. "Economic History and Economic Policy." Journal of Economic History
72(2): 289-307.
Ennis, Huberto M., and Todd Keister. 2009. Bank runs and institutions: The perils of
intervention. The American Economic Review 99 (4) (Sep.): 1588-607.
Fetter, Frank W. 1965. Development of British Monetary Orthodoxy, 1797-1875.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Fisher, Irving. 1933. "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions." Econometrica
1: 337-357.
———. 1932. Booms and Depressions: Some First Principles. New York: Adelphi.
Flandreau, Marc 1997. "Central Bank Cooperation in Historical Perspective: A Skeptical
View." Economic History Review 50(4): 735-763.
Flannery, Mark J. 2010. “Stabilizing Large Financial Institutions with Contingent Capital
Certificates.” CAREFIN Research Paper No. 04/2010. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1798611
Friedman, Milton. 1974. Interview with Milton Friedman. Franklin National. Sound
recording 146., ed. Rose D. Friedman. Instructional Dynamics, Online Archive of
California.
———. 1970. Interview with Milton Friedman, Penn Central bankruptcy. Sound
recording 53., ed. Rose D. Friedman, Instructional Dynamics, Online Archive of
California.
Friedman, Milton, and Rose D. Friedman. 1980. Free to choose: A personal statement.
1st ed. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz. 1986a. Has government any role in money?
Journal of Monetary Economics 17 (1) (01): 37-62.
———. 1986b. “The failure of the bank of United States: A reappraisal: A reply.”
Explorations in Economic History 23 (2) (04): 199-204.
———. 1963. A monetary history of the united states, 1867-1960. National bureau of
economic research. studies in business cycles. Vol. 12. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Goodfriend, Marvin. 2012. The elusive promise of independent central banking: Keynote
speech. Monetary and Economic Studies 30 (11): 39-54.
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King. 1988. Financial deregulation, monetary policy,
and central banking. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review 74 (3)
(May): 3-22.
62

Goodhart, Charles A. E. 1999. “Myths about the lender of last resort.” International
Finance 2 (3) (11): 339-60.
Goodhart, Charles A. E., and Haizhou Huang. 2005. The lender of last resort. Journal of
Banking & Finance 29 (5) (5): 1059-82.
Gorton, Gary. 2012. Misunderstanding financial crises: Why we don't see them coming.
New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 1985. "Clearinghouses and the Origin of Central Banking in the United States."
Journal of Economic History 45(2): 277-283.
Grossman, Richard S. 2013. WRONG: Nine Economic Policy Disasters and What We
Can Learn from Them. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 2010. Unsettled Account: The Evolution of Banking in the Industrialized World
since 1800. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
———. 2007. "Fear and Greed: The Evolution of Double Liability in American Banking,
1865-1930." Explorations in Economic History 44(1): 59-80.
———. 2001. "Double Liability and Bank Risk Taking." Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 33(2): 143-59.
Grossman, Richard S. and Masami Imai. 2013. "Contingent Capital and Bank RiskTaking among British Banks before the First World War." Economic History Review
66(1): 132-155
———. 2010. “Contingent capital and risk taking: Evidence from Britain’ banks 18781912.” Vox.eu, 7 September 2010. http://www.voxeu.org/article/liability-andexcessive-risk-taking-historical-evidence-britain-s-banks.
Hautcoeur, Pierre-Cyrille, Angelo Riva, and Eugene N. White. 2013. Can moral hazard
be avoided? The Banque de France and the Crisis of 1889. Prepared for the
Carnegie-Rochester-NYU conference on public policy, mimeo.
Hawtrey, R. G. 1932. The art of central banking. London, New York, etc.: Longmans,
Green and Co. Kindle Ebook edition.
Herrala, Risto 1999. "Banking Crises versus Depositor Crises: The Era of the Finnish
Markka, 1865-1998." Scandinavian Economic History Review 47(2): 5-22.
Hetzel, Robert L. 1987. “Henry Thornton: Seminal monetary theorist and father of the
modern central bank.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review 73 (4)
(July): 3-16.
Hidy, Ralph W. 1946. Cushioning a crisis in the London money market. Bulletin of the
Business Historical Society 20 (5) (Nov.): 131-45.
63

Humphrey, Thomas M. 1992. Lender of last resort. In The Palgrave dictionary of money
& finance., eds. Peter Newman, Murray Milgate and John Eatwell. Vol. 2, 571-573.
London and Basingstoke, United Kingdom: The Macmillan Press Limited.
———. 1989. Lender of last resort: The concept in history. Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond Economic Review 75 (2) (March): 8-16.
James, John A., James McAndrews, and David F. Weiman. 2013. Wall Street and main
street: The macroeconomic consequences of New York bank suspensions, 18661914. Cliometrica 7 (2) (05): 99-130.
Jefferys, James B. 1946. "The Denomination and Character of Shares, 1855-1885."
Economic History Review 16(1): 45-55.
Jensen, Adolph 1896. "A History of Banking in the Scandinavian Nations." A History of
Banking in All the Leading Nations, Volume 4. New York: Journal of Commerce and
Commercial Bulletin, 1-412.
Kindleberger, Charles Poor. 1989. Manias, panics, and crashes: A history of financial
crises. Rev ed. New York: Basic Books.
———. 1984. A Financial History of Western Europe. London: Allen and Unwin.
Kindleberger, Charles Poor and Robert Z. Aliber 2011. Manias, Panics and Crashes: A
History of Financial Crises. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Lovell, Michael C. 1957. "The Role of the Bank of England as Lender of Last Resort in
the Crises of the Eighteenth Century." Explorations in Entrepreneurial History 10(1):
8-20.
Lucia, Joseph L. 1985. The failure of the bank of United States: A reappraisal.
Explorations in Economic History 22 (4) (10): 402-16.
Meltzer, Allan H. 2013. What's wrong with the Fed? What would restore independence?
Cato Journal 33 (3) (Fall): 401-16.
———. 2003; 2009. A history of the Federal Reserve. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Minsky, Hyman P. 1982. Can 'It' Happen Again? New York: M.E. Sharp.
Mints, Lloyd W. 1945. A history of banking theory in Great Britain and the United States.
Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press.
Mitchell, Wesley C. 1941. Business cycles and their causes. A new edition of Mitchell's
Business cycles: part III. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
64

Nelson, Edward. 2013. Friedman's monetary economics in practice. Journal of
International Money and Finance 38 (11): 59-83.
O'Brien, Anthony Patrick. 1992. The failure of the bank of the United States: A defense
of Joseph Lucia: A note. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 24 (3) (08): 374-84.
Plessis, Alain 1995. "The Bank of France from the Early 20th Century to the 1950s."
The Evolution of Financial Institutions and Markets in Twentieth-Century Europe.
Youssef Cassis, Gerald D. Feldman, and Ulf Olsson. Aldershot, Hants and
Brookfield, VT: Scolar Press, 9-19.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This time is different: Eight
centuries of financial folly. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Rockoff, Hugh. 2013. “Adam Smith on money, banking, and the price level.” In Oxford
handbook of Adam Smith., eds. Christopher J. Berry, Maria Pia Paganelli and Craig
Smith, 307-332. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
———. 2012. Bagehot, Sprague, Friedman and Schwartz and the Great Depression. In
Internationale studien zur geschicte von wirtschaft und gesellschaft, ed. Karl
Hardach. Vol. 2, 945-972. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
———. 1986. “Walter Bagehot and the theory of central banking.” In Financial crises
and the world banking system., eds. Forrest H. Capie, Geoffrey E. Wood, 160-180.
New York: Macmillan Press, Ltd.
Romer, Christina D. 1990. “The Great Crash and the onset of the Great Depression.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 105 (3) (Aug.): 597-624.
Ryssdal, Kai. 2009. “Interview with Anna J. Schwartz.” In Marketplace, Taking Stock:
Lessons from History. June 9. [database online]. Available from
http://www.marketplace.org/topics/business/taking-stock/taking-stock-lessons-history
(accessed May 29, 2013).
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy,
leverage cycles, and financial crises, 1870-2008. American Economic Review 102
(2) (04): 1029-61.
Schumpeter, Joseph Alois. 1954. History of economic analysis. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Schwartz, Anna J. 1986. Real and pseudo-financial crises. In Financial crises and the
world banking system., eds. Forrest Capie, Geoffrey E. Wood, 11-40New York:; St.
Martin's Press.

65

Smith, Adam. 1981 [1776]. An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of
nations, eds. R. Campbell, A. Skinner. Indianapolis, Indiana: Liberty Fund.
Sorkin, Andrew Ross. 2009. Too big to fail: The inside story of how Wall Street and
Washington fought to save the financial system from crisis--and themselves. New
York: Viking. Kindle edition.
Sprague, O. M. W. 1910. History of crises under the National Banking System. U. S.
61st cong., 2d sess. senate. doc. 538. Washington: Govt. Print. Off.
———. 1909. The proposal for a central bank in the United States: A critical view. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 23 (3) (May): 363-415.
Tamaki, Norio 1995. Japanese Banking: A History, 1859-1959. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Temin, Peter. 1989. Lessons from the great depression: The lioncel Robbins lectures
for 1989. Lionel Robbins lectures. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
———. 1976. Did monetary forces cause the great depression? 1st ed. New York:
Norton.
Thomas, Samuel Evelyn 1934. The Rise and Growth of Joint Stock Banking. London:
Sir I. Pitman and Sons, Ltd.
Thornton, Henry. 1807 [1802]. An enquiry into the nature and effects of the paper credit
of Great Britain (1802). The Google Books Edition ed. Philadelphia: James
Humphreys.
Timberlake, Richard H. 1984. "The Central Banking Role of Clearinghouse
Associations." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 16(1): 1-15.
Trescott, Paul B. 1992. The failure of the Bank of the United States, 1930: A rejoinder.
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 24 (3) (08): 384-99.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. 2013. “The Financial Crisis Five Years Later:
Response, Reform, and Progress,” September 2013,
http://www.treasury.gov/connect/blog/Documents/FinancialCrisis5Yr_vFINAL.pdf
Vanthoor, Wim 2005. The King's Eldest Daughter: A History of the Nederlandsche
Bank, 1814-1998. Amsterdam: Boom.
Wheelock, David C. 1991. The strategy and consistency of Federal Reserve monetary
policy, 1924-1933. Studies in monetary and financial history. Cambridge England;
New York: Cambridge University Press.

66

White, Eugene N. 2010. "Rethinking the regulation of banking: choices or incentives?"
Rutgers University, Mimeo, December.
Wirth, Max 1874. Geschichte Der Handelskrisen. Frankfurt am Main: J. D.
Sauerländer's Verlag.
Wood, Geoffrey 2000. "The Lender of Last Resort Reconsidered." Journal of Financial
Services Research 18 (2/3): 203-227.

67

9.00
8.00
7.00

Percent

6.00
5.00

Crisis Month
1907

4.00

1930

3.00
2.00
1.00

-12
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

0.00

Figure 1. The Commercial paper rate in 1907 and 1930.
Note. The data is monthly. The crisis month in 1907 was October when the
Knickerbocker Trust failed. In 1930 it was December when the Bank of United States
failed.
Source. The NBER macrohistory data base.
(http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/rectdata/13/m13001a.dat accessed
January 2014).

68

Figure 2. A Google Ngram of “Lender of Last Resort,” 1800-2008.

Source. Google Ngram Viewer. https://book.google.com/ngrams. Accessed August,
2014.

69

20
18

Failure of
Caldwell and Company
(November)
and Bank of United

16
14

Ratio

12
10
8
6
4
2

Crucial Failures

deposit-currency ratio

deposit-reserve ratio

Figure 3. The deposit-reserve ratio and the deposit-currency ratio in the Great
Contraction, 1929-1933.
Source. Friedman and Schwartz (1963, Table B3, pp. 799-804).

70

Oct-33

Jul-33

Apr-33

Jan-33

Oct-32

Jul-32

Apr-32

Jan-32

Oct-31

Jul-31

Apr-31

Jan-31

Oct-30

Jul-30

Apr-30

Jan-30

Oct-29

Jul-29

Apr-29

Jan-29

0

1000
900
800

Billions of dollars

700
600

Failures of
Caldwell and
Company
(November)
and Bank of
United States
(Deccember)

500
400
300
200
100
0

Figure 4. Postal savings in the United States, Monthly, January 1930 - December 1932.

Source. Friedman and Schwartz (1970, Table 1, pp. 24-26, column 6).

71

Figure 5. Percentage change in monetary aggregates from a year earlier.

Note.M2 is the narrower monetary aggregate similar to the aggregate chosen by
Friedman and Schwartz. MZM (money with zero maturity) excludes excludes various
time accounts but includes money market funds.

Source. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Fred Economic Data.

72

Table 1. Monetary Statistics for Seven Financial Crises
Year

Month

HighPowered
Money

DepositReserve
Ratio

DepositCurrency
Ratio

M2

Percent
Change in
M2

Percent
Change in
Real GDP

Billions

Ratio

Ratio

Billions

Percent

Percent

1873 February

0.78

4.63

1.94

1.62

2.45

8.19

1874 February

0.80

3.88

2.03

1.59

-1.80

1.80

1875 February

0.78

4.82

2.12

1.70

6.28

-0.18

1.18

5.96

2.28

2.81

8.03

2.73

1.19

5.54

2.28

2.76

-1.65

-1.66

1.23

4.54

2.64

2.84

2.68

0.35

1.37

6.32

3.40

3.91

9.75

9.27

1.43

6.05

3.36

4.02

2.75

1.18

1.53

5.90

3.81

4.47

10.66

4.97

1892 June

1.53

5.90

3.81

4.47

10.66

4.97

1893 June

1.51

6.05

3.25

4.19

-6.54

-5.98

1894 June

1.57

4.87

3.78

4.22

0.87

-4.86

1907 June

2.82

8.87

5.84

11.61

6.66

2.54

1908 June

3.08

6.98

5.53

11.23

-3.37

-11.44

1909 June

3.14

7.48

6.45

12.57

11.34

6.98

1883 June
1884 June
1885 June

1890 June
1891 June
1892 June

73

1929 June

7.10

13.16

10.74

45.91

0.14

5.87

1930 June

6.91

12.90

11.31

45.31

-1.31

-8.89

1931 June

7.30

11.67

9.66

42.59

-6.20

-6.60

1932 June

7.79

10.44

5.95

34.48

-21.13

-13.81

1933 June

7.94

8.39

5.08

30.08

-13.63

-1.27

2006 June

838

62.8

8.2

6,812

5.08

2.63

2007 June

851

67.7

8.6

7,245

6.17

1.76

2008 June

864

72.2

9.0

7,705

6.16

-0.29

2009 June

1,771

8.2

8.9

8,419

8.86

-2.81

2010 June

2,028

6.7

8.7

8,588

1.99

2.50

2011 June

2,656

4.8

8.4

9,089

5.67

1.59

2012 June

2,642

5.6

8.5

9,946

9.00

2.29

2013 June

3,218

4.5

8.5

10,635

6.70

2.20

2014 June

3,985

3.7

8.4

11,341

6.43

NA

Source and Notes. Monetary Statistics: Friedman and Schwartz (1963, Table B3, pp.
799-804). The first observation following the panic is shown in bold. High-Powered
money is a synonym for the monetary base. Real GDP: Samuel H. Williamson, "What
Was the U.S. GDP Then?" MeasuringWorth, 2014 URL:
http://www.measuringworth.org/usgdp/. Real GDP is an annual series. The last column
shows percentage changes from the previous annual observation. Data for 2006 to
2014 is from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Fred Economic Data.

74

