                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




BOUNDING THE LABOR SUPPLY RESPONSES TO A RANDOMIZED WELFARE EXPERIMENT:
                    A REVEALED PREFERENCE APPROACH

                                              Patrick Kline
                                              Melissa Tartari

                                           Working Paper 20838
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w20838


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2015




  This paper previously circulated under the title "What Distributional Impacts Mean: Welfare Reform
  Experiments and Competing Margins of Adjustment." We thank the editor and four referees for helpful
  comments that greatly improved the paper. We also thank Andres Santos and seminar participants
  and discussants at the NBER Public Economics and Labor Studies Program Meetings, the Becker-Friedman
  Institute Interactions Conference, the Institute for Research on Poverty meetings, the Federal Reserve
  Bank of Chicago, the Harris School, Mannheim University, MIT, UC Berkeley, UCL, UCLA, UCSD,
  Rice University, the University of Sydney, the University of Technology Sydney, Stanford, and Yale
  for useful comments. Stuart Craig, Attila Lindner, and Raffaele Saggio provided outstanding research
  assistance. This research was supported by NSF Grant #0962352. The views expressed herein are
  those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2015 by Patrick Kline and Melissa Tartari. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
  two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
  is given to the source.
Bounding the Labor Supply Responses to a Randomized Welfare Experiment: A Revealed
Preference Approach
Patrick Kline and Melissa Tartari
NBER Working Paper No. 20838
January 2015, Revised November 2015
JEL No. C14,H20,J22

                                             ABSTRACT

We study the short-term impact of Connecticut's Jobs First welfare reform experiment on women's
labor supply and welfare participation decisions. A non-parametric optimizing model is shown to restrict
the set of counterfactual choices compatible with each woman's actual choice. These revealed preference
restrictions yield informative bounds on the frequency of several intensive and extensive margin responses
to the experiment. We find that welfare reform induced many women to work but led some others
to reduce their earnings in order to receive assistance. The bounds on this latter "opt-in" effect imply
that intensive margin labor supply responses are non-trivial.


Patrick Kline
Department of Economics
University of California at Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
pkline@econ.berkeley.edu

Melissa Tartari
University of Chicago
Saieh Hall for Economics, room 012
5757 S. University Avenue,
Chicago, Illinois, 60637
mtartari@uchicago.edu
    The U.S., like other advanced economies, has an extensive system of transfer programs
designed to provide social insurance and improve equity. By affecting work incentives, these
programs can induce individuals to enter or exit the labor force (extensive margin responses)
or to alter how much they earn conditional on working (intensive margin responses). The
relative magnitude of these responses is an important input to the optimal design of tax and
transfer schemes (Diamond, 1980; Saez, 2002; Laroque, 2005).
    Much of the empirical literature concludes that adjustment to policy reforms occurs
primarily along the extensive margin.1 Two sorts of evidence are often cited in support
of this position. First, several studies exploiting policy variation fail to find evidence of
mean impacts on hours worked among the employed (Eissa and Liebman, 1996; Meyer and
Rosenbaum, 2001; Meyer, 2002). Second, in both survey and administrative data, earnings
tend not to exhibit much bunching at the budget “kinks” induced by tax and transfer policies,
suggesting that intensive margin elasticities are small (Heckman, 1983; Saez, 2010). Both
forms of evidence are subject to qualification. In addition to being susceptible to sample
selection bias, mean impacts on hours worked ignore the potentially offsetting labor supply
effects of program phase-in and phase-out provisions (Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes, 2006).
And although excess mass at kink-points is a non-parametric indicator of intensive margin
responsiveness (Saez, 2010), demand side constraints on labor supply may confound the
quantitative inferences drawn from bunching approaches (Chetty et al., 2011b).
    This paper studies the impact of Connecticut’s Jobs First (JF) welfare reform experiment
on the labor supply and program participation decisions of a sample of welfare applicants
and recipients. We develop a non-parametric approach to measuring intensive and extensive
margin responses to the JF reform that remains valid in the presence of labor supply con-
straints, impact heterogeneity, and self-selection. Conceptually, detecting adjustment along
a given margin in response to a policy reform requires inferring what choices a decision maker
would have made if the reform had not taken place. Because choices are only observed un-
der the policy regime to which the decision maker is exposed, the problem of distinguishing
response margins is closely tied to fundamental challenges in causal inference. To address
these challenges, we follow Manski (2014) in using revealed preference arguments to restrict
    1
      Heckman (1993), for instance, concludes that “elasticities are closer to 0 than 1 for hours-of-work equa-
tions (or weeks-of-work equations) estimated for those who are working. A major lesson of the past 20 years
is that the strongest empirical effects of wages and nonlabor income on labor supply are to be found at the
extensive margin.” (emphasis in original). Likewise, many modern models of aggregate labor supply are now
predicated on the notion that labor supply is “indivisible” (Hansen, 1985; Rogerson, 1988; Ljungqvist and
Sargent, 2011). See Chetty et al. (2011a) for an assessment of how macro estimates of these models compare
to estimates from micro data.



                                                      2
the set of counterfactual choices compatible with each decision maker’s actual choice. These
restrictions are shown to yield informative bounds on the frequency of intensive and extensive
margin responses to reform when policy regimes are randomly assigned.
    The JF experiment provides an interesting venue for studying labor supply because the
reform entailed a mix of positive and negative work incentives characteristic of many transfer
programs. First, it strengthened work requirements and increased sanctions for welfare
recipients who fail to seek work. Second, it changed the manner in which welfare benefits
phase out by disregarding earnings up to an eligibility threshold (or “notch”) above which
benefits abruptly drop to zero. Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes (BGH, 2006) show that the
JF reform induced a nuanced pattern of quantile treatment effects (QTEs) on earnings
qualitatively consistent with intensive margin responsiveness. They find that JF boosted
the middle quantiles of earnings while lowering the top quantiles, yielding a mean earnings
effect near zero. The negative impacts on upper quantiles provide suggestive evidence of an
“opt-in” response to welfare (Ashenfelter, 1983), whereby working women are induced to
lower their earnings in order to qualify for transfers.
    Quantifying the frequency of intensive and extensive margin responses to this reform
requires additional structure, as the experiment may have shifted women between many
points in the earnings distribution, potentially violating the standard “rank preservation”
condition needed to infer impact distributions from QTEs.2 To narrow down the set of
possible responses to the experiment, we develop a non-parametric optimizing model of
labor supply and welfare participation. In the model, women value consumption and may
derive disutility from welfare participation and work. Labor supply decisions are potentially
constrained by the set of job offers drawn; and earnings can, at some cost, be under-reported
to the welfare agency, which explains the empirical finding that some women with earnings
above the eligibility notch draw welfare benefits. Despite this generality, the model places
sharp restrictions on how women may respond to the JF reform that follow from simple
revealed preference arguments. Specifically, if the utility of a woman’s choice under AFDC
was not lowered by the reform, she will either make the same choice under JF or select an
   2
     Here rank preservation means that the JF reform would not alter a woman’s rank in the distribution
of earnings. With this restriction, QTEs can be used to infer the joint distribution of potential earnings
under the two policy regimes (Heckman, Smith, and Clements, 1997) and hence to quantify extensive and
intensive margin labor supply responses. BGH (2006) are skeptical of the rank preservation assumption and,
in a related analysis, provide evidence of rank reversals in the Canadian Self-Sufficiency Project experiment
(BGH, 2005). In the JF experiment, rank reversals could occur (for example) because reform induced some
skilled women to work and earn above the eligibility notch while leading others to lower their earnings below
the notch through an opt-in response.



                                                     3
alternative that the reform made more attractive.
    In taking the model to the data, we permit women to vary arbitrarily in their preferences
and constraints, which may also evolve over time in an unrestricted fashion. This flexibility
allows us to rationalize any distribution of earnings and program participation choices found
under a given policy regime.3 Nevertheless, we show that our model places strong testable
restrictions on the experimental impacts generated by the JF reform. Specifically, we use the
aforementioned revealed preference restrictions to develop analytic bounds on the proportion
of women responding along each of nine allowable margins defined by pairings of coarse
earnings and program participation categories across policy regimes.
    Applying our identification results, we find evidence of substantial intensive and extensive
margin responses to reform over the first seven quarters of the experiment. The JF reform
incentivized at least 14% of the women who would not have worked to do so and more than
32% of women who would have worked off welfare at low earnings to take up assistance.
Importantly, we find that at least 20% of the women who would have worked off welfare at
relatively high earnings levels were induced to reduce their earnings and opt-in to welfare,
demonstrating that the reform in fact led to substantial intensive margin responses. We
also find that the JF work requirements induced at least 2% of the women who would have
not worked while on welfare to work and under-report their earnings in order to maintain
eligibility for benefits.
    Our results demonstrate that simple revealed preference arguments allow researchers
studying policy reforms to derive informative bounds on the size of competing response mar-
gins under very weak assumptions. These findings extend results by Heckman, Smith, and
Clements (1997) who, in the context of an application to the U.S. Job Training Partnership
Act, considered the identifying power of Roy (1951)-type models of optimization for the joint
distribution of potential outcomes. Our approach is applicable to more general settings that
do not obey strong Roy-style selection on potential outcome differences, and can easily be
adapted to other reforms which alter the value of alternatives in known directions.
    We also contribute to a recent literature on partial identification of labor supply mod-
els. The bounding approach developed here is closely related to the theoretical analysis of
Manski (2014) who considers the use of revealed preference arguments to set-identify tax
policy counterfactuals. While Manski conducts computational experiments involving a sin-
   3
    This is in contrast to traditional parametric models of labor supply (e.g. Burtless and Hausman, 1978;
Hoynes, 1996; Keane and Moffitt, 1998) that can be identified without policy variation. See MaCurdy, Green,
and Paarsch (1990) for an early critique of parametrically structured econometric models of labor supply
with nonlinear budget sets.



                                                    4
gle tax parameter, we study a reform that changes a bundle of policy features and employ a
correspondingly richer model incorporating program participation and reporting decisions.
Our additional allowances for labor supply constraints and endogenous wages necessitate
the use of policy variation to achieve identification. Blundell, Bozio, and Laroque (2011a,b)
also implement a bounds based analysis of labor supply behavior but are concerned with a
statistical decomposition of fluctuations in aggregate hours worked rather than formal iden-
tification of policy counterfactuals. Their findings, which are compatible with ours, indicate
that adjustments along both the intensive and extensive margins are important contributors
to fluctuations in aggregate hours worked. Finally, Chetty (2012) considers bounds on labor
supply elasticities in a class of semi-parametric models with optimization frictions. He too
finds evidence of non-trivial intensive margin responsiveness, but relies on strong parametric
assumptions.
     The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section I describes the Jobs First
experiment. Section II describes the data from the Jobs First Public Use Files. Section III
summarizes the program’s experimental impacts on earnings and provides a test for intensive
margin responsiveness. Section IV describes our baseline optimizing model. Section V
derives the restrictions implied by revealed preference. Section VI considers some extensions
of the baseline model. Section VII studies identification of the probabilities of responding to
reform along various margins. Section VIII discusses the computation of bounds on response
probabilities and inference issues. Section IX provides our main empirical results and Section
X discusses their robustness. Section XI concludes. Technical proofs and additional results
are provided in an Online Appendix.


                     I.     The Jobs First Evaluation
With the passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
in 1996, all fifty states were required to reform their Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC) welfare programs by introducing lifetime time limits, work requirements, and en-
hanced financial incentives to work while on assistance. The state of Connecticut responded
to these changes by implementing the Jobs First program. To study the effectiveness of
the reform, the state contracted with the Manpower Development Research Corporation
(MDRC) to conduct a randomized evaluation comparing the JF program with the earlier
state AFDC program for low-income single parents with children. Table 1 provides a detailed
summary of the JF and AFDC program features, which we now describe in detail.


                                              5
                         A. Changes in the Treatment of Earnings
A primary feature of the JF reform was the enhancement of financial incentives to work while
on assistance. In the determination of welfare eligibility and grant amounts, Connecticut
AFDC recipients faced a fixed earnings disregard of $120 per month for the twelve months
following the first month of employment while on assistance and $90 per month afterwards
(henceforth, the unreduced and reduced fixed disregards). They also faced a proportional
disregard of any additional earnings: 51% for the four months following the first month of
employment while on assistance and 27% afterwards (henceforth, the unreduced and reduced
proportional disregards). By contrast, the JF program disregarded 100% of earnings up to
the monthly federal poverty line (FPL). This change was meant to incentivize work but also
generated an eligibility “notch” in the transfer scheme, with a windfall loss of the entire
grant amount occurring if a woman earned a dollar more than the poverty line. This created
strong incentives for some women to reduce their earnings in order to maintain eligibility for
assistance.
     We can formalize the rules governing welfare transfers by means of the transfer func-
tion Gti (E) which gives the monthly grant amount associated with welfare participation at
earnings level E under policy regime t ∈ {a, j} (AFDC or JF respectively). The i subscript
acknowledges that the grant amount also varies according to a woman’s history of employ-
ment while on assistance (under AFDC only) and the size of a woman’s assistance unit,
which consists of the woman receiving welfare plus any eligible dependent children.4 Letting
1 [.] be an indicator for the expression in brackets being true, the regime specific transfer
functions can be written:

                           Gai (E) = 1 E ≤ E i Gi − 1 [E > δi ] (E − δi ) τi
                                                                           
                                                                                                  (1)
                           Gji (E) = 1 [E ≤ F P Li ] Gi ,                                         (2)

where δi ∈ {90, 120} and τi ∈ {.73, .49} are the fixed and proportional AFDC earnings
disregards, Gi is the base grant amount (which is common to JF and AFDC), F P Li is the
federal poverty line, and E i = Gi /τi + δi is the so-called AFDC break-even earnings level
above which a woman becomes ineligible for cash assistance. The i subscripts on Gi and
F P Li reflect that these quantities vary with the size of the assistance unit.
    Figure 1 provides a stylized depiction of the changes to the cash assistance component
of welfare experienced by a woman with two children who, in 1997, would face a base grant
  4
      Children are eligible if they are under age eighteen or under age nineteen and in school.


                                                       6
amount of $543 and a federal poverty line of $1,111. This woman’s welfare history gives her
access only to the reduced fixed and proportional disregards under AFDC. The Figure plots
the woman’s disposable income (earned income plus welfare assistance) against her earnings
E under AFDC (panel a) and JF (panel b) respectively. Transfers under JF exhibit a large
discontinuity at the federal poverty line. By contrast, assistance phases out smoothly under
AFDC. For instance, if the woman were to earn $200 per month, she would receive a welfare
transfer that is $80 (17%) larger under JF than under AFDC. While if she earned $800
per month, she would receive a transfer that is $518 (2,098%) larger under JF than under
AFDC. Although in Figure 1 the AFDC transfer is fully exhausted at an earnings level E
that is strictly below the poverty line, this is not always the case. A woman with access to
the unreduced proportional and fixed disregards exhausts her AFDC transfer at an earnings
level slightly above the poverty line.
    Welfare is, of course, part of a broader web of tax and transfer programs. Figure 2
depicts the woman’s monthly income accounting for the Food Stamps (FS) program, payroll
and Medicaid taxes, and the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). The Food Stamps program
interacts with welfare assistance both because welfare recipients are categorically eligible
for the program and because welfare transfers are treated as income in the determination
of the Food Stamps transfer amounts. The JF reform introduced a further link between
cash and in-kind assistance: conditional on joint take up, earnings up to the poverty line
were disregarded in the determination of both the welfare and the Food Stamps transfers.
This feature is clearly visible in Figure 2 – under JF, the combined welfare and FS transfer
depends only on whether earnings exceed the poverty line, in which case assistance is denied.
Thus, JF’s impact on the Food Stamps program amplifies the notch at the poverty line.5


               B. Work Requirements, Sanctions, and Time Limits
At the time of the reform, Connecticut mandated work requirements for all AFDC recipients
except those with a child under age two (who were exempt). AFDC work requirements could
be met by paid employment or, in place of employment, by participation in employment-
related services. The MDRC final report describes these services as “a small-scale, largely
voluntary, education-focused welfare-to-work program” (Bloom et al., 2002, p.28) with lax
enforcement. JF recipients, by contrast, were required to participate in employment services
targeted toward quick job placement unless they were parents caring for a child under age
   5
     The EITC and other taxes do not directly interact with cash and in-kind assistance because income from
welfare and Food Stamps are not counted in the determination of taxes and tax credits.


                                                    7
one.6 Additionally, the JF reform stepped up sanctions for non-compliance with work re-
quirements. JF recipients who failed to make good faith efforts to find work while receiving
assistance could be sanctioned by having their welfare grant reduced or temporarily can-
celed. Under AFDC, sanctions involved removing the noncompliant adult from the grant
calculation rather than closing the entire case.
    Finally, women could remain on welfare indefinitely under AFDC provided that their
children were of eligible age. By contrast, under JF women were limited to a lifetime total
of twenty one months of cash assistance. However, months when women were exempt from
work requirements did not count towards the lifetime limit and additional exemptions from
the time limit were available in some cases (e.g., if the parent was incapacitated or caring
for a disabled child). Moreover, six month extensions from the time limit were possible if
recipients were deemed to have made a “good faith” effort to find employment. Bloom et al.
(2002, p.37) report that “in general, a goodfaith effort was assumed as long as the recipient
was not sanctioned more than once and did not quit a job without ’good cause’ in the final
six months of assistance.” There was no limit on the number of six-month extensions a family
could receive. Survey evidence from Bloom et al. (2002, p.76) suggests that, in practice,
a majority of the cases reaching the time limit were granted an extension and, during the
first year after random assignment, nearly 20% of the JF units were exempt from time limits
(p.35).


                                        C. Other Changes
The JF reform also entailed some minor changes to programs available to women leaving
welfare. Under AFDC, recipients were eligible for twelve months of Transitional Child Care
subsidies if they left welfare for work, while under JF, cases were eligible for child care subsi-
dies indefinitely provided that their income did not exceed 75% of the state median income.
Likewise, under AFDC, assistance units leaving welfare because of increased earnings were
eligible for one year of Transitional Medicaid, while under JF, units were eligible for two
   6
    Bloom et al. (2002, p.31) note that “Connecticut, like many other states, did not strongly enforce the
existing requirements for AFDC recipients to participate in employment-related activities (in fact there were
waiting lists for services). Job Connection, the state’s Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training (JOBS)
program, served a small proportion of the total welfare caseload in any month, and a large proportion of
those who participated were in education and training activities.” By contrast, the JF work mandates
appear to have been implemented strictly with minimal emphasis on training: “nearly all [non-exempted]
JF participants were required to begin by looking for a job, either on their own or through Job Search Skills
Training (JSST), a group activity that teaches job-seeking and job-holding skills. Education and training
were generally reserved for recipients who were unable to find a job despite lengthy up-front job search
activities.” (p.11)


                                                     8
years of Medicaid. While these programs could create additional incentives to work, Bloom
et al. (2002) argue that these components of the JF reform had little impact on actual access
to child- or health care because of contemporaneous state level programs covering essentially
the same population.7
    JF also changed the treatment of income received in the form of child support transfers.
Under AFDC, recipients received only the first $50 of the child support collected by the child
support collection agency from the child’s non-custodial father. The amount received was
then disregarded in the computation of the welfare grant. Under JF, recipients received a
check for the full amount of any child support collected with only the first $100 disregarded in
computing the welfare transfer. These changes may have induced income effects since women
whose child support collection was between $50 and $100 could enjoy an increased welfare
transfer with no change in behavior. However, these income effects are likely negligible given
that they only apply to women within this restricted range of child support payments –
payments above $100 were deducted dollar for dollar from benefits – and since the amount
of additional income per month was very small.


                   II.      Data and Descriptive Statistics
Before delving into a model of women’s responses to the JF reform, it is useful to first in-
troduce some basic features of the data. Between January of 1996 and February of 1997,
MDRC randomly assigned 4,803 welfare recipients and applicants to either an AFDC “con-
trol” group or to a JF “experimental” group. Data were collected on these women through
the end of 2000 when the experiment ended. We now describe the MDRC Jobs First Public
Use Files used in our analysis and briefly examine the baseline characteristics of our estima-
tion sample. We then examine the distribution of earned income relative to the eligibility
notch in the experimental sample.
   7
     Regarding Transitional Child Care, Bloom et al. (2002) write that “in practice, however, the difference
between these two policies was minimal, because AFDC members who reached the end of their eligibility
for TCC could move directly into the child care certificate program (that is, income-eligible child care) for
low-income working parents.” As to the effects of Transitional Medicaid, they write that “the magnitude of
the treatment difference related to medical assistance has diminished over time, as Connecticut has expanded
the availability of health coverage to low-income children and adults who do not receive welfare.” In addition,
they note that “the 1996 federal welfare law ’de-linked’ eligibility for Medicaid from eligibility for welfare
and created a new coverage category for families who are not on welfare but who meet the AFDC eligibility
criteria that were in place in July 1996. These statewide expansions in health coverage for children and
adults are available to both the JF group and the AFDC group.” Taken together these observations suggests
that the additional 12 months of Transitional Medicaid available under JF are unlikely to have induced
changes in the value of working off assistance.


                                                      9
                                                 A. Data
The MDRC Jobs First Public Use Files contain a baseline survey of demographic and fam-
ily composition variables merged with longitudinal administrative information on welfare
and Food Stamps participation, rounded welfare and Food Stamps payments, and rounded
earnings covered by the state Unemployment Insurance (UI) system. There are a number
of limitations to these data. While participation and transfers are measured monthly, UI
earnings data are only available quarterly. Data on hours and weeks worked are not avail-
able, which prevents us from inferring hourly wages. Also, earnings reported to the welfare
agency by applicants and recipients are not available.
    Another difficulty is that the administrative measure of assistance unit size is missing
for most cases. This is problematic because a woman’s assistance unit size determines her
poverty line and the corresponding location of the JF eligibility notch she faces. In the
JF sample, we are able to infer an assistance unit size from the grant amount in months
when a woman is on welfare. But in the AFDC sample, the grant amount depends on the
woman’s history of past employment and welfare take up, which we observe only partially.
Consequently, we cannot reliably infer an assistance unit size from grant amounts under
AFDC. For this reason, when computing treatment effects by assistance unit size, we rely
on a variable collected in the baseline survey named “kidcount” that records the number of
children in the household at the time of random assignment. As might be expected, using
the kidcount variable leads to underestimates of true assistance unit size since women may
have additional children over the seven quarters following the baseline survey. To deal with
this problem we inflate the kidcount based measure of assistance unit size by one in order
to avoid understating the location of the poverty line for most women.8 Additional details
regarding variable construction are provided in the Online Appendix.


                 B. Baseline Characteristics of the Analysis Sample
Table 2 provides baseline descriptive statistics for our analysis sample. We have 4,642 cases
with complete pre-random assignment data and non-missing values of the kidcount variable.
    8
      Understating the poverty line could lead to an over-estimate of the population at risk of opting in to
welfare. We err on the side of overstating the poverty line because one of our goals is to provide a conservative
assessment of whether opt-in behavior actually takes place. Online Appendix Table A1 tabulates the kidcount
variable against the administrative measure available in the JF sample. Our inflation scheme maps the
kidcount measure to its modal administrative value plus one. As detailed in Online Appendix Table A7, our
main results are robust to alternate codings such as inflating the assistance unit size by two and not inflating
it at all.



                                                       10
There are some mildly significant differences between the AFDC and JF groups in their
baseline characteristics, however these differences are not jointly significant. We follow BGH
(2006) in using propensity score re-weighting to adjust for these baseline differences.9 After
adjustment, the baseline means of the AFDC and JF groups are very similar. We also ex-
amine two subgroups defined by whether they had positive earnings seven quarters prior to
random assignment (the two rightmost panels in Table 2). Because pre-assignment earnings
proxy for tastes and earnings ability, the JF reform likely presented these groups with dif-
ferent incentives, which makes them useful for exploring treatment effect heterogeneity (see
BGH, 2014 for a related subgroup analysis).


                                   C. Earnings Distribution
Figures 3a-3c provide histograms by assistance status of earned income in the JF sample for
the seven quarters following random assignment – a horizon over which no case was in danger
of reaching the time limit. Earnings are rescaled relative to three times the federal poverty
line, which is the maximum amount that a woman can earn in a quarter while maintaining
welfare eligibility throughout the quarter. Each woman’s poverty line is determined using
our administratively inferred measure of assistance unit size.
     Many labor supply models predict bunching of earnings at notches (Slemrod, 2010; Kleven
and Waseem, 2013). Like BGH (2006), we find no evidence of such bunching at the JF
eligibility notch (Figure 3a). Rather, the earnings density declines smoothly through the
notch which should bound, to its right, a dominated earnings region. Compared to women
not on welfare in the quarter (Figure 3c), there is arguably an excess “mound” in the density
of earnings below the notch for women on welfare throughout the quarter (Figure 3b). While
it is possible to rationalize the absence of bunching with certain distributions of preferences,
this evidence is also consistent with the possibility that women face significant labor supply
constraints – a conjecture that has received substantial empirical support in related settings
(Altonji and Paxson, 1988; Dickens and Lundberg, 1993; Chetty et al., 2011b; Beffy et al.,
2014).
     A conspicuous feature of Figure 3b is that the distribution of earnings stretches well
beyond the poverty line, despite the fact that women with such earnings levels should be
ineligible for welfare under JF. While it is possible that some of these observations are the
   9
    These techniques are described in the Online Appendix. The baseline sample in BGH (2006) contains
4,803 cases. Relative to their analysis, we impose the additional restriction that the kidcount variable be
non-missing. We also drop one AFDC case from our analysis with unrealistically high quarterly earnings
that sometimes led to erratic results.


                                                    11
result of measurement problems, under-reporting behavior is also undoubtedly at play here.
The MDRC final report (Bloom et al., 2002, p. 38) provides some direct evidence on this
point, noting that, in the AFDC group, the fraction of women with earnings in the UI system
was about ten percentage points higher than the fraction reporting earnings to the welfare
agency. In the JF group, the fraction reporting earnings to the welfare system was nearly
identical to the fraction with UI earnings. However, this may be an artifact of the 100% JF
earnings disregard which creates incentives to report an earnings amount below the poverty
line rather than no earnings at all. Evidence on such partial under-reporting was found in a
related context by Hotz, Mullin, and Scholz (2003), who analyzed data from a welfare reform
experiment in California.10


       III.      Earnings Impacts and A Test for Intensive
                                    Margin Responsiveness
As previously documented by BGH (2006), the JF reform had nuanced effects on the distri-
bution of earned income. Here we briefly review those impacts and then ask whether they
could have been generated solely by extensive margin responses.


                                     A. Earnings Impacts
Figure 4a provides reweighted empirical distribution functions (EDFs) by experimental sta-
tus of rescaled earnings in the first seven quarters of the experiment. The poverty line
employed in the rescaling is computed using our survey-based measure of assistance unit
size. Significant opt-in behavior should lead earnings levels below the poverty line to be
more common in the JF sample than the AFDC sample.
    A reweighted Kolmogorov-Smirnov test strongly rejects the null hypothesis that the two
EDFs are identical. More quarters exhibit positive earnings in the JF sample than in the
AFDC sample, indicating that JF successfully incentivized many women to work.11 The
earnings EDF rises more quickly in the JF sample than in the AFDC sample, signaling
excess mass at low earnings levels. Also, the EDFs cross below the notch, implying that the
  10
     Comparing administrative earnings records from the California Unemployment Insurance system with
earnings reported to welfare, they find that about a quarter of welfare cases report earning amounts to the
welfare agency that are lower than the figures recorded in the state UI system. Among these cases, the
average fraction of UI earnings reported varied from 64% to 84% depending on the year studied.
  11
     Appendix Table A2 provides standard errors on selected earnings impacts, which confirm the visual
impression of Figures 4a-4c.

                                                    12
fraction earning less than the poverty line is slightly greater in the JF sample than among the
AFDC controls. A large increase in the fraction earning less than the poverty line would be
suggestive evidence of an opt-in response, however the impact here is small and statistically
insignificant.
    Figures 4b-4c provide corresponding EDFs in the two subsamples defined by their earn-
ings in the seventh quarter prior to random assignment. These groups are of interest because
pre-random assignment earnings are a strong predictor of post-random assignment earnings
and therefore proxy for the relevant range of the budget set an agent would face under AFDC.
Accordingly, units with positive pre-random assignment earnings should be most likely to
exhibit an opt-in effect, while units with zero earning should be more likely to be pushed
into the labor force by JF. The Figures confirm that the expected pattern of heterogeneity
is in fact present: the positive earnings group experienced less of an impact on the fraction
of quarters spent working and a significant increase in the fraction of quarters with earnings
less than or equal to the poverty line. The zero earnings group, by contrast, exhibits a large
increase in the fraction of quarters working, but essentially no impact on the fraction of
quarters with earnings less than or equal to the poverty line.


                  B. A Test for Intensive Margin Responsiveness
Could these distributional impacts on earnings have been generated by extensive margin ad-
justments alone? In the absence of intensive margin adjustments, the distribution of earned
income in the JF sample should stochastically dominate the distribution in the AFDC sam-
ple as the reform simply shifts mass from zero to positive earnings levels.12 Using a variant
of the testing procedure of Barrett and Donald (2003) described in the Online Appendix,
we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the JF earnings distribution stochastically domi-
nates the earnings distribution in the pooled AFDC sample (Figure 4a). However, first order
stochastic dominance is rejected at the 5% level in the positive earnings sample (Figure 4c),
indicating that intensive margin responses did in fact occur in response to the reform, but
are difficult to detect in the pooled sample using earnings alone.
  12
    First order stochastic dominance implies the absence of negative QTEs. Therefore the analysis of BGH
(2006) already provides evidence against the extensive margin-only null hypothesis. However, focusing on
particular QTEs that happen to be significant can generate a multiple testing problem. The methods used
here address this problem.




                                                  13
                                           IV.        Model
Having established the presence of both intensive and extensive margin labor supply re-
sponses to the JF reform, we now seek to infer the frequency of these responses. What
fraction of women were induced to lower their earnings and take up welfare in response to
the JF reform? What share of women were induced to work at earnings levels above the
poverty line? How many women were induced to leave welfare? The fundamental challenge
to answering such questions is that we cannot observe the choice each woman would have
made under the policy regime to which she was not assigned.
    In this section we develop an optimizing model that formalizes the incentives provided
by the JF reform and restricts the set of possible labor supply and program participation
responses to the experiment. We depart from conventional structural modeling approaches
(e.g., Moffitt, 1983; Keane and Moffitt, 1998; Hoynes, 1996; Swann, 2005; Keane and Wolpin,
2002, 2007, 2010; Chan, 2013) by allowing for a non-parametric specification of preferences.
Motivated by our finding of the absence of a spike in the earnings distribution at the JF
eligibility threshold, we allow for the possibility that women face constraints on their labor
supply decisions. Women also choose how much of their earnings to report to the welfare
agency, creating the possibility that earnings ineligible women are welfare participants.
    Our analysis relies on a number of simplifying assumptions. First, the model is static.
In practice, women are likely to make choices taking into account both current and future
payoffs. For our purposes, these motives are only problematic if they rationalize responses
that do not emerge under myopic decision making. For this to be the case, alternative specific
continuation values would need to differ across AFDC and JF in ways that undermine our
static conclusions regarding which choices are made more or less attractive by the reform
(see Section V). The JF time limits are the most obvious culprit for such effects since they
could make working while on welfare less attractive under JF than under AFDC. However,
as described in Section X, an adaptation of the Grogger and Michalopoulos (2003) test for
anticipatory responses fails to detect forward-looking behavior, leading us to believe that
the dynamic incentives of the reform are in fact weak in this sample.13 Second, the model
  13
     Returns to labor market experience are a second culprit. Our model posits regime-invariant earning offer
functions, which implies that the attractiveness of off-welfare alternatives is assumed to be the same under
AFDC and JF. If JF induces more women to work, and if returns to labor market experience are substantial,
this assumption is violated. However, the magnitude of experience effects in our sample is likely to be small.
For example, after studying data from a similar welfare experiment – the Canadian Self Sufficiency Project
(SSP) – Card and Hyslop (2005) conclude that “work experience attributable to SSP appears to have had
no detectable effect on wage opportunities.” Couch (2014) uses 14 years of post-randomization earnings data
from the JF reform and concludes that “the short-term intervention did not appear to have altered the


                                                     14
ignores the Transitional Child Care, Transitional Medicare, and child support components
of the JF reform. We explained above why these features of the reform likely had minimal
effects. Introducing them would substantially complicate our analysis and add little given
that we lack data on participation in these programs. Third, to simplify exposition, the
model ignores the Food Stamps program, payroll and Medicare taxes, and the EITC. We
explain in Section VI why extending the model to incorporate these policies has no effect
on our revealed preference arguments. Finally, we present the model for a woman whose
break-even earnings level (E i ) under AFDC is below the federal poverty line as in Figure 1.
In Section VI, we discuss how things differ for women who have access to unreduced earnings
disregards yielding E i > F P Li .


                                  A. The Decision Problem
Consider a woman with children, call her i, subject to a policy regime indexed by t ∈ {a, j}
(AFDC or JF respectively). In a given month, woman i samples Ki ≥ 0 job offers, composed
                                                   Ki
of wage and hours offer pairs: Θi ≡ Wik , Hik k=1       . The woman’s offer set Θi reflects a
mix of luck and the woman’s labor market skills. Woman i decides which (if any) of the Ki
offers to accept, whether to participate in welfare (represented by the indicator D ∈ {0, 1}),
and a level (E r ≥ 0) of earned income to report to the welfare agency. We assume E r is less
than or equal to her actual earnings E = W H where W and H refer to the wage and hours
at her chosen job (which are both zero when no offer is accepted).14
    Woman i consumes her earnings plus any welfare transfer. Specifically, her consumption
is given by:
                             C = Cit (E, D, E r ) = E + DGti (E r ) ,                      (3)

where the welfare grant Gti (E r ) is determined according to the regime-specific transfer func-
tions (1)-(2) based upon her reported (as opposed to her actual) earnings.
    Woman i’s preferences are represented by the utility function:

                                          Uit (H, C, D, Z, R) ,                                        (4)

where Z = Z(D, E r ) = D1 [E r = 0] is an indicator that equals one if she reports zero
earnings to the welfare agency and R = R(E, D, E r ) = D1 [E r < E] is an indicator that
long-term outcomes of participants examined in terms of employment or labor market earnings.”
  14
     Allowing over-reporting behavior would essentially nullify the JF work requirements. In practice, con-
cocting a fictitious job was difficult as employment had to be verified by case workers.


                                                    15
equals one if she under-reports her earnings to the welfare agency. The dependence of utility
on D captures the potential for a “stigma” (or, conversely, a psychic benefit) to be associated
with welfare participation (Moffitt, 1983), while the dependence on Z captures the “hassle”
associated with welfare work requirements. The dependence of utility on R captures the cost
of under-reporting to the welfare agency which may reflect the effort exerted in disguising
earnings and the possibility of being caught under-reporting.15 Utility is indexed by the
policy regime t to allow for differences in hassle disutility under AFDC and JF.
    We assume that the utility function in (4) obeys the following restrictions:

A.1          utility is strictly increasing in C;

A.2          Uit (H, C, 1, Z, 1) < Uit (H, C, 1, Z, 0) for all t ∈ {a, j};

A.3          Uit (H, C, 1, 1, R) ≤ Uit (H, C, 1, 0, R) for all t ∈ {a, j};

A.4          Uij (H, C, 1, 1, R) ≤ Uia (H, C, 1, 1, R);

A.5          Uij (H, C, 1, 0, R) = Uia (H, C, 1, 0, R);

A.6          Uij (H, C, 0, 0, 0) = Uia (H, C, 0, 0, 0).

Assumption A.1 is a standard non-satiation condition. Assumption A.2 states that under-
reporting is costly under either policy regime. Assumption A.3 states that reporting zero
earnings weakly lowers utility (due to welfare hassle). Assumptions A.4-A.6 formalize our
institutional knowledge of the JF reform. In accord with JF’s increased work requirements,
A.4 restricts the utility of reporting zero earnings while on welfare to be no higher under
JF than AFDC. Assumption A.5 restricts both the utility costs of under-reporting and the
psychic costs (or benefits) of welfare participation to be regime-invariant among recipients
who report positive earnings. Finally, assumption A.6 requires utility to be regime-invariant
when off assistance.
    The above specification of utility is extremely general. Due to the non-separability of H
and C, leisure and consumption may be complements or substitutes and preferences may be
non-homothetic as in classic Stone-Geary specifications of utility. Because we do not require
monotonicity with respect to H, woman i may value working full time more than working
part time or vice versa. Likewise, participation in welfare may increase or decrease her
  15
    An important restriction here is that the cost of under-reporting does not depend on what fraction of
earnings are under-reported. This feature of our model is necessitated by the fact that reported earnings
E r are not included in MDRC’s Public Use Files. See Saez (2010) for a similar restriction involving a fixed
“moral” cost of misreporting income to tax authorities.

                                                    16
utility. Welfare stigma creates the possibility that woman i refuses assistance despite being
eligible. The effect of welfare participation on her utility is allowed to vary with consumption
and leisure due to the non-separability of D. Similarly, the hassle disutility is allowed to
vary with consumption and leisure due to the further non-separability of Z. Note that we
have not assumed continuity of utility with respect to H or C, which accommodates the
possibility that woman i faces a fixed cost (or benefit) of work such as a monthly commuting
cost. Fixed costs discourage work at low earnings levels and create the possibility that she
responds to marginal changes in work incentives by earning large amounts instead of not
working at all (Cogan, 1981).
    A special case of (4) monetizes welfare stigma, hassle, the disutility of under-reporting,
and the (dis)-utility of working as follows:

                              Ui H, C − φi D − ηit Z − κi R − µi 1 [E > 0] ,
                                                                          
                                                                                                           (5)

where φi is the monetized cost of welfare stigma, ηit is the hassle cost of reporting zero
earnings under regime t, κi is the cost of under-reporting, and µi is a fixed cost (or benefit)
of work. The parameters φi , ηia , ηij , κi , µi inherit the above restrictions on preferences.
                                                

Specifically, A.2 and A.4 imply κi > 0 is regime-invariant, A.3 and A.4 stipulate that
ηij ≥ ηia ≥ 0, and A.5 requires that φi be regime-invariant. Finally, in accordance with
A.6, µi and the two-argument utility function in (5) are both regime-invariant. We refer to
the second argument of (5) as the “consumption equivalent.” We selectively consider this
“monetized” specification below to aid in illustrating the mechanics of the model and the
implications of further structuring preferences. Our main results rely on the more general
specification given in (4).
    Woman i’s objective is to maximize her utility under policy regime t. Hence, she selects
a labor supply, program participation, and reporting alternative Xit∗ that belongs to:16

                                            Uit H, Cit (W H, D, E r ), D, Z(D, E r ), R (W H, D, E r ) .
                                                                                                      
                arg max                                                                                    (6)
   (W,H)∈{Θi ,(0,0)}, D∈{0,1}, E r ∈[0,E]


We refer to Xit∗ as woman i’s choice under policy regime t. Note that her pair Xia∗ , Xij∗
                                                                                                            

  16
    Indifferences between alternatives may arise that lead the arg max to be a set instead of a vector. We
do not model how woman i chooses among alternatives between which she is indifferent. We only assume
that the rule she uses to choose among them is invariant to the policy regime t.




                                                         17
of regime-dependent choices is governed by the vector of primitives:

                            θi ≡ Uij (., ., ., ., .) , Uia (., ., ., ., .) , Θi , Ḡi , δi , τi .
                                                                                               


We provide some examples of how choices depend on these primitives at the end of the next
Section.


                                          B. Optimal Reporting
Recall from (4) that woman i’s utility depends on whether or not she under-reports her
earnings to the welfare agency but not on the magnitude of the under-reporting. As a result,
optimal reporting obeys a particularly convenient decision rule. Specifically, assumptions
A.1, A.2, and A.3 imply that when concealing her earnings optimally, woman i reports a
positive amount to the welfare agency that allows her to avoid any hassle penalty and to
receive a transfer Ḡi irrespective of the policy regime she faces (see Lemma 2 in the Online
Appendix). Hence by assumption A.5, for any level of actual earnings E, the utility she
receives from optimally under-reporting while on assistance is the same across regimes. We
shall exploit this result repeatedly in what follows.


                   V.       Revealed Preference Restrictions
The above model restricts how a woman responds to policy variation. That is, it rules out
certain pairings of choices across the two policy regimes. These restrictions stem from simple
revealed preference arguments. Specifically, if the utility of a woman’s choice under AFDC
is not lowered by the reform, she will either make the same choice under JF or select an
alternative that the reform made more attractive.
    A parsimonious approach to summarizing these restrictions leverages the fact that the JF
reform improved (or worsened) the attractiveness of large collections of alternatives based on
their implied earnings. To see this, recall that the JF reform altered the mapping between
earnings and grant amounts and imposed more stringent work requirements on recipients
with zero earnings. In what follows, we group labor supply alternatives into three broad
categories based upon the earnings they generate. We then apply revealed preference argu-
ments to rule out possible pairings of alternatives within these broad categories across policy
regimes.17 In Section X, we discuss what can (and cannot) be learned from working with
 17
      The structural labor supply literature often assumes labor supply choices are constrained to fall into a


                                                            18
finer earnings categories.


                                      A. Earnings Ranges
Consider the following “coarsened” earnings variable E
                                                     ei , defined by the relation:
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                           0 if E = 0
                                          
                                      ei ≡ 1 if E ≤ F P L .
                                      E                                                               (7)
                                                          i
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          2 if E > F P L
                                                          i



That is, E ei indicates whether woman i works, and if so, whether her earnings make her
ineligible for welfare assistance under JF.
    The JF reform had qualitatively similar effects on the attractiveness of alternatives within
each of these earnings ranges. To see this, note that the reform potentially reduced the
attractiveness of not working (E ei = 0) while on welfare because of JF’s more stringent work
requirements. By contrast, the reform made earning positive amounts below the poverty
line (Eei = 1) at least as attractive since a woman with earnings in this range is either off
assistance, or on assistance and under-reporting, or on assistance and truthfully-reporting.
In the first two circumstances, the utility value she attains is unaffected by the regime (recall
the optimal reporting result described in Section IV). In the third circumstance, the utility
value she attains under JF is at least as high as that attainable under AFDC because of
JF’s enhanced earnings disregard. Finally, the reform had no effect on the utility of working
at earnings levels above the poverty line (E   ei = 2). This follows because a woman with
earnings in range 2 is either off assistance or under-reporting while on assistance. In both
circumstances, the utility value she attains is unaffected by the regime.
    Pairing the earning categories with the decision to participate in welfare and the under-
reporting decision yields seven earnings / participation / reporting combinations, which we
henceforth refer to as states. The set of possible states is given by:

                                   S ≡ {0n, 1n, 2n, 0r, 1r, 1u, 2u} .

The number associated with each state refers to the woman’s earnings category while the
few data driven categories such as “part-time” and “full-time” work (e.g. Hoynes, 1996; Keane and Moffitt,
1998; Blundell et al, 2013; Manski, 2014). By contrast, we allow the choice set to vary across women in an
unrestricted fashion by means of the heterogeneous offer set Θi .



                                                   19
letter describes her combined welfare participation and reporting decisions. Specifically,
the letter n denotes welfare non-participation, r denotes welfare participation with truthful
reporting of earnings (E r = E), and u denotes welfare participation with under-reporting of
earnings (E r < E). Note that state 0u is ruled out, as it is not meaningful to “under-report”
zero earnings. Likewise, state 2r cannot occur under either JF or AFDC because of their
respective eligibility rules (recall that we are considering a woman with Ēi ≤ F P Li ).


                       B. Allowed and Disallowed Responses
Table 3 catalogs the possible pairings of states across the two policy regimes. Pairs of states
labeled “no response” entail the same behavior under the two policy regimes. We term the
remaining pairs either “disallowed” or “allowed” responses. The disallowed responses entail
a change in behavior that is proscribed by the model. This occurs either because the change
in behavior would entail an alternative that is dominated or because the change in behavior
is incompatible with revealed preference. In Table 3, the disallowed responses are denoted
with a “–” entry. The allowed responses entail a change in behavior that is permitted by
the model. These responses are represented by entries that describe the three margins along
which behavior may change: welfare participation (welfare take up or exit), labor supply
(extensive versus intensive labor supply response), and reporting of earnings to the welfare
agency (truthful reporting versus under-reporting). We next describe the logic behind which
responses are allowed and which are not. The Online Appendix establishes formally that the
restrictions in Table 3 are exhaustive.
    Starting with the disallowed responses, a woman will not make a choice corresponding to
state 1u under JF because under-reporting is costly (A.2) and earnings below the poverty line
are fully disregarded. For this reason, the column of Table 3 pertaining to state 1u under
JF is populated with “–” entries over a horizontally striped background. The remaining
prohibited responses stem from revealed preference arguments. By assumptions A.1 and
A.5, the JF reform may have made alternatives corresponding to state 1r more (but not
less) attractive. Conversely, by assumption A.4, the reform may have made alternatives
corresponding to the state 0r less (but not more) attractive. Finally, the reform had no effect
on the value of alternatives corresponding to the set C0 ≡ {0n, 1n, 2n, 1u, 2u} by assumption
A.6 and optimal reporting. Therefore, by revealed preference, a woman will not pair any of
the states in C ≡ {1r} ∪ C0 under AFDC with a (different) state in C ≡ {0r} ∪ C0 under
JF. This reasoning justifies the “–” entries in the cells with a greyed background.
    Proceeding now to responses that are allowed, consider first the extensive margin labor

                                              20
supply responses. A woman who, under AFDC, chooses not to work while off welfare (state
0n) must face high welfare stigma, hassle, or under-reporting costs since she is willing to
forgo the full grant amount Gi . Under JF, she may choose to work while on assistance and
earn below the poverty line (state 1r), as this option entails higher consumption than under
AFDC. Next, a woman who, under AFDC, would participate in welfare without working
(state 0r), may respond to JF in several ways. Specifically, she may be induced to: i) work
while on welfare (state 1r), ii) leave welfare and earn less than the federal poverty line (state
1n), iii) leave welfare and earn more than the federal poverty line (state 2n), iv) remain on
welfare and earn more than the federal poverty line (state 2u), or v) opt out of welfare (state
0n). The first response can result from either the reduction in implicit tax rates on earnings
or the increased hassle associated with JF. Sufficiently large fixed costs of work can enable
the second, third, or fourth responses. A large increase in the hassle costs may induce the
fifth response, in which case no labor supply response occurs.
    Consider next the allowed intensive margin labor supply responses. The pairing of states
1n, 1r, or 1u under AFDC with state 1r under JF could entail intensive margin responses
as a woman may adjust her earnings within region 1. A woman working on welfare under
AFDC, and earning less than the poverty line, will face a reduction in her implicit tax rate
under JF. Like any uncompensated increase in the wage, this change could lead to increases
or decreases in the amount of work undertaken, but in either case will lead her to continue
working on welfare. Likewise, a woman working off welfare under AFDC may choose to
participate in JF which would offer an increase in income for the same amount of work. This
may result in a reduction in earnings due to income effects. If the woman has high enough
welfare stigma, she will not participate in welfare under either regime (i.e. she will pair state
1n with state 1n). The pairing of either state 2n or 2u under AFDC with state 1r under JF
also corresponds to an intensive margin response: the reform induces the woman to reduce
her earnings below the poverty line.
    Some of the above extensive and intensive margin labor supply responses can be accom-
panied by an adjustment in reporting behavior. Specifically, the JF reform may induce a
woman to truthfully report her earnings (pairing states 1u or 2u with state 1r). Conversely,
the reform may induce a woman to under-report her earnings (pairing state 0r with state
2u). Thus, the JF reform may have mixed effects on reporting behavior.




                                               21
                                C. Graphical Examples
Figures 5 and 6 illustrate some of the allowed responses listed above assuming a fixed wage
rate and no labor market constraints (i.e., setting Ki = ∞). For convenience, both figures
employ the monetized form of the utility function given in (5).
    Figure 5 illustrates allowed responses that entail either an extensive margin or intensive
margin labor supply adjustment. Specifically, Figure 5a illustrates an extensive margin
response, corresponding to pairing state 0r under AFDC with state 1r under JF. As depicted,
the hassle costs ηia of not working under AFDC are much smaller than the corresponding
costs ηij under JF. The fixed cost of work µi straddles the two hassle costs. In comparison
with the fixed costs of work and hassle, the cost of under-reporting κi is depicted as being
quite large. The under-reporting line is the same under AFDC and JF because under either
regime a woman can secure the base grant by concealing her earnings. A woman with the
configuration of preferences found in Figure 5a would not work on welfare under AFDC (point
A) but would take up work and truthfully report her earnings under JF (point B). Figure
5b illustrates the traditional opt-in response considered in the literature, corresponding to
pairing state 2n under AFDC with state 1r under JF. As depicted, the hassle costs ηia of
not working under AFDC are large but smaller than the corresponding costs ηij under JF.
The fixed cost of work µi straddles the two hassle costs. A woman with the configuration
of costs and preferences found in Figure 5b would earn above the poverty line off assistance
under AFDC (point A) but would earn strictly below the poverty line on assistance under
JF (point B).
    Figure 6 illustrates allowed responses that entail an adjustment in reporting behavior.
As depicted, the hassle costs ηij of not working under JF are larger than the corresponding
costs ηia under AFDC, but both are smaller than the fixed cost of work µi . In comparison
with the fixed costs of work and hassle, the cost of under-reporting κi is relatively small. A
woman with the configuration of preferences found in Figure 6a would work on welfare under
AFDC but under-report her earnings (point A). However, under JF, she would truthfully
report her earnings (point B), as the JF disregard reduces the return to under-reporting.
Hence, reform may induce a reduction in under-reporting. By contrast, Figure 6b shows a
scenario where the hassle effects of JF are larger, the costs of under-reporting are smaller,
and preferences over earnings are such that the disutility of work is lower. This woman
would receive benefits without working (point A) under AFDC but, under JF, will choose
to earn above the poverty line and under-report her earnings (point B) in order to maintain
eligibility. This occurs because the JF work requirements remove point A from her budget


                                             22
set – such a woman has effectively been hassled off welfare into under-reporting.


                                      VI.        Extensions
The model of Section IV pertains to a woman who, under AFDC, would have access to the
reduced earnings disregards so that E i ≤ F P Li . Here we extend the model by considering
a woman for whom E i > F P Li . We show that, for such a woman, the set of theoretically
allowable responses to the JF reform is expanded but that these additional responses are
empirically irrelevant for the women in our analysis sample. Additionally, we summarize why
the inclusion of Food Stamps, payroll taxes, and the EITC does not change our reasoning
about the theoretically allowable effects of the JF reform with respect to welfare take up
and earnings. The important conclusion to be drawn from these two extensions is that
the response margins catalogued in Section V constitute the full list of possible welfare
participation and earning responses for the women in our sample.


                                    A. Unreduced Disregards
A woman with breakeven earnings level E i > F P Li may occupy state 2r because AFDC
rules permit her to truthfully report earnings above the poverty line. This augments the set
of possible responses to the JF reform since, as remarked above, state 2r is not permitted
by the JF eligibility rules. In particular, access to unreduced disregards enables flows out of
the labor force (i.e., pairing of state 2r under AFDC with state 0r or 0n under JF) provided
that earning constraints are present (see the Online Appendix for details).
    While interesting, the analysis of these additional responses turns out to be purely ped-
agogical. The number of observations in our sample for which this sort of behavior could
be present is bounded from above by the number of quarters in the AFDC sample where
women earn more than the poverty line and receive a positive welfare transfer no larger
than Gai (F P Li ). In our data, there are only 3 case-quarters (out of 14,784) meeting these
criteria, implying that such behavior is extremely rare.18 This should not be particularly sur-
prising – if women have convex preferences they are unlikely to earn in the range (F P Li , E i ]
  18
    This estimate is constructed as follows: for each AFDC sample woman and quarter, we determine
the welfare transfer she would receive if her earnings equaled the (assistance unit size and quarter-specific)
poverty line and if she had access to the unreduced fixed and proportional disregards. We round this amount
to the nearest $50 and denote it by Ga∗ i (F P Li ). Then, we count the number of quarterly observations in
the AFDC sample associated with UI earnings above the poverty line and with quarterly welfare transfers
no greater than Ga∗i (F P Li ).




                                                     23
since AFDC benefit exhaustion induces a non-convex kink in the budget set (Moffitt, 1990).
Moreover, even a mild welfare stigma could outweigh the relatively trivial amount of cash
assistance available to women with earnings in this range. Whatever the explanation, the
conclusion is the same: disregarding state 2r (and the related response margins) is empiri-
cally inconsequential.


                    B. Food Stamps, the EITC, and Payroll Taxes
In the Online Appendix we develop an extended model where Food Stamp participation is
introduced as an additional choice variable, so that a woman may be off assistance, on welfare
only, on Food Stamps only, or on both welfare and Food Stamps.19 Pairing the earnings
categories in (7) with the decisions to participate in welfare and/or FS as well as the under-
reporting decision yields sixteen states. Revealed preference arguments proscribe 190 out of
the 16 x 15 = 240 atheoretically possible responses leaving us with 50 allowed responses.
Crucially, none of the allowed responses involve pairing of earnings, welfare participation and
reporting alternatives prohibited by the model of Section IV. The reason for this convenient
result is that, under JF, earnings up to the poverty line were disregarded in full for the
determination of the Food Stamps grant only conditional on joint take up of welfare. Thus,
JF’s impact on the Food Stamps program effectively amplifies the notch at the poverty line
(recall Figure 2) and leaves the attractiveness of the non-welfare assistance states unaffected.
In summary, the restrictions in Table 3 hold with reference to both the welfare and Food
Stamp components of the JF reform and given the tax system in place at the time of the
reform.


         VII.        Identification of Response Probabilities
Table 3 summarizes the restrictions our model places on how a woman may respond to the
JF reform. These restrictions are not directly testable because we cannot observe the same
woman under both policy regimes at a given point in time. However, the experimental
nature of our data allow us to compare groups of women with identical distributions of
primitives who face different policy rules. In this section, we discuss how the individual
level restrictions enumerated in Table 3 can be exploited to test the model and bound the
  19
    This model allows for separate stigma effects for each combination of Food Stamps and welfare assistance.
Under-reporting costs also vary depending on the type of assistance. Filing for EITC is assumed invariant
to the policy regime, and payroll and Medicare taxes are levied on earnings under both regimes.


                                                     24
frequency of adjustment to the JF reform along each allowable response margin.


                            A. Population Heterogeneity
We start by assuming the N women in our sample obey assumptions A.1-A.6 and have
primitives {θi }N
                i=1 drawn independently from a distribution function Γθ (.). We shall depart
from much of the structural labor supply literature by leaving the distribution Γθ (.) unre-
stricted save for the support limitations implied by assumptions A.1-A.6, and the logical
non-negativity of hours and wage offers. Substantively, this formulation implies that prefer-
ences and constraints may vary freely across women, giving rise, for instance, to arbitrary
correlations between tastes and offer sets. Such dependence poses difficult endogeneity prob-
lems bypassed in much of the recent literature on non-parametric identification of structural
labor supply models, which typically treats wages (and policy rules) as exogenous (Manski,
2014; Blomquist et al, 2014).
    Because we allow for unrestricted heterogeneity across women, the right mix of pref-
erences and offers can rationalize any distribution of choices under a given policy regime.
However, as we show below, our theoretical restrictions do have empirical content when
applied to the JF experiment.


                           B. The Identification Problem
Let Sia denote the “potential” state corresponding to woman i’s choice under the AFDC
regime and Sij the state corresponding to her choice under the JF regime. Our goal is to
identify response probabilities of the form:

                                πsa ,sj ≡ P Sij = sj |Sia = sa ,
                                                              


for (sa , sj ) ∈ S × S, where P (.) is the probability measure induced by the distribution
function Γθ (.). These probabilities summarize the frequency of adjustment to the JF reform
along specific labor supply and participation margins. For example, π2n,1r gives the propor-
tion of those women who under AFDC would earn above the federal poverty line while off
assistance that would work on welfare under JF – that is, the share of high earning women
who opt-in to welfare.
    Let T i denote the treatment regime to which woman i is assigned and S i ≡ 1 [Ti = j] Sij +
1 [Ti = a] Sia her realized state. Random assignment ensures that her potential states are


                                              25
independent of the policy regime to which she is assigned. Formally,

                                              Ti ⊥ Sia , Sij ,
                                                            
                                                                                                          (8)

where the symbol ⊥ denotes independence. The above condition implies that, for every
s ∈ S and t ∈ {a, j}, P (Si = s|Ti = t) = P (Sit = s) ≡ qst , which is the well-known result
that experimental variation identifies the marginal distributions of potential outcomes.
    Unfortunately, experimental variation is not sufficient to identify the response proba-
        
bilities πsa ,sj . To see this, observe that by the law of total probability, the marginal
distributions of potential states are linked by the relation:

                                                   qj = Π0 qa ,                                           (9)

                                               0
where qt ≡ [q0n
              t    t
                , q1n    t
                      , q2n    t
                            , q0r    t
                                  , q1r    t
                                        , q1u    t
                                              , q2u ] for t ∈ {a, j} and the 7 × 7 matrix Π is composed of
unknown response probabilities. Supposing for the moment that we know the vectors (qa , qj )
with certainty, the system in (9) consists of 7 equations (one of which is redundant) and
7 × 6 = 42 unknown independent response probabilities. Clearly, the response probabilities
are heavily under-identified. As we show next, our model dramatically reduces the degree of
under-identification present.


                          C. Unrestricted Response Probabilities
The revealed preference arguments developed in Section IV imply that only ten out of the
forty two possible response margins cataloged in Table 3 are allowed. Accordingly, only
ten of the forty two response probabilities in the matrix Π are not restricted to equal zero.
Furthermore, π1u,1r equals one because no woman pairs state 1u under AFDC with any state
but 1r under JF. Hence, there are nine free response probabilities, which we collect into the
vector:
               π ≡ [π0n,1r , π0r,0n , π2n,1r , π0r,2n , π0r,1r , π0r,1n , π1n,1r , π0r,2u , π2u,1r ]0 . (10)

Note that rank reversals in earnings may result from the allowed responses to reform. For
example, some women who do not work under AFDC may earn in range 2 under JF (π0r,2n >
0 or π0r,2u > 0) and thereby “leap over” their peers who earn in range 1 of the earnings
distribution under either regime.20
  20
     Many additional sorts of rank reversals are possible in this framework. For example, additional reversals
occur in the above case where π0r,2n > 0 or π0r,2u > 0 if some women who would earn in range 2 under



                                                       26
   Recall that we have only seven equations to discipline the nine free response probabilities,
which necessitates a partial identification analysis of π. Moreover, because we do not directly
observe under-reporting behavior, we cannot distinguish between states 1u and 1r, making
the vectors (qa , qj ) themselves under-identified. We address both of these concerns below.


                                     D. Observable States
Our data do not allow us to measure reporting decisions other than by contrasting a woman’s
administrative earnings with the eligible maximum. Hence, states 1u and 1r are not empir-
ically distinguishable. Accordingly, we define a function g : S → Se that reduces the latent
states S to observable states Se that can be measured in our data. Formally,
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                         s      if   s ∈ {0n, 1n, 2n}
                                        
                                         0p     if   s = 0r
                                g (s) ≡                                .
                                        
                                        
                                         1p     if   s ∈ {1u, 1r}
                                        
                                         2p     if   s = 2u

As before, the number of each state refers to the woman’s earnings category and the letter
n refers to welfare non-participation. The letter p denotes welfare participation, which is
directly observable. Note that state 2p can only be occupied via under-reporting.
    Let Seit denote the potential observable state of a woman whose latent potential state
under policy regime t is Sit , that is, Seit ≡ g (Sit ) for t ∈ {a,j}. Also,
                                                                           define the probability
of occupying state se ∈ Se under policy regime t as pse ≡ P Sei = se = s: se=g(s) qst . Finally,
                                                            t         t
                                                                              P
                                                                                                   0
denote the vectors of observable state probabilities as pt ≡ pt0n , pt1n , pt2n , pt0p , pt1p , pt2p for
t ∈ {a, j}. We are now ready to discuss identification of the nine free response probabilities
appearing in (10) based on the regime specific state distributions pa and pj .


                                        E. Identified Set
Integrating the unobserved states out of (9) yields a system of six equations, one of which
is redundant given that state probabilities sum to one in each policy regime. The five non-
AFDC earn in range 1 under JF (π2n,1r > 0 or π2u,1r > 0). One also expects reversals to be common among
women who do not work under AFDC but earn positive amounts under JF, since the amounts earned under
JF are likely to be above the lowest earnings levels of women who would have worked even in the absence of
reform.




                                                      27
redundant equations can be given an intuitive representation as:

                       pj0n − pa0n = −pa0n π0n,1r + pa0p π0r,0n
                       pj1n − pa1n = −pa1n π1n,1r + pa0p π0r,1n
                       pj2n − pa2n = −pa2n π2n,1r + pa0p π0r,2n                                            (11)
                       pj0p − pa0p = −pa0p (π0r,1n + π0r,1r + π0r,2u + π0r,2n + π0r,0n )
                       pj2p − pa2p = pa0p π0r,2u − pa2p π2u,1r

The left hand side of (11) catalogs the experimental impacts of the JF reform on the observ-
able state probabilities. The right hand side rationalizes these impacts in terms of “flows”
into and out of each state as allowed by the model. The identifying power of the model
derives from the fact that only a handful of response probabilities appear in each equation.
The identified set Ξ of response probabilities consists of the set of vectors π obeying (11)
that satisfy the usual adding up and non-negativity conditions of probability distributions.21


                                         F. Testable Restrictions
As we show in the Online Appendix, System (11) implies sixteen inequality restrictions.
These restrictions exhaust the predictions of our model for the distribution of observed states
(pa , pj ). As argued above, the restrictions pertain exclusively to the impact (pj − pa ) of
the JF reform on state probabilities, as opposed to the cross-sectional distributions of states
within a regime. Violation of any of these inequalities would imply that our framework
fails to allow for a response actually present in the data. To conserve space, we list the
sixteen inequality restrictions in the Online Appendix. Here we report five of them that are
particularly intuitive:
                                                                                                
                                                                                   pj0p − pa0p       ≤ 0   (12a)
                                                                                              
                                                           pj0p − pa0p + pj0n − pa0n                 ≤ 0   (12b)
                                                                              
                              pj0p − pa0p + pj2n − pa2n + pj0n − pa0n + pj1n − pa1n                  ≤ 0   (12c)
                                                                              
                              pj0p − pa0p + pj2n − pa2n + pj0n − pa0n + pj2p − pa2p                  ≤ 0   (12d)
                                                                            
               pj0p − pa0p + pj2n − pa2n + pj0n − pa0n + pj2p − pa2p + pj1n − pa1n                   ≤ 0   (12e)

      These restrictions state that the JF reform must (weakly): lower the fraction of women
 21                                  9
      Here this means that π ∈ [0, 1] and π0r,1n + π0r,1r + π0r,2u + π0r,2n + π0r,0n ≤ 1.


                                                        28
on assistance and not working (12a), raise the fraction of women working (12b), raise the
fraction of women who work and receive assistance (12c), raise the fraction of women with
earnings in range 1 (12d), and raise the fraction of women who receive assistance and have
earnings in range 1 (12e).


                            G. Further Structuring Preferences
As an illustration of the identifying power of further structuring preferences, we also consider
the monetized form of the utility function given in (5). In the Online Appendix we show
that with this restricted specification, the choice of 0r under AFDC by woman i reveals
that her stigma cost φi is below the base grant amount Ḡi . This, in turn, implies that state
1n is dominated by state 1r under JF. Hence, no woman pairs state 0r under AFDC with
state 1n under JF. Accordingly, π0r,1n = 0 which reduces the number of unknown response
probabilities to eight. Imposing this restriction on system (11) reveals that the second
equation uniquely identifies the response probability π1n,1r . Intuitively, when π0r,1n = 0,
there is a “flow” into but no “flow” out of state 1n. Furthermore, this version of the model
implies that the JF reform must (weakly) reduce the fraction of working women off assistance
and earning in range 1, formally:
                                         pa1n − pj1n ≥ 0.                                   (13)


             VIII.         Bounds on Response Probabilities
Subject to the above restrictions holding, we can derive bounds on the nine response proba-
bilities that are set-identified in our baseline model. The upper and lower bounds on each of
the response probabilities correspond to vertices of the identified set Ξ. These vertices can
be represented as the solution to a pair of linear programming problems of the form:

                                      max π 0 λ subject to π ∈ Ξ                                       (14)
                                        π


where the layout of π was given in (10). For example, solving the above problem for λ =
[0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]0 yields the upper bound on π2n,1r , while choosing λ = [0, 0, −1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]0
yields the lower bound.




                                                    29
                                  A. Composite Margins
We can also use this representation to derive bounds on linear combinations of the response
probabilities. We consider the probabilities of adjusting along four “composite” margins:

                  π0r,n ≡ π0r,0n + π0r,2n + π0r,1n ,
                                 pa0p
                   πp,n ≡ a                  (π0r,0n + π0r,2n + π0r,1n ) ,
                          p0p + pa1p + pa2p
                          pa π0n,1r + π1n,1r pa1n + π2n,1r pa2n
                   πn,p ≡ 0n                                    ,
                                     pa0n + pa1n + pa2n
                          pa0p (π0r,1r + π0r,2n + π0r,2u + π0r,1n ) + pa0n π0n,1r
                  π0,1+ ≡                                                         .
                                                 pa0p + pa0n

The first composite response probability gives the fraction of women who would claim benefits
without working under AFDC that are induced to get off welfare under JF (denoted π0r,n ).
Upper and lower bounds for this response probability can be had by solving (14) with
λ = [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0] and [0, −1, 0, −1, 0, −1, 0, 0, 0] respectively. We also examine the
fraction of all women who would participate in welfare under AFDC that are induced to
leave welfare under JF (denoted πp,n ), the fraction of women who are induced to take up
welfare under JF (denoted πn,p ), and the fraction of women who are induced by JF to work
(denoted π0,1+ ). Because no woman who would work under AFDC will choose not to work
under JF, this last fraction is point identified by the proportional reduction in the fraction
of women not working under JF relative to AFDC.


                                 B. Analytic Expressions
It is useful for conducting inference to obtain analytic expressions for the bounds as a function
of the regime-specific marginal distributions (pa , pj ). We accomplished this by solving the
relevant linear programming problems by hand. The resulting expressions are listed in the
Online Appendix. An example is given by the bounds on the opt-in probability π2n,1r which




                                                 30
take the form:
                                                                                                                              
                                                   
                                                                                    1,                                        
                                                                                                                               
                                                                        (pa2n −pj2n )+(pa0p −pj0p )
                                                   
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                      ,
                                                   
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                     pa
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                     2n                                       
                                                                         j
                                                                               + p0p −pj0p + pa       j
                                                                                                                              
                                                   
                                                                ( pa
                                                                    2n −p2n   ) (  a
                                                                                          ) (    0n −p0n  )                    
                                                                                                                               
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                    pa
                                                                                                              ,                
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                     2n                                       
                                                                           j             j            j
                                                   
                                                                 ( pa        ) (  a
                                                                                          ) (    a
                                                                      2n −p2n + p0p −p0p + p2p −p2p       )                    
                                                                                                                               
          (                   )
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                     a
                                                                                     p2n
                                                                                                              ,                
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                               
                pa2n   pj2n
                                                                                                                              
                     −                             
                                                                 (  pa     j
                                                                              ) (  a     j
                                                                                          ) (    a
                                                                      2n −p2n + p0p −p0p + p1n −p1n
                                                                                                      j
                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                               
 max 0,                           ≤ π2n,1r ≤ min                                      a
                                                                                     p2n
                                                                                                              ,                    .
                    pa2n                                            j            j             j           j
                                                           ( pa       ) (    a
                                                                                    ) (    a
                                                                                                 ) (     a
                                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                                            
                                                               2n −p2n + p0p −p0p + p0n −p0n + p2p −p2p
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                      ,
                                                   
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                             
                                                   
                                                                                    pa
                                                                                      2n
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                             
                                                                    j            j            j            j
                                                                                                                            
                                                          ( pa       ) (    a
                                                                                    ) (    a
                                                                                                 ) (
                                                               2n −p2n + p0p −p0p + p0n −p0n + p1n −p1n
                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                  )          
                                                                                                                      ,
                                                   
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                             
                                                   
                                                                                     a
                                                                                     p2n
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                             
                                                                   j            j            j            j
                                                                                                                             
                                                   
                                                          ( pa       ) (    a
                                                                                    ) (    a
                                                                                                 ) (
                                                               2n −p2n + p0p −p0p + p2p −p2p + p1n −p1n
                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                  )          
                                                                                                                             
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                    pa
                                                                                                                      ,      
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                     2n                                     
                                                              j        a −pj        a −pj              j        j
                                                    ( pa  −p   ) (
                                                                  +  p        ) (
                                                                               +  p       ) (     a
                                                                                                          ) (a
                                                                                          0n + p2p −p2p + p1n −p1n         ) 
                                                   
                                                                                                                            
                                                        2n    2n       0p   0p      0n                                       
                                                                                       a
                                                                                     p2n
                                                                                        (15)
                                                                                                                          22
Note that there are two possible solutions for the lower bound, one of which is zero. This
turns out to be a generic feature of the lower bounds for each of the nine set-identified
response probabilities. Here, the lower bound reflects the model’s restriction that reform-
induced reductions in the fraction of women occupying state 2n can only be rationalized via
                                  pa −pj
opt-in behavior (when positive, 2npa 2n gives the proportional reduction in the fraction of
                                     2n
women choosing state 2n under JF relative to AFDC). The upper bound on π2n,1r admits
nine possible solutions, corresponding to settings where opt-in responses are accompanied by
other responses that move probability mass to state 1r. The upper bounds on the remaining
response probabilities can have fewer or more solutions.


                                       C. Estimation and Inference
Consistent estimators of the upper and lower bounds of interest can be had by using sample
analogs of the marginal probabilities and computing the relevant
                                                             n min    {.} oand max {.} expres-
                                                                         j
                                                                 p̂a −p̂
sions. For example, working off of equation (15), we use max 0, 2np̂a 2n as an estimator of
                                                                     2n
the lower bound for π2n,1r .
  22
    From (11), the fraction of people occupying state 2n under JF may differ from that under AFDC because
of an “in-flow” from state 0r (represented by pa0p π0r,2n ) or because of an “out-flow” to state 1r (represented
by −pa2n π2n,1r ). If pa2n − pj2n ≤ 0, the in-flow from state 0r must be at least as large as the out-flow to state
1r. But this latter quantity may be zero, in which case the lower bound on π2n,1r is zero. If pa2n − pj2n > 0,
the in-flow from state 0r can at most equal the out-flow to state 1r, in which case this latter quantity must
be at least pa2n − pj2n . Accordingly, the lower bound on π2n,1r is the π that solves pa2n − pj2n =pa2n π, namely
              j
       pa
        2n −p2n
π=        pa    .
           2n




                                                           31
    Inference is complicated by the fact that the limit distribution of the upper and lower
bounds depends upon uncertainty in which of the constraints in (14) bind – i.e. in which of
the bound solutions is relevant. As discussed by Andrews and Han (2009), bootstrapping
the empirical min {.} and max {.} of the sample analogues of the bound solutions will fail to
capture the sampling uncertainty in the bounds, particularly when many constraints are close
to binding. Several approaches to this problem have been proposed that involve conducting
pre-tests for which population constraints are binding (e.g. Andrews and Barwick, 2012).
We take an alternative approach to inference that is simple to implement, avoids the choice of
tuning parameters, and is consistent regardless of the constraints that bind. Specifically, we
report two sets of confidence intervals, one “naive” interval that will under-cover when many
constraints are close to binding and one “conservative” interval that will cover regardless of
which constraints bind (details on both are provided in the Online Appendix).
    The procedure for constructing the “naive” confidence interval ignores the uncertainty
in which constraints bind – that is, it assumes the bound solution that appears relevant
given the sample analogues binds with probability one. In such a case, results from Imbens
and Manski (2002) imply a pointwise 95% confidence interval for the parameter in question
can be constructed by extending the upper and lower bounds by 1.65b        σ where σb is a non-
parametric bootstrap estimate of the standard error of the sample moment used to define
the relevant bound. These confidence intervals will provide valid inferences only if no other
constraints are close to binding.
    Our second procedure, which is also based on the bootstrap, assumes that all bound solu-
tions are identical, in which case sampling uncertainty in all of the solution estimates affects
the composite bound. As we demonstrate in the Online Appendix, this procedure, which
can be thought of as an asymptotically conservative version of the method of Chernozhukov,
Lee, and Rosen (2013), covers the parameter under study with asymptotic probability greater
than or equal to 95% regardless of which solutions bind. The lower limit of the resulting
“conservative” confidence interval coincides with that of the naive confidence interval because
sampling uncertainty only affects one of the bound solutions in the max {.} operator. How-
ever, the upper limit of the conservative confidence interval generally exceeds that from the
naive confidence interval, often by a substantial amount. Hence, the conservative confidence
interval provides fully robust coverage, at the possible expense of reductions in asymptotic
power.




                                              32
                                           D. Panel Data
Thus far we have abstracted from the panel nature of our data and presumed access to only a
single cross-section of post-reform choices. In practice, we follow BGH (2006) in conducting a
pooled analysis using all person-quarter observations in the seven quarters following random
assignment. We treat all person-quarter observations as potentially separate decision-makers
in order to accommodate the likely possibility that the primitives θi governing a woman’s
behavior vary over time. For example, among women in the AFDC control group who chose
state 0r in the quarter prior to random assignment, more than 20% had switched states
by the first quarter after random assignment, which implies that either their preferences or
constraints must have changed.23 Without additional assumptions restricting this evolution,
our (static) model has no special implications for sequences of choices over time as opposed to
choices made by different women. However, the bootstrapping approach employed to obtain
confidence intervals for the bounds accounts for the fact that the observations contributed
by a woman over time may be dependent. Specifically, it resamples a woman’s entire profile
of choices made during the first 7 quarters after random assignment.


                                          IX.        Results
Table 4 reports the estimated probabilities of occupying the six observable earnings and
welfare participation states under each policy regime in the seven quarters after random
assignment.24 The sixteen testable restrictions of our baseline model, as well as the additional
restriction (13) associated with the monetized form of utility, are satisfied by the point
estimates. There is a small but statistically significant increase in the fraction of quarters on
welfare with earnings above the quarterly poverty line indicating that, on net, JF induced
more women to under-report earnings than it induced to truthfully report them.
    Table 5 provides estimates of the response probabilities that rationalize the impacts in
  23
      The details of this exercise are in Online Appendix Table A5 which provides the distribution of states
occupied in quarters 1 through 7 among the subsample of woman assigned to AFDC who chose state 0r in
the quarter prior to random assignment.
   24
      We discard from our sample all quarters in which a woman’s welfare participation status varies from
month to month as it would be impossible to infer reliably whether such a women earned above the poverty
line in the months when she was on welfare. This selection could confound the experimental impacts reported
in Table 4 if the experiment influenced the probability of selection. However, we find that after adjusting
for baseline covariates via a linear probability model, the frequency of these “mixed” quarters is roughly the
same in the AFDC and JF groups: the estimated impact of JF on the probability of a quarter being mixed
is 0.0063 (se=0.0034). Hence, we interpret the impacts reported in Table 4 as average treatment effects on
“unmixed” quarters.


                                                     33
Table 4. Panel (a) of the Table reports estimates obtained under the general specification
of preferences given in (4), while panel (b) reports estimates obtained under the monetized
specification of preferences given in (5).
     Starting with panel (a), our most important finding is that the JF reform induced a
substantial opt-in response among women who would have otherwise worked off welfare at
earning levels above the poverty line. The estimated bounds imply that π2n,1r ≥ .28. That
is, at least 28% of those women with ineligible earnings under AFDC decided to work at
eligible levels under JF and participate in welfare – an intensive margin labor supply response.
Accounting for sampling uncertainty in the bounds extends this lower limit to 20%, which is
still quite substantial. The upper bounds for this parameter are not informative leading us
to conclude that the interval [.20, 1] covers the true opt-in probability with 95% probability.
We also find suggestive evidence of a second opt-in effect from non-participation, this time
entailing an extensive margin labor supply response. Specifically, the sample bounds imply
π0n,1r ∈ [.06, .62]. However, uncertainty in the bounds prevents us from rejecting the null
that this response probability is actually zero.
     We find a small but significant under-reporting response attributable to the hassle effects
of JF. A conservative 95% confidence interval for π0r,2u is [.02, .10]. Thus, JF induced at
least one sub-population to under-report earnings. The finding that both π0r,2u and π2n,1r
are significantly positive indicates that earnings rank reversals occurred in response to reform.
JF also had a strong effect on entry into the program by the working poor. The bootstrap
confidence interval for π1n,1r indicates that at least 32% of the women who would have worked
off welfare under AFDC at earnings levels below the poverty line were induced to participate
in JF at eligible earning levels.
     The remaining response probabilities (π0r,0n , π0r,2n , π0r,1n , π0r,1r , π2u,1r ) each have zero
lower bounds. However, we can reject the null that they are jointly zero. From (11) such
a joint restriction implies pj0p − pa0p = − pj2p − pa2p , which is easily rejected in our data.
                                                         

Thus, at least some of these margins of adjustment are present. Among the probabilities in
question, the candidate that seems most likely to be positive is π0r,1r which is the extensive
margin response through which welfare reform has traditionally been assumed to operate.
     The last four rows of panel (a) in Table 5 report the estimated bounds, and correspond-
ing confidence intervals, for the composite margins described in Section VII. First is the
probability π0,1+ that a woman responds along the extensive margin from non-work to work.
A 95% confidence interval for this probability is [0.14, 0.20]. Thus, JF induced a substantial
fraction of women who would not have worked under AFDC to obtain employment under


                                                 34
JF.
    The confidence interval on the fraction πn,p of women induced to take up welfare by JF
is relatively tight. Although JF unambiguously increased the fraction of women on welfare,
our model suggests some women may also have been induced to leave welfare, breaking point
identification of this margin. According to our conservative inference procedure, at least 19%
(and at most 49%) of women off welfare under AFDC were induced to claim benefits under
JF. Conversely, the fraction πp,n of women induced by JF to leave welfare is estimated to be
at most 15%.
    Finally, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that JF failed to induce any of the women
who would have not worked while claiming AFDC benefits to leave welfare under JF, as
the lower bound for the response probability π0r,n is zero. We are however able to conclude
that at most 21% of such women left welfare, which may limit concerns that the JF reforms
pushed a large fraction of women potentially unable to work off assistance.
    Consider now panel (b), which reports results when utility is assumed to be of the mon-
etized form given in (5). Here, the response probability π0r,1n is constrained to equal zero
which renders π1n,1r point identified. According to these estimates, the JF reform had a
strong effect on entry into the program by the working poor. The bootstrap confidence in-
terval for π1n,1r indicates that between 31% and 46% of the women who would have worked
off welfare under AFDC at earnings levels below the poverty line were induced to participate
in JF at eligible earning levels. The estimates of the remaining response probabilities and
composite margins are omitted because they are the same as in panel (a).25


                                      X.       Robustness
We now discuss some potential extensions and issues which may affect the interpretation of
our results.


                                  A. Finer Earnings Ranges
The above analysis was predicated on the coarsening of earnings dictated in (7). This
coarsening scheme is “natural” in the sense that the JF reform changed the utility of all
the alternatives corresponding to each of the earning ranges in (7) in the same direction.
Nevertheless, it can be of interest to consider finer coarsenings of earnings. For instance, our
  25
     Although the expressions for the bounds differ depending on whether the utility function obeys (4) or
(5), the solutions that bind in the data are the same. This is because inequality (13) holds in the sample.


                                                    35
finding in Table 5 of a significant opt-in response could hypothetically reflect trivial earnings
reductions from a dollar above the poverty line to exactly the poverty line. To assess such
possibilities, consider the following finer coarsening of earnings obtained by partitioning
range 2 into two sub-ranges:
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                     0       if E = 0
                                    
                                    
                                              if E ≤ F P Li
                                    
                                    1
                               Ei ≡
                               e                                                .                          (16)
                                    
                                    
                                     20      if E ∈ (F P Li , 1.2 × F P Li ]
                                    
                                    
                                    200
                                    
                                              if E > 1.2 × F P Li

    In the Online Appendix, we derive bounds on the response probabilities π20 n,1r and π200 n,1r
which correspond to the fraction of women in earnings ranges 20 and 200 who opt-in to assis-
tance by reducing their earnings. These bounds exploit the fact that, by revealed preference,
no woman will pair state 20 u under AFDC with state 200 u under JF. Likewise, no woman will
pair state 20 n under AFDC with state 200 n under JF.
    Implementing these formulas, we find that at least 27% of women who would work off
assistance in earnings range 200 under AFDC reduced their earnings below the poverty line
in response to the JF reform. Accounting for sampling uncertainty yields a lower limit on
a 95% confidence interval for π200 ,1r of 0.17. Hence, the evidence is strong that some large
earnings reductions occurred in response to the JF reform. We also find that at least 31%
of women who would work off assistance in earnings range 20 under AFDC reduced their
earnings below the poverty line in response to reform. The lower limit of the confidence
interval for π20 n,1r is 0.19, which indicates that some opt-in responses also took place from
earnings ranges closer to the poverty line.26
    It is also possible to partition range 1 into two or more sub-ranges. We have experimented
with such extensions but found that they fail to offer additional insights regarding the effects
of the JF reform.27
  26
     Note that some of the responses involving reductions from earnings range 20 to range 1 could be larger
than those from earnings range 200 to range 1 since we don’t know which earnings level in range 1 is being
selected. The upper bounds on these response probabilities are uninformative.
  27
     There are good reasons for this. Recall that the theory does not constrain the sign of the labor supply
responses that occur within range 1. This theoretical indeterminacy persists if range 1 is partitioned into sub-
ranges and prevents identification of the magnitude of these allowed intensive margin responses. Additionally,
the possibility of under-reporting limits the utility of revealed preference arguments because states 1u and
1r are not empirically distinguishable. This prevents identification of the magnitude of any responses to the
reform entailing adjustments in reporting behavior within range 1.




                                                      36
                                  B. A Test for Anticipation
As mentioned in Section IV, the JF time limits create incentives for a risk averse woman to
save months of welfare eligibility for later periods when her earnings may be lower (e.g. due
to job loss). Thus, under some conditions, JF may actually make working on welfare less
attractive, as this choice requires sacrificing the option value of using welfare an additional
month in the future. This could, in turn, lead to a violation of our model’s static revealed
preference restrictions.
    Following Grogger and Michalopolous (2003), we conduct a simple test for whether the
JF time limits in fact yielded anticipatory effects. Our test compares the impact of reform on
the welfare use of women who at baseline had a youngest child age 16-17 (for whom the time
limits were irrelevant) to impacts on the welfare use of women who had younger children.
As shown in Table 6, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the average impact of JF on
monthly welfare take-up is the same for both groups of women. In fact, our point estimates
suggest that the response of women with younger children to reform was actually slightly
greater than the response of women with children ages 16-17, which is the opposite of what
anticipatory behavior would suggest. While this finding does not prove that the women in
our sample were myopic, it does suggest that anticipatory responses to the time limits were
probably small.28


                                     XI.        Conclusion
Our analysis of the Jobs First experiment suggests that women responded to the policy in-
centives of welfare reform along several margins, some of which entail an intensive margin
and some of which entail an extensive margin labor supply response. This finding is in accord
with BGH’s original interpretation of the JF experiment and with recent evidence from Blun-
dell, Bozio, and Laroque (2011a,b) who find that secular trends in aggregate hours worked
  28
     Grogger and Michalopolous (2003) rely on data from a randomized welfare reform where the experi-
mental group was exposed to a twenty four month time limit (or a thirty six month limit if particularly
disadvantaged). JF’s more stringent twenty one month time limit might be expected to produce a larger
anticipatory response than found by Grogger and Michalopoulus. It does not. One possible explanation for
this discrepancy is that, as mentioned in Section I, a large fraction of JF experimental units were exempted
from time limits, and a large fraction of the non-exempted units were granted six month extensions. Bloom
et al. (2002, p.59) report that “written material produced by the DSS explicitly stated that extensions
would be possible.” Also, “staff reported that many recipients were initially skeptical that the time limit
would be implemented (in fact, many staff said that they themselves were skeptical).” Based on the Interim
Client Survey, it appears that “from the beginning, most recipients understood that the time limit would
not necessarily result in cancellation of their welfare grant.”


                                                    37
appear to be driven by both intensive and extensive margin adjustments. Our conclusions
are also qualitatively consistent with recent studies relying on dynamic parametrically struc-
tured labor supply models (e.g., Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten, 2012; Blundell et
al., 2013).
     An important question is the extent to which our finding of intensive margin responsive-
ness might generalize to other transfer programs that lack sharp budget notches but still
involve phase-out regions that should discourage work. It seems plausible that the JF notch
would yield larger disincentive effects than, say, the budget kink induced by the EITC phase-
out region. However, BGH (2008) show that experimental responses to a Canadian reform
inducing such a gradual benefit phaseout generated a pattern of earnings QTEs similar to
that found in the JF experiment. More conclusive evidence on this question may be had via
an application of the methods developed here to other policy reforms.
     Though we studied a randomized experiment, our approach is easily adapted to quasi-
experimental settings. Estimates of the relevant counterfactual choice probabilities can be
formed using one’s research design of choice (e.g., a difference in differences design), subject
to the usual caveat that different designs may identify counterfactuals for different treated
sub-populations.29 With the two sets of marginal choice probabilities, bounds on response
probabilities can then be had by a direct application of the methods developed in this paper.
     A potentially fruitful avenue for future research is to consider the application of revealed
preference arguments to dynamic models. Alternatives in such models consist of sequences of
possible choices, which significantly enlarges the space of potential responses that can occur.
However, explicitly dynamic models also provide additional opportunities to incorporate
plausible non-parametric restrictions (e.g., stationary and time-separable preferences) that
may yield interesting empirical predictions.
     Finally, it is worth noting that decision-makers have sometimes been found to violate
revealed preference restrictions empirically (e.g., Choi et al., 2014). An interesting question
for future research is whether comparably informative non-parametric restrictions can be
derived from behavioral models designed to explain systematic deviations from rationality.

                                             References
   Andrews, Donald and Panle Jia Barwick. 2012. “Inference for Parameters Defined by
Moment Inequalities: A Recommended Moment Selection Procedure.” Econometrica 80(6):
2805-2826.
  29
    For example, if one uses an instrumental variables design, counterfactuals are, under weak assumptions,
identified only for the sub-population of “compliers” (Imbens and Rubin, 1997).

                                                    38
   Andrews, Donald and S. Han. 2009. “Invalidity of the Bootstrap and m Out of n
Bootstrap for Interval Endpoints Defined by Moment Inequalities.” Econometrics Journal
12(s1): S172-S199.
   Altonji, Joseph G. and Christina H. Paxson. 1992. “Labor Supply, Hours Constraints,
and Job Mobility,” Journal of Human Resources, 27(2): 256-278.
   Ashenfelter, Orley. 1983. “Determining Participation in Income-Tested Social Pro-
grams.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 78(383):517-525.
   Barrett, Garry F. and Stephen G. Donald. 2003. “Consistent Tests for Stochastic Dom-
inance.” Econometrica 71(1):71-104.
   Beffy, Magali, Richard Blundell, Antoine Bozio, and Guy Laroque. 2014. “Labour supply
and taxation with restricted choices.” Working paper.
   Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes. 2005. “Distributional Impacts of
the Self-Sufficiency Project.” NBER Working Paper #11626.
   Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes. 2006. “What Mean Impacts Miss:
Distributional Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments.” American Economic Review 96(4):
988-1012.
   Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes. 2008. “Distributional Impacts of
the Self-Sufficiency Project.” Journal of Public Economics, 92(3): 748-765.
   Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes. 2014. “Can Variation in Sub-
groups’ Average Treatment Effects Explain Treatment Effect Heterogeneity? Evidence from
a Social Experiment.” NBER Working Paper #20142.
   Bloom, Dan, Susan Scrivener, Charles Michalopoulos, Pamela Morris, Richard Hendra,
Diana Adams-Ciardullo, Johanna Walter, and Wanda Vargas. 2002. Jobs First: Final
Report on Connecticut’s Welfare Reform Initiative. New York: Manpower Demonstration
Research Corporation.
   Blundell, Richard and Thomas Macurdy. 1999. “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David
Card, pp.1559-1695. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
   Blundell, Richard, Antoine Bozio, and Guy Laroque. 2011a. “Extensive and Intensive
Margins of Labour Supply: Working Hours in the US, UK and France.” IZA Discussion
Paper #6051.
   Blundell, Richard, Antoine Bozio, and Guy Laroque. 2011b. “Labour Supply and the
Extensive Margin.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 101(3): 482-486.
   Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. 2012. “Consumption In-


                                          39
equality and Family Labor Supply.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
   Blundell, Richard, Monica Costas Dias, Costas Meghir, and Jonathan Shaw. 2013. “Fe-
male Labor Supply, Human Capital, and Welfare Reform.” NBER Working Paper #19007.
   Blomquist, Soren, Anil Kumar, Che-Yuan Liang, and Whitney K. Newey. 2014. “Indi-
vidual Heterogeneity, Nonlinear Budget Sets, and Taxable Income.” Working paper.
   Burtless, Gary and Jerry Hausman. 1978. “The Effect of Taxation on Labor Supply:
Evaluating the Gary Negative Income Tax Experiment.” The Journal of Political Economy
86(6):1103-1130.
   Card, David and Dean Hyslop. 2005. “Estimating the Effects of a Time-Limited Earnings
Subsidy for Welfare-Leavers.” Econometrica, 73(6): 1723-1770.
   Chan, Marc. K. 2013. “A Dynamic Model of Welfare Reform.” Econometrica, 81(3):
941-1001.
   Chernozhukov, Victor, Sokbae Lee, and Adam Rosen. 2013. “Intersection bounds: esti-
mation and inference.” Econometrica, 81(2), 667-737.
   Chetty, Raj. 2012. “Bounds on Elasticities With Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of
Micro and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica, 80(3):969-1018.
   Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber. 2011a. “Are Micro and
Macro Labor Supply Elasticities Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive and
Extensive Margins.” American Economic Review 101(3): 471-475.
   Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011b. “Adjustment
Costs, Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence From
Danish Tax Records.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2): 749-804.
   Choi, Syngjoo, Shachar Kariv, Wieland Müller, and Dan Silverman. 2014. “Who is
(more) rational?” American Economic Review, 104(6), 1518-1550.
   Cogan, John. 1981. “Fixed Costs and Labor Supply.” Econometrica 49 (4): 945–63.
   Couch, Kenneth A. 2014. “Experimental Evidence of Welfare Reform on Employment
and Earnings.” Working paper.
   Diamond, Peter. 1980. “Income Taxation with Fixed Hours of Work.” Journal of Public
Economics 13(1): 101-110.
   Dickens, William T & Lundberg, Shelly J. 1993. “Hours Restrictions and Labor Supply,”
International Economic Review, 34(1): 169-92, February.
   Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned
Income Tax Credit.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 605-37.
   Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Hoynes. 2006. “The Hours of Work Response of Married Couples:


                                           40
Taxes and the Earned Income Tax Credit.” In Tax Policy and Labor Market Performance,
ed. Jonas Agell and Peter Birch Sorensen, pp.187-227. Cambridge: MIT Press.
    Grogger, Jeffrey and Charles Michalopoulos. 2003. “Welfare Dynamics under Time
Limits.” Journal of Political Economy 111(3): 530-554.
    Grogger, Jeffrey and Lynn Karoly. 2005. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
    Hansen, Gary D. 1985. “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 16:309-327.
    Heckman, James, Jeffrey Smith, and Nancy Clements. 1997. “Making the Most Out
of Programme Evaluations and Social Experiments: Accounting for Heterogeneity in Pro-
gramme Impacts.” Review of Economic Studies 64(4): 487-535.
    Heckman, James J. 1983. “Comment.” In Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy
Analysis, ed. Martin Feldstein, 70–82. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
    Heckman, James. 1993. “What Has Been Learned About Labor Supply in the Last 20
Years?” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 83(2): 116-121.
    Hotz, Joseph , Charles Mullin, and Karl Scholz. 2003. “The Effects of Welfare Reform
on Employment and Income: Evidence from California.” Working paper.
    Hoynes, Hilary. 1996. “Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families: Labor Supply and
Welfare Participation Under AFDC-UP.” Econometrica 64(2): 295-332.
    Imbens, Guido and Donald Rubin. 1997. “Estimating Outcome Distributions for Com-
pliers in Instrumental Variables Models.” Review of Economic Studies 64(4): 555-574.
    Imbens, Guido and Charles F. Manski. 2004. “Confidence Intervals for Partially Identi-
fied Parameters.” Econometrica, 72(6): 1845-1857.
    Keane, Michael P. and Robert Moffitt. 1998. “A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare
Program Participation and Labor Supply.” International Economic Review, 39(3): 553-89.
    Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2002. “Estimating Welfare Effects Consistent
with Forward Looking Behavior, Part II: Empirical Results.” Journal of Human Resources,
37(3): 600-622.
    Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2007. “Exploring The Usefulness Of A
Nonrandom Holdout Sample For Model Validation: Welfare Effects On Female Behavior.”
International Economic Review, 48(4): 1351-1378.
    Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2010. “The Role Of Labor And Marriage
Markets, Preference Heterogeneity, And The Welfare System In The Life Cycle Decisions Of
Black, Hispanic, And White Women.” International Economic Review, 51(3): 851-892.


                                           41
    Kleven, Henrik and Mazhar Waseem. 2013. “Using Notches to Uncover Optimization
Frictions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics, 128(2), 669-723.
    Laroque, Guy. 2005. “Income Maintenance and Labor Force Participation.” Economet-
rica 73(2): 341-376.
    Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas Sargent. 2011. “A Labor Supply Elasticity Accord?”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 101(3): 487-491.
    MaCurdy, Thomas, David Green, and Harry Paarsch. 1990. “Assessing Empirical Ap-
proaches for Analyzing Taxes and Labor Supply.” Journal of Human Resources 25(3): 415-
490.
    Manski, Charles F. 2014. “Identification of income–leisure preferences and evaluation of
income tax policy.” Quantitative Economics, 5(1): 145-174.
    Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3): 1063-1114.
    Meyer, Bruce. 2002. “Labor Supply at the Intensive and Extensive Margins: the EITC,
Welfare, and Hours Worked.” American Economic Review 92(2): 373-379.
    Moffitt, Robert. 1983. “An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma.” The American Eco-
nomic Review 73(5): 1023-1035.
    Moffitt, Robert. 1990. “The Econometrics of Kinked Budget Constraints.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 4(2): 119-139.
    Moffitt, Robert. 2002. “Welfare Programs and Labor Supply.” In Handbook of Public
Economics. Vol. 4, ed. Alan J. Auerbach and Martin S. Feldstein, 2393-2430. New York:
North-Holland.
    Roy, A.D. 1951. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic
Papers, 3:145-146.
    Rogerson, Richard. 1988. “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries, and Equilibrium.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 21:3-16.
    Saez, Emmanuel. 2002. “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive
Labor Supply Responses.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(3): 1039-1073.
    Saez, Emmanuel. 2010. “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy 2(3): 180-212.
    Slemrod, Joel. 2010. “Buenas Notches: Lines and Notches in Tax System Design.”
Working paper.
    Swann, Christopher. A. 2005. “Welfare reform when recipients are forward-looking.”


                                            42
Journal of Human Resources, 40(1): 31-56.




                                            43
                                                  Table 1: Summary of Differences Between Status Quo and Jobs First Policy Regimes
                                                                                  Jobs First                                                                             Status Quo
Welfare:
      Name of Program                                            Temporary Family Assistance (JF‐TFA)                                              Aid for Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)
                                                                                                                                                    Earnings level at which benefits are exhausted
        Eligibility                                                    Earnings Below Poverty Line
                                                                                                                                                          (see disregard parameters below)
        Earnings Disregards:
           Fixed                                                                     n.a.                                                    $120 /mo. (first 12 months of work), $90 /mo. (afterwards)
           Proportional                                                             100%                                                          51% (first 4 months of work), 27% (afterwards)
        Time Limit                                                               21 months                                                                                   None

        Work Requirements                         Mandatory work first employment services (exempt if child <1)                                         Education / training (exempt if child < 2)

        Other Features:
                                                 Grant reduced by 20%, 35%, or 100% depending on the infraction                        Grant reduced to reflect removal of adult from assistance unit; rarely
             Sanctions
                                                       (1st, 2nd, or 3rd) for 3 months; moderately enforced                                                         enforced
             Asset Limit                                                        $3,000                                                                                 $1,000
             Family Cap                                                        $50 /mo.                                                                              $100 /mo.
             Transitional Medicaid                                              2 years                                                                                1 year
             Transitional Child Care                   Indefinitely as long as income is <75% of state median                                    1 year as long as income is <75% of state median
             Child Support                                    $100 /mo. disregarded; full pass‐through                                        $50 /mo. disregarded; $50 /mo. maximum pass‐through

Food Stamps (if joint with welfare):
       Earnings Disregards:
          Fixed                                                                    n.a                                                                                   n.a.
          Proportional                                                  100% of earnings up to FPL                                                   76% of earnings up to the eligibility threshold
Notes: The left panel of the table, titled “Jobs First”, pertains to the experimental policy regime while the right panel, titled “Status Quo”, pertains to the control policy regime. The top panel of the table, titled
“Welfare”, reports on the rules of the regime‐specific welfare policy while the bottom panel, titled “Food Stamps”, reports on the rules of the regime‐specific Foods Stamps program when taken up jointly with
welfare assistance (as a stand‐alone program Foods Stamps is the same under both policy regimes). Specifically, “Welfare” is the "family group" variant of welfare assistance considered in the JF experiment
called, respectively, AFDC under the status quo and JF‐TFA under Jobs First. Categorical eligibility for both AFDC and JF‐TFA requires the presence of children below the age of 18 (19 if enrolled in high school)
or of a pregnant woman. CT’s implementation of AFDC reflects the “fill‐the‐gap” provision whereby the effective implicit tax rate on earnings is always less than 100%. Specifically, “fill‐the‐gap” budgeting
lowers the implicit AFDC tax rate on earnings by a factor of .73. For example, in the first four months of employment while on AFDC the usual tax rate would be 2/3rds (as part of the so called “$30 + 1/3
policy”) but in CT it is .73 × (1‐1/3) × 100=49%, hence a proportional disregard of 51% ensues. From the 5th month forward the usual tax rate would be 100% but in CT it is .73 × (1‐0) × 100=73%, hence a
proportional disregard of 27% ensues. Certain families, such as those in which the parent is incapacitated, are exempt from the Job First time limits. In addition, JF‐TFA recipients who reach the 21 month time
limit may receive renewable six‐month extensions of their benefits if they have made a good‐faith effort to find employment. Both AFDC and JF‐TFA impose work requirements. Unless they are exempt, JF‐TFA
recipients are required to look for a job, either on their own or through Job Search Skills Training courses that teach job‐seeking skills. Education and training are generally restricted to those who were unable
to find a job despite lengthy up‐front job search activities. Job Connection, the state’s Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training program under AFDC, served a small proportion of the total welfare caseload in
any month, and a large proportion of those who participated were in education and training activities. Under both AFDC and JF‐TFA, sanctions are imposed for failure to comply with employment‐related
mandates (work‐requirements). Sanctions entail grant reductions that become more severe as the recipient accumulates instances of non‐compliance. During the study period, a JF‐TFA recipient’s cash grant
was reduced by 20% for three months in response to the first instance of noncompliance and by 35% for three months in response to the second instance. A third instance resulted in cancellation of the entire
grant for three months. Under AFDC, a sanction removed the noncompliant individual from the grant. “Full pass‐through” of child support means that under JF‐TFA all child support collected on behalf of
children receiving assistance is given directly to the custodial parent. Under AFDC, when child support was collected, the welfare recipient received a check for the first $50 that was collected each month (or
less than $50 if less was collected), in addition to her regular welfare check. A "family cap" is a cap on the benefit increase for children conceived while the mother receives welfare. “Transitional Medicaid
assistance” is Medicaid assistance for families leaving welfare for work. “Transitional child care assistance” is child care assistance (subsidies) for families leaving welfare for work. AFDC and JF‐TFA differ in the
duration of the assistance, not in its nature or generosity. Because cash assistance recipients are categorically eligible for Food Stamps (FS), the asset and earned income rules effectively apply to FS eligibility
while a family receives welfare. In particular, Job First's enhanced earning disregard applies to the FS grant calculation so that all earnings below the poverty line are disregarded. When JF‐TFA recipients lose
their welfare grant, they also lose the enhanced FS earned income disregard.
                                                                         Table 2: Mean Sample Characteristics
                                                        Overall Sample                                  Zero Earnings Q7 pre‐RA                              Positive Earnings Q7 pre‐RA
                                                                          Difference                                          Difference                                              Difference
                                         Jobs First   AFDC     Difference                     Jobs First AFDC Difference                             Jobs First AFDC Difference
                                                                          (adjusted)                                          (adjusted)                                              (adjusted)
Demographic Characteristics
White                                      0.374      0.360      0.014       0.001              0.340     0.331       0.009       ‐0.001              0.453      0.421      0.032        0.003
Black                                      0.380      0.384     ‐0.004       0.000              0.370     0.360       0.010        0.001              0.404      0.435     ‐0.031       ‐0.002
Hispanic                                   0.214      0.224     ‐0.010      ‐0.001              0.258     0.275      ‐0.017        0.000              0.110      0.117     ‐0.007       ‐0.002
Never married                              0.654      0.661     ‐0.007       0.000              0.658     0.654       0.003        0.000              0.645      0.674     ‐0.029        0.000
Div/wid/sep/living apart                   0.332      0.327      0.005       0.000              0.327     0.334      ‐0.007        0.000              0.345      0.312      0.032        0.000
HS dropout                                 0.350      0.334      0.017       0.000              0.390     0.394      ‐0.004        0.000              0.257      0.209      0.048        0.000
HS diploma/GED                             0.583      0.604     ‐0.021       0.000              0.550     0.555      ‐0.005       ‐0.001              0.661      0.706     ‐0.045        0.001
More than HS diploma                       0.066      0.062      0.004       0.000              0.060     0.051       0.009        0.000              0.082      0.085     ‐0.003       ‐0.001
More than 2 Children                       0.235      0.214      0.021       0.000              0.260     0.250       0.010        0.000              0.176      0.139      0.037        0.001
Mother younger than 25                     0.287      0.298     ‐0.011      ‐0.003              0.287     0.268       0.019       ‐0.001              0.288      0.361     ‐0.074        0.000
Mother age 25‐34                           0.412      0.414     ‐0.003       0.005              0.410     0.419      ‐0.009        0.000              0.416      0.405      0.010        0.000
Mother older than 34                       0.301      0.287      0.014      ‐0.002              0.303     0.313      ‐0.010        0.001              0.297      0.233      0.063        0.000

Average quarterly pretreatment values
Earnings                                    673         750      ‐76*          4                 174       185         ‐11           2                 1856      1935        ‐79          11
                                          [1306]      [1379]     (40)         (6)               [465]     [479]       (17)          (4)               [1802]    [1828]      (99)         (21)
Cash welfare                                903         845      58**          ‐1               1050      1022         28            0                  555       475       80**           ‐4
                                           [805]       [784]     (23)         (2)               [811]     [799]       (28)          (3)                [677]     [602]      (35)          (7)
Food stamps                                 356         344       12           0                 399       398          1            1                  253       230        23            ‐2
                                           [320]       [304]      (9)         (1)               [326]     [310]       (11)          (1)                [282]     [256]      (15)          (4)
Fraction of pretreatment quarters with
Any earnings                               0.319       0.347 ‐0.029***       0.000              0.137     0.143     ‐0.007        0.000                0.751     0.776    ‐0.025*        0.000
                                          [0.361]     [0.370] (0.011)       (0.001)            [0.211]   [0.215]    (0.008)      (0.001)              [0.262]   [0.239]   (0.014)       (0.002)
Any welfare assistance                     0.581       0.551   0.030*       ‐0.001              0.650     0.636      0.014        0.000                0.418     0.373     0.045*       ‐0.002
                                          [0.451]     [0.449] (0.013)       (0.001)            [0.439]   [0.439]    (0.015)      (0.001)              [0.438]   [0.416]   (0.023)       (0.004)
Any Food Stamp assistance                  0.613       0.605   0.008         0.000              0.670     0.674     ‐0.004        0.001                0.480     0.460     0.020        ‐0.003
                                          [0.437]     [0.431] (0.012)       (0.001)            [0.427]   [0.421]    (0.015)      (0.001)              [0.433]   [0.418]   (0.023)       (0.004)
# of cases                                 2,318       2,324                                    1,630     1,574                                         688       750



Notes: Sample units missing baseline data on number of children (kidcount) are excluded. The included units are organized into the following sub‐samples: “Overall Sample / Jobs First”
refers to units in the experimental sample, “Overall Sample / AFDC” refers to units in the control sample, “Zero Earnings Q7 pre‐RA / Jobs First” refers to units in the experimental sample
that have zero earnings in the seventh quarter prior to random assignment (RA), “Zero Earnings Q7 pre‐RA / AFDC” refers to units in the control sample that have zero earnings in the seventh
quarter prior to RA, “Positive Earnings Q7 pre‐RA / Jobs First” refers to units in the experimental sample that have positive earnings in the seventh quarter prior to RA, and “Positive Earnings
Q7 pre‐RA / AFDC” refers to units in the control sample that have positive earnings in the seventh quarter prior to RA. Adjusted differences are computed via propensity score reweighting.
Numbers in brackets are standard deviations and numbers in parentheses are standard errors calculated via 1,000 block bootstrap replications (resampling at case level). ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1‐percent, 5‐percent, and 10‐percent levels, respectively (significance indicators provided only for difference estimates).
                                                                                Table 3: Allowed and Disallowed Responses


                                                                                                     State under Jobs First
 State
 under                  0n                           1n                            2n                             0r                            1r                           1u                            2u
 AFDC

                                                                                                                                          Extensive LS (+)
   0n              No Response                       —                             —                             —                       Take Up Welfare                     —                             —
                                                                                                                                       Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
   1n                  —                         No Response                       —                             —                      Take Up Welfare                      —                             —
                                                                                                                                          Intensive LS (‐)
   2n                  —                             —                         No Response                       —                       Take Up Welfare
                                                                                                                                            (Figure 5 b)
                                                                                                                                                                             —                             —
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Extensive LS (+)
                 No LS Response                 Extensive LS (+)             Extensive LS (+)                                            Extensive LS (+)
   0r             Exit Welfare                   Exit Welfare                 Exit Welfare
                                                                                                             No Response
                                                                                                                                           (Figure 5 a)                      —                       Under‐reporting
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (Figure 6 b)


   1r                  —                             —                             —                             —                     Intensive LS (+/0/‐)                  —                             —
                                                                                                                                       Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
   1u                  —                             —                             —                             —                     Truthful Reporting                    —                             —
                                                                                                                                          Intensive LS (‐)
   2u                  —                             —                             —                             —                      Truthful Reporting
                                                                                                                                            (Figure 6 a)
                                                                                                                                                                             —                        No Response




Notes: This table catalogues the theoretically allowed response margins given the states that a woman may occupy under AFDC and Jobs First. A state is a pair of coarsened earnings (0 stands for zero earnings, 1 for
positive earnings at or below the FPL, and 2 for earnings strictly above the FPL), and participation status in the relevant welfare assistance program along with an earnings reporting decision (n stands for “not on
assistance”, r for “on assistance and truthfully reporting earnings”, and u for “on assistance and under‐reporting earnings”). The cells termed “no response” entail the same behavior under the two policy regimes.
The cells containing a “—” represent responses that are not allowed based on revealed preference arguments derived from the model of Section IV. Specifically, (a) state 1u is unpopulated under JF (“—” in cells
with a horizontally striped background fill) and (b) a woman will not leave a state at least as attractive under JF as under AFDC for a state that is no more attractive under JF than under AFDC (“—” in cells with a solid
greyed‐out background fill). The remaining cells represent responses that are allowed by the model. Their content summarizes the three possible sorts of responses: (a) the labor supply “LS” response (intensive
versus extensive and its sign: “+” for increase, “0” for no change, and “‐” for decrease), (b) the program participation response (take up of versus exit from welfare assistance), and (c) the reporting of earnings to the
welfare agency margin (to truthfully report versus to under‐report). See Online Appendix for details.
                      Table 4: Probability of Earnings / Participation States
                                                Overall                               Overall ‐ Adjusted
                                 Jobs First      AFDC        Difference     Jobs First     AFDC        Difference
Pr(State=0n)                       0.127         0.136         ‐0.009         0.128        0.135          ‐0.007
                                                                             (0.005)      (0.006)        (0.008)
Pr(State=1n)                       0.076         0.130         ‐0.055         0.078        0.126          ‐0.048
                                                                             (0.004)      (0.005)        (0.006)
Pr(State=2n)                       0.068         0.099         ‐0.031         0.069        0.096          ‐0.027
                                                                             (0.004)      (0.005)        (0.006)
Pr(State=0p)                       0.366         0.440         ‐0.074         0.359        0.449          ‐0.090
                                                                             (0.008)      (0.008)        (0.010)
Pr(State=1p)                       0.342         0.185         0.157          0.343        0.184           0.159
                                                                             (0.007)      (0.005)        (0.009)
Pr(State=2p)                       0.022         0.009         0.013          0.023        0.009           0.014
                                                                             (0.002)      (0.001)        (0.002)

# of quarterly observations         16,226        16,268                      16,226        16,268
Notes: Sample covers quarters 1‐7 post‐random assignment during which individual is either always on or always
off welfare. Sample cases with kidcount missing are excluded. Number of state refers to earnings level, with 0
indicating no earnings, 1 indicating earnings below 3 times the monthly FPL, and 2 indicating earnings above 3FPL.
The letter "n" indicates welfare nonparticipation throughout the quarter while the letter "p" indicates welfare
participation throughout the quarter. Poverty line computed under assumption Assistance Unit size is one greater
than amount implied by baseline kidcount variable. Adjusted probabilities are computed via propensity score
reweighting. Standard errors computed using 1,000 block bootstrap replications (resampling at case level).
                                                        Table 5: Point and Set‐identified Response Probabilities

                                     State Occupied under                                                            (a) General Specification of Preferences
  Response                                                                                                                       Standard          95% CI                  95% CI
                                  AFDC                       JF                                Symbol            Estimate
    Type                                                                                                                           Error           (naive)              (conservative)

                                   0n                        1r                                π0n,1r         {0.055, 0.620}                     [0.000, 0.739]          [0.000, 0.775]
                                   1n                        1r                                π1n,1r         {0.382, 0.987}                     [0.317, 1.000]          [0.317, 1.000]
                                   2n                        1r                                π2n,1r         {0.280, 1.000}                     [0.198, 1.000]          [0.198, 1.000]
                                    0r                       0n                                π0r,0n         {0.000, 0.170}                     [0.000, 0.205]          [0.000, 0.216]
   Detailed                         "                        1n                                π0r,1n         {0.000, 0.170}                     [0.000, 0.211]          [0.000, 0.215]
                                    "                        2n                                π0r,2n         {0.000, 0.154}                     [0.000, 0.171]          [0.000, 0.225]
                                    "                        1r                                π0r,1r         {0.000, 0.170}                     [0.000, 0.205]          [0.000, 0.219]
                                    "                        2u                                π0r,2u         {0.031, 0.051}                     [0.022, 0.058]          [0.022, 0.099]
                                   2u                        1r                                π2u,1r         {0.000, 1.000}                     [0.000, 1.000]          [0.000, 1.000]


                              Not working                 Working                              π0,1+              0.167             0.016        [0.136, 0.198]          [0.136, 0.198]
                               Off welfare              On welfare                             πn,p           {0.231, 0.445}                     [0.189, 0.484]          [0.189, 0.486]
 Composite
                               On welfare               Off welfare                            πp,n           {0.000, 0.119}                     [0.000, 0.144]          [0.000, 0.148]
                        On welfare, not working          Off welfare                           π0r,n          {0.000, 0.170}                     [0.000, 0.205]          [0.000, 0.212]

                                                                                                                    (b) Restricted Specification of Preferences

                                    0r                       1n                                π0r,1n                0
   Detailed
                                   1n                        1r                                π1n,1r             0.382             0.039        [0.305, 0.459]          [0.305, 0.459]



Notes: Number of state refers to earnings level, with 0 indicating no earnings, 1 indicating earnings below 3 times the monthly FPL, 2 indicating earnings above 3FPL, and 1+ indicating
positive earnings. The letter "n" indicates welfare nonparticipation, the letter "r" indicates welfare participation with truthful reporting of earnings, the letter "u" indicates welfare
participation with under‐reporting of earnings, the letter "p" indicates welfare participation (irrespective of reporting). Composite response probabilities are linear combination of the
detailed response probabilities (see Section VIII for the exact expressions). Estimates inferred from probabilities in Table 4, see text for formulas. Numbers in braces are estimated
upper and lower bounds, numbers in brackets are 95% confidence intervals. "Naive" 95% confidence interval ignores uncertainty in which moment inequalities bind. "Conservative"
95% confidence interval assumes all constraints bind. See Online Appendix for details. Panel a refers to the general specification of preferences (expression (4) in the paper). Panel b
refers to the restricted specification (expression (5) in the paper). Panel b omits all response probabilities whose estimates are the same as in Panel a.
 Table 6: Fraction of Months on Welfare by Experimental
             Status and Age of Youngest Child
  Age of Youngest Child at Baseline:        16 or 17             15 or less
                                             0.185                 0.383
                AFDC
                                            (0.078)               (0.069)
                                             0.251                 0.473
                  JF
                                            (0.077)               (0.069)
                                             0.066                 0.090
              Difference
                                            (0.054)               (0.010)
                                                        ‐0.024
       Difference in Differences
                                                       (0.054)


Notes: Sample consists of 87,717 case‐months: 21 months of data on each
of 4,177 cases with non‐missing baseline information on age of youngest
child. Table gives regression‐adjusted fraction of case‐months that women
participated in welfare by experimental status and age of youngest child at
baseline. Robust standard errors computed using clustering at case level.
                                          Figure 1: Monthly Earnings plus Welfare Transfer under AFDC and Jobs First




Notes: The figures (not drawn to scale) depict the sum of monthly earnings and welfare transfers for a woman with 2 children under AFDC (panel a) and Jobs First (panel b)
policy rules as of 1997. FPL refers to federal poverty line ($1,111) and G is the base grant amount ($543). The illustration assumes that the woman only has access to the fixed
$90 disregard and the proportional 73% disregard under AFDC which implies that the AFDC transfer is exhausted at earnings level E corresponding to G / 0.73  90 ($834). The
JF welfare transfer falls to zero at earnings levels above FPL. Under JF, a woman who earns between FPL ($1,111) and FPL  G ($1,654) can increase the sum of earnings and
welfare transfers by taking up welfare assistance and working less.
                                 Figure 2: Net Income under Status Quo and Jobs First Policies, Accounting for Food Stamps and Taxes




                  Net Income




                                                                                                                            45 degree line

                                                                                                                            Off Welfare and FS

                                                                                                                            On FS

                                                                                                                            On Welfare (JF)

                                                                                                                            On Welfare + FS (JF)
                               543
                                                                                                                            On Welfare (AFDC)

                               315                                                                                          On Welfare + FS (AFDC)
                                                                               1111
                                                                                  67



                                                                                                        44




                                                                                                                                                          41
                                                                      2
                                                                      5

                                                                                   4
                                      90




                                                                   76
                                                                   83

                                                                                99
                                                                               11




                                                                                                     14




                                                                                                                                                       24
                                                                                     Gross Earnings

Notes: Figure depicts net income as a function of gross earnings for an assistance unit of size 3 in 1997 under the status‐quo policy and the JF policy rules. Illustration assumes
household only has access to fixed $90 disregard under AFDC and faces $366 in monthly rental expenses. Net income is earnings net of federal income taxes and inclusive of EITC
and welfare and Food Stamps transfers (given participation in either program). Vertical lines: at the AFDC fixed earning disregard and break‐even level ($90 and $835), at the end
of the EITC’s phase‐in and start and end of the phase‐out regions ($762, $994 and $2,441), at the minimum taxable earnings ($1,167), at the FPL ($1,111), and at 1.3xFPL
($1,444) which is a FS eligibility threshold under AFDC. Horizontal ticks: at maximum FS and welfare grants.
                                               Figure 3: Distribution of Quarterly Earnings Centered at 3 x Monthly Federal Poverty Line

                                                                                                 a) Unconditional




                                                                        500
                                                                        400300
                                                                    Frequency
                                                                  200   100
                                                                        0
                                                                                 -1000         -500          0                     500     1000




                                     b) On Assistance all 3 Months of the Quarter                                            c) Off Assistance all 3 Months of the Quarter
                                   500




                                                                                                                             150
                                   400




                                                                                                                             100
                                      300
                               Frequency




                                                                                                                 Frequency
                              200




                                                                                                                             50
                                   100
                                   0




                                                                                                                             0




                                            -1000      -500          0                   500          1000                         -1000    -500         0          500      1000



Notes: Restricted to the Jobs First sample in quarters 1‐7 post random assignment. Assistance unit size has been inferred from monthly aid payment (sizes above eight have
been excluded). The bins in the histograms are $100 wide with bin 0 containing three times the monthly federal poverty line corresponding to the assistance unit’s size and the
calendar year of the quarterly observation. Vertical line indicates Jobs First eligibility threshold at three times the monthly federal poverty line.
                                               Figure 4: EDFs of Quarterly Earnings Relative to 3 x Federal Poverty Line
                                                                                                a) Unconditional




                                                                1
                                                                .9
                                                                                                                               p‐value for equality: 0.000




                                                                .8
                                                                                                                               p‐value for FOSD: 0.343




                                                                .7
                                                                .6
                                                                .5
                                                                      0                 .5            1                  1.5                   2                2.5
                                                                                             Quarterly Earnings as a fraction of 3*FPL.

                                                                                                          AFDC                   JF


                             b) Zero Earnings Prior to Random Assignment                                                       c) Positive Earnings Prior to Random Assignment




                                                                                                                  1
                    1
                    .9




                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                p‐value for equality: 0.000                                                                                            p‐value for equality: 0.090
                    .8




                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                p‐value for FOSD: 0.986                                                                                                p‐value for FOSD: 0.039
                    .7




                                                                                                                  .4
                    .6




                                                                                                                  .2




                         0           .5             1                  1.5               2            2.5               0                 .5                1                  1.5              2        2.5
                                           Quarterly Earnings as a fraction of 3*FPL.                                                              Quarterly Earnings as a fraction of 3*FPL.

                                                        AFDC                   JF                                                                               AFDC                   JF


Notes: Figures give reweighted empirical distribution functions of quarterly UI earnings (in quarters 1‐7 post‐randomization) in JF and AFDC samples relative to three times the
monthly federal poverty line. Assistance unit size determined by baseline survey variable “kidcount” (see text for details). Panel (b) refers to women with zero earnings in the 7th
quarter prior to random assignment, while panel (c) refers to women with positive earnings in that quarter. The “p‐value for equality” refers to a Kolmogorov‐Smirnov test of
equality of the two distributions, while “p‐value for FOSD” refers to a Barrett‐Donald test for first order stochastic dominance of the JF distribution over the AFDC distribution
(both based on 1,000 block bootstrap replications at case level, see Online Appendix for details).
                               Figure 5: Extensive and Intensive Margin Responses to Reform

                    a) From Not Working on Assistance under AFDC to Earning in Range 1 under Jobs First




                b) From Working in Range 2 off Assistance under AFDC to Earning in Range 1 under Jobs First




Notes: Panels a and b are drawn in the earnings (horizontal axis) and consumption equivalent (vertical axis) plane. The consumption equivalent
equals earnings plus transfer income from welfare (if any) net of monetized hassle, stigma, work, and under‐reporting costs (if any, see text for
details). At each level of earnings, the bold lines correspond to consumption either off welfare or on welfare with truthful reporting of earnings to
the welfare agency. The dashed lines correspond to consumption on welfare with under‐reporting. Vertical lines represent the same earnings levels
depicted in Figure 1: the fixed earning disregard under AFDC ($90), the earnings level E at which welfare assistance is exhausted under AFDC, and
the FPL. For clarity, the graphs assume away earnings constraints and use a fixed wage rate. Panel a depicts a scenario where the JF reform induces
a woman who would participate in welfare and not work under AFDC (point A) to take up work and truthfully report her earnings under JF (point B)
– an extensive margin response. Panel b depicts a scenario where the JF reform induces a woman who be off assistance and earn in range 2 (point
A) to reduce her earnings to range 1 and take up assistance under JF (point B) – an intensive margin response.
                             Figure 6: Earnings and Participation Choices with Under‐reporting

                             a) From Under‐reporting under AFDC to Truthful Reporting under Jobs First




                             b) From Truthful Reporting under AFDC to Under‐reporting under Jobs First




Notes: Panels a and b are drawn in the earnings (horizontal axis) and consumption equivalent (vertical axis) plane. The consumption equivalent
equals earnings plus transfer income from welfare (if any) net of monetized hassle, stigma, work, and under‐reporting costs (if any, see text for
details). At each level of earnings, the bold lines correspond to consumption either off welfare or on welfare with truthful reporting of earnings to
the welfare agency. At each level of earnings, the dashed lines correspond to consumption on welfare with under‐reporting. Vertical lines
represent the same earnings levels depicted in Figure 1: the fixed earning disregard under AFDC ($90), the earnings level E at which welfare
assistance is exhausted under AFDC, and the FPL. For clarity, the graphs assume away earnings constraints and use a fixed wage rate. Panel a
depicts a scenario where the JF reform induces a woman who would participate in welfare, work, and under‐report her earnings under AFDC (point
A) to work and truthfully report her earnings under JF (point B) thanks to the 100% earning disregard under JF. Panel b depicts a scenario where the
JF reform induces a woman who would participate in welfare without work under AFDC (point A) to work and under‐report her earnings under JF
(point B) to avoid the hassle cost under JF.
                                    Online Appendix



Outline
  • Section 1 provides additional details about the data and variable construction summarized in
    Section II of the paper.

  • Section 2 describes the propensity score re-weighting method used to adjust for chance im-
    balances in baseline characteristics mentioned in Section II of the paper.

  • Section 3 explains how we construct the tests for equality and first order stochastic dominance
    whose p-values are reported in Figure 4 of the paper.

  • Section 4 presents the baseline model described in Section IV of the paper. For expositional
    simplicity, Section IV of the paper describes the decision problem of a woman for whom
    Ēi ≤ F P Li . Here we handle both the case when Ēi ≤ F P Li and Ēi > F P Li . We do so
    by introducing an additional assumption on preferences (denoted A.7) which caps the value
    of being on assistance and truthfully reporting earning levels in (F P Li , Ēi ]. Assumption
    A.7 is clearly void when Ēi ≤ F P Li , so the model presented here nests that described in
    Section IV of the paper. Instead, when Ēi > F P Li assumption A.7 ensures that no woman
    chooses to earn in range 2, be on assistance, and truthfully report her earnings under AFDC.
    In brief, thanks to assumption A.7 we do not need to distinguish between the case when
    Ēi ≤ F P Li and Ēi > F P Li because in both cases the alternatives compatible with state
    2r are either incompatible with the policy rules or compatible with the policy rules but not
    utility maximizing. Section 4 starts by introducing definitions and restating the assumptions
    made in the paper. We then prove a few intermediate lemmas and conclude with the main
    propositions and their proofs which support the revealed preference restrictions summarized
    in Section V of the paper. Specifically,

      – Lemma 1 establishes that no woman truthfully reports earnings above the federal poverty
        level while on assistance. Lemma 2 characterizes optimal reporting of earnings to the
        welfare agency. Corollary 1 describes the implications of optimal reporting for the de-
        pendence of preferences on the policy regime.
      – Lemma 3 characterizes the relative attractiveness of each state under the two policy
        regimes. Lemma 4 provides the main revealed preference argument regarding pairing of
        states under JF and AFDC.
      – Propositions 1 and 2 formally establish Table 3 in the paper. Corollary 2 establishes
        additional disallowed responses under the special form of the utility function introduced
        in Section IV of the paper.

  • Section 5, specifically Lemma 5, describes the exhaustive set of testable restrictions on state
    probabilities implied by revealed preference, as presented in Section VII of the paper.

                                                1
• Section 6 lists the analytical expressions for the bounds on the response probabilities and
  explain how they were derived. An example of such bounds is reproduced in Section VIII of
  the paper.

• Section 7 describes the construction of the 95% confidence intervals reported in Table 5 of
  the paper.

• Section 8 develops an extended model that relaxes assumption A.7 made in Section 4 of this
  Appendix (see above) so that it becomes possible for a woman with Ēi > F P Li to select
  an alternative compatible with state 2r under AFDC. This extended model is referenced in
  Section VI of the paper. Specifically,

    – Propositions 3 and 4 establishes the effect of this relaxation on the set of allowed response
      margins, as summarized in Table A3. Corollary 4 establishes additional disallowed re-
      sponses under the special form of the utility function introduced in Section IV of the
      paper.
    – Corollary 5 shows that, when women may select alternatives compatible with state 2r
      under AFDC, exits from the labor force (in the form of pairings of state 2r under AFDC
      with state 0r or 0n under JF) are allowed responses to the JF reform provided that labor
      market constraints are present.

• Section 9 develops an extended model that allows for participation in the Food Stamps (FS)
  program and accounts for taxes, including the EITC. This extended model is summarized in
  Section VI of the paper. Specifically,

    – Lemmas 6 and 7 characterize the combined welfare and FS transfer.
    – Lemma 8 establishes that no woman truthfully reports earnings above the federal poverty
      level while on welfare assistance. Lemma 9 characterizes optimal reporting. Corollary 6
      describes the implication of optimal reporting for the dependence of preferences on the
      policy regime.
    – Lemma 10 provides the main revealed preference argument regarding pairing of states
      under JF and AFDC. Lemma 11 characterizes the relative attractiveness of each state
      under the two policy regimes.
    – Propositions 6 and 7 establish the allowed and disallowed responses, as summarized in
      Table A4.
    – Proposition 8 derives the form of the matrix Π of response probabilities. Proposition 9
      and Remark 12 demonstrate that integrating out FS participation yields a matrix with
      the same zero and unitary entries as in the baseline model.

• Section 10 establishes the form of the matrix of response probabilities when a finer coarsening
  of earnings is adopted. The results of this extension are summarized in Section X of the paper.
  The empirical choice probabilities used for this exercise are reported in Table A8.

• Appendix Figures and Tables are provided at the end, along with references.




                                              2
1     Data
From Monthly to Quarterly Data
The public use files do not report the month of randomization. However, we were able to infer it by
contrasting monthly assistance payments with an MDRC constructed variable providing quarterly
assistance payments. For each case, we found that a unique month of randomization leads the
aggregation of the monthly payments to match the quarterly measure to within rounding error.

Measures of Assistance Unit (AU) Size
The administrative measure of AU size is missing for most cases, which is problematic because the
JF notch occurs at the FPL which varies with AU size. For the Jobs First sample we are able to
infer an AU size in most months from the grant amount while the women are on welfare. However
if AU size changes while off welfare we are not able to detect this change.1 Moreover, in some cases
the grant amount does not match any of the base grant amounts. This can result when a woman
reports some unearned income or because of sanctions. In both of these situations, we use the grant
amount in other months to impute AU size. For the AFDC sample, the grant amount depends on
many unobserved factors, preventing us from inferring the AU size from the administrative data.
    The kidcount variable described in the text records the number of children in the household
at the time of random assignment and is top-coded at three children. Appendix Table A1 gives a
cross-tabulation, in the JF sample, of kidcount with our more reliable AU size measure inferred from
grant amounts. The tabulation suggests the kidcount variable is a reasonably accurate measure of
AU size over the first 7 quarters post-random assignment conditional on the number of children at
baseline being less than three. As might be expected, the kidcount variable tends to underestimate
the true AU size as women may have additional children over the 7 quarters following the baseline
survey. To deal with this problem we inflate the kidcount based AU size by one in order to avoid
understating the location of the poverty line for most assistance units. That is, we use the following
mapping from kidcount to AU size: 0→3, 1→3, 2→4, 3→5, which maps each kidcount value to the
modal inferred AU size in Appendix Table A1 plus one. This mapping is conservative in ensuring
that earnings levels below the FPL are indeed below it.




    1
      Changes in AU size are typically due to a birth or to the fact that a child becomes categorically ineligible for
welfare. Under AFDC, the AU size also changes when the adult is removed from the unit due to sanctions for
failure to comply with employment-related mandates. Empirically this source of time variation in AU size seems
quantitatively minor. Bloom et al. (2002) report that 5 percent of AFDC group members had their benefits reduced
owing to a sanction within four years after random assignment.


                                                          3
2    Propensity Score Re-weighting
We use propensity score re-weighting methods to adjust for the chance imbalances in baseline
characteristics between the AFDC and JF groups. Following BGH (2006) we estimate a logit
of the JF assignment dummy on: quarterly earnings in each of the 8 pre-assignment quarters,
separate variables representing quarterly AFDC and quarterly food stamps payments in each of
the 7 pre-assignment quarters, dummies indicating whether each of these 22 variables is nonzero,
and dummies indicating whether the woman was employed at all or on welfare at all in the year
preceding random assignment or in the applicant sample. We also include dummies indicating each
of the following baseline demographic characteristics: being white, black, or Hispanic; being never
married or separated; having a high-school diploma/GED or more than a high-school education;
having more than two children; being younger than 25 or age 25-34; and dummies indicating
whether baseline information is missing for education, number of children, or marital status.
    Denote the predicted values from this model by pbi . The propensity score weights used to adjust
the moments of interest are given by:
                                          1[Ti =j]           1−1[Ti =j]
                                             pbi               1−bpi
                                 ωi =    N
                                                       +    N
                                                                          .
                                        X 1[T =j]          X 1−1[T =j]
                                                  n                  n
                                                 pbn             1−b pn
                                        n=1                n=1

where N is the number of cases. These are inverse probability weights, re-normalized to sum to
one within policy group. When examining subgroups we always recompute a new set of propensity
score weights and re-normalize them.




                                                       4
3    Distributional Tests
Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test for Equality of Distributions
We use a bootstrap procedure to compute the p-values for our re-weighted Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-
S) tests for equality of distribution functions across treatment groups. Let Fnt (e) be the propensity
score re-weighted EDF of earnings in treatment group t. That is,
                                              X
                                    Fnt (e) ≡    ωi 1 [Ei ≤ e, Ti = t] .
                                              i

Define the corresponding bootstrap EDF as:
                                          X
                               Fnt∗ (e) ≡   ωi∗ 1 [Ei∗ ≤ e, Ti∗ = t] .
                                              i

where stars refer to resampled values (we resampled at the case level in order to preserve serial
correlation in the data). The K-S test statistic is given by:

                                      d ≡ sup |F j (e) − F a (e) |.
                                      KS        n         n
                                              e

To obtain a critical value for this statistic, we compute the bootstrap distribution of the recentered
K-S statistic:
                         KS ∗ ≡ sup |Fnj∗ (e) − Fna∗ (e) − Fnj (e) − Fna (e) |.
                                                                            
                                  e

Recentering is necessary to impose the correct null hypothesis on the bootstrap DGP (Giné and
Zinn, 1990). We compute an estimated p-value α  bKS for the null hypothesis that the two distribu-
tions are equal as:
                                           1000
                                        1 X h                   i
                              αbKS ≡            1 KS ∗(b) > KS
                                                            d ,
                                      1000
                                                  b=1

where b indexes the bootstrap replication.

Barrett-Donald test for stochastic dominance
Our test statistic for detecting violations of the null hypothesis that the JF distribution of earnings
stochastically dominates the AFDC distribution is given by:
                                      d ≡ sup F j (e) − F a (e) .
                                      BD       n         n
                                                  e

As suggested by Barrett and Donald (2003), we bootstrap the re-centered version of this statistic
given by:
                      BD∗ ≡ sup Fnj∗ (e) − Fna∗ (e) − Fnj (e) − Fna (e) .
                                                                      
                                  e

We compute an estimated p-value α
                                bBD as:
                                              1000
                                           1 X h                 i
                                 bBD ≡
                                 α                 1 BD∗(b) > BD
                                                              d .
                                         1000
                                                  b=1




                                                        5
4     Baseline Model
Notation, Definitions, and Assumptions
Notation (Policy Regimes). Throughout, we use a to refer to AFDC and j to refer to JF. The
policy regime is denoted by t ∈ {a, j}.

Definition 1 (Earnings, Reported Earnings, and Program Participation). Let D be an
indicator for a woman participating in welfare: D = 1 if she is on assistance and D = 0 otherwise.
Let E denote a woman’s earnings. Earnings are the product of hours of work, H, and an hourly
wage rate, W . Let E r denote the earnings a woman reports to the welfare agency; Z be an indicator
that takes the value 1 when a welfare recipient reports zero earnings and takes the value 0 otherwise,
that is, Z = Z (D, E r ) ≡ 1 [E r = 0] D; and R be an indicator that takes the value 1 when a welfare
recipient under-reports her earnings to the welfare agency and takes the value 0 otherwise, that is,
R = R (E, D, E r ) ≡ 1 [E r < E] D.

Definition 2 (Earning Ranges). Earnings range 0 refers to zero earnings. Earnings range 1
refers to the interval (0, F P Li ] where F P Li is woman i’s federal poverty line. Earnings range 2
refers to the interval (F P Li , ∞).

Definition 3 (Welfare Transfer Functions). For any reported earnings E r , the regime depen-
dent transfers are
                   Gai (E r ) ≡ 1 E r ≤ Ēi Gi − 1 [E r > δi ] (E r − δi ) τi ,
                                                                           

and
                                    Gji (E r ) ≡ 1 [E r ≤ F P Li ] Gi .
The parameter δi ∈ {90, 120} gives woman i’s fixed disregards, the parameter τi ∈ {.49, .73} governs
her proportional disregard, E i ≡ Gi /τi + δi is woman i’s break-even earnings level under regime
a (i.e. the level at which benefits are exhausted), and Gi is the base grant amount. E i , Gi , and
F P Li vary across women due to differences in AU size.

Definition 4 (Consumption). Consider the triple (E, D, E r ). Under regime t ∈ {a, j}, woman
i’s consumption corresponding to (E, D, E r ) is

                                  Cit (E, D, E r ) ≡ E + Gti (E r ) D.                            (1)

Below, when the consumption associated with a triple (E, D, E r ) and calculated according to (1)
does not vary across regimes we omit the superscript t, and we omit the subscript i when it does
not vary across women.

Definition 5 (State). Consider the triple (E, D, E r ). The state corresponding to (E, D, E r ) is
defined by the function:
                                      
                                      
                                       0n if E = 0, D = 0
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                       1n if E in range 1, D = 0
                                       2n if E in range 2, D = 0
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                        0r if E = 0, D = 1
                                      
                     s (E, D, E r ) =                                      .
                                      
                                       1r if E in range 1, D = 1, E r = E
                                        1u if E in range 1, D = 1, E r < E
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                        2u if E in range 2, D = 1, E r < E
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                        2r if E in range 2, D = 1, E r = E
                                      


                                                    6
Definition 6 (Job Offers). A woman’s samples Ki job offers, composed of wage and hours
                                   Ki
                         Wik , Hik k=1 where Ki is an integer number (possibly zero), Wik , Hik ∈
                                                                                              
offer pairs: Θi =
(0, ∞) × (0, H i ] with H i denoting the woman’s total disposable time. The limiting case Ki = ∞ is
treated as follows: for any H ∈ (0, H i ] a woman’s samples a wage offer Wi (H). When Ki = ∞ let
Θi = Wi (.) × (0, H i ].

Definition 7 (Alternative). An alternative is a wage, hours of work, welfare participation indi-
cator, and earning report tuple (W, H, D, E r ).

Definition 8 (Sub-alternative). A sub-alternative is a wage, hours of work, and welfare partic-
ipation indicator tuple (W, H, D).

Definition 9 (Alternative Compatible with a State). We say that alternative (W, H, D, E r )
is compatible with state s for woman i if, letting E ≡ W H, s = s (E, D, E r ).

Definition 10 (Alternative Compatible with a State and Available). We say that al-
ternative (W, H, D, E r ) is available and compatible with state s for woman i if (W, H, D, E r ) is
compatible with state s and (W, H) ∈ Θi ∪ (0, 0).

Definition 11 (Dominated State). We say that state s is dominated under regime t if no
available alternative compatible s under regime t is chosen by any woman.

Definition 12 (Utility Function). Define Uit (H, C, D, Z, R) as the utility woman i derives from
the tuple (H, C, D, Z, R) under regime t ∈ {a, j}. When the utility of a tuple (H, C, D, Z, R) is
regime-invariant we omit the superscript t.

Definition 13 (Relative attractiveness of a State). We say that state s is:

   1. no better under regime j than under regime a if, for any alternative (W, H, D, E r ) compatible
      with state s, and letting E ≡ W H, Cit ≡ Cit (E, D, E r ), Z ≡ Z (D, E r ) and R ≡ R (E, D, E r ),
                                               
                            Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R ≤ Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) for all i.

   2. no worse under regime j than under regime a if, for any alternative (W, H, D, E r ) compatible
      with state s, and letting E ≡ W H, Cit ≡ Cit (E, D, E r ), Z ≡ Z (D, E r ) and R ≡ R (E, D, E r ),
                                               
                            Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R ≥ Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) for all i.

   3. equally attractive under regime j and regime a if, for any alternative (W, H, D, E r ) compatible
      with state s, and letting E ≡ W H, Cit ≡ Cit (E, D, E r ), Z ≡ Z (D, E r ) and R ≡ R (E, D, E r ),
                                               
                            Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R = Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) for all i.

Definition 14 (Collections of States). Define S ≡ {0n, 1n, 2n, 0r, 1r, 1u, 2u}, C+ ≡ {1r}, C− ≡
{0r}, and C0 ≡ {0n, 1n, 2n, 1u, 2u}.

Assumption 1 (Preferences). Woman i’s utility functions Uia (., ., ., ., .) and Uij (., ., ., ., .) satisfy
the following restrictions:

A.1         utility is strictly increasing in C;

                                                    7
A.2         Uit (H, C, 1, Z, 1) < Uit (H, C, 1, Z, 0) for all (H, C, Z) and t ∈ {a, j};

A.3         Uit (H, C, 1, 1, R) ≤ Uit (H, C, 1, 0, R) for all (H, C, R) and t ∈ {a, j};

A.4         Uij (H, C, 1, 1, R) ≤ Uia (H, C, 1, 1, R) for all (H, C, R);

A.5         Uia (H, C, 1, 0, R) = Uij (H, C, 1, 0, R) for all (H, C, R);

A.6         Uia (H, C, 0, 0, 0) = Uij (H, C, 0, 0, 0) for all (H, C);

A.7         Uia (H, Cia (E, 1, E) , 1, 0, 0) < Uia (H, Cia (E, 0, E) , 0, 0, 0) for all (H, W ) such that E =
            W H ∈ F P Li , E i whenever E i > F P Li .

Remark 1 (Preferences: Verbalizing Assumption 1). A.2 states that under-reporting de-
creases utility; this “under-reporting disutility” may vary across alternatives. A.3 states that
hassle does not increase utility; this “hassle disutility” may vary with hours worked and consump-
tion. A.4 states that regime j’s hassle disutility is no smaller than regime a’s; the difference in
hassle disutility between the two regimes may vary with hours worked and consumption. Assump-
tion A.5 states that the utility value of an alternative entailing hours of work and consumption
(H, C) and welfare recipiency does not vary with the regime whenever reported earnings are pos-
itive, irrespective of whether earnings are under-reported or reported truthfully. A.6 states that
the utility value of an alternative entailing no welfare recipiency is independent of the treatment.
As mentioned in the introductory Outline to this Appendix, A.7 implicitly defines a local lower
bound on the disutility from stigma disutility. It says that at earnings levels in F P Li , E i , the
extra consumption due to the transfer income that a woman receives under regime a when truth-
fully reporting her earnings does not suffice to compensate her for the stigma disutility she incurs.
Clearly, A.7 is void for any woman with E i ≤ F P Li , in which case Assumption 1 reduces to the
set of assumptions on preferences made in Section IV of the paper.
Remark 2 (Preferences: A Special Case). In Section IV of the paper, we consider a restricted
specification of the 5-argument utility function Uit (., ., ., ., .) in Assumption 1. We do so to aid
in illustrating the mechanics of the model and the implications of further restricting preferences.
Specifically, we employ a 2-argument utility function Ui (., .):

                           Ui H, C − µi 1 [E > 0] − φi D − ηit Z − κi R ,
                                                                            
                                                                                                  (2)

where κi is an under-reporting penalty, µi is a fixed cost (or benefit) of working, φi is a stigma
cost (or benefit) from welfare                      t
                              participation, and ηi is a hassle cost from reporting zero earnings on
assistance. The parameters φi , ηia , ηij , κi , µi obey the following restrictions: φi is regime invariant
in accordance with A.5 in Assumption 1, ηij ≥ ηia ≥ 0 in accordance with A.3 and A.4, κi > 0 is
regime invariant in accordance with A.2 and A.5, and µi is regime invariant in accordance with
A.6. The utility function is not indexed by regime t in accordance with A.6 in Assumption 1. A
sufficient condition for A.7 in Assumption 1 to hold, is that, φi > Gai (F P Li ); hence φi must be
a stigma cost not a benefit for any woman with E i > F P Li . Furthermore, the 2-argument utility
function Ui (., .) is strictly increasing in its second argument in accordance with A.1 in Assumption
1. To preview, form (2) is used below in Corollaries 2 and 4.
Remark 3 (Preferences: Another Special Case). In this Appendix (proof of Propositions 2
and 4), we consider a second special case of the 5-argument utility function Uit (., ., ., ., .) under



                                                      8
Assumption 1. We do so to provide examples. Specifically, we let the utility that a generic woman
i derives under regime t from alternative (W, H, D, E r ) be (letting E ≡ W H):

      Uit H, Cit (E, D, E r ) , D, Z (D, E r ) = −αi H + v Cit (E, D, E r ) − µi 1 [E > 0] − κi R
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                    (3)
                                                 −φi D − ηit Z (D, E r )

where αi is the change in utility that the woman derives from one additional unit of work, κi is an
under-reporting penalty, µi is a fixed cost (or benefit) of working, φi is a stigma cost (or benefit)
from welfare participation, ηit is a hassle cost from reporting zero earnings on assistance, and v (.) is
a strictly increasing
                   function
                                by A.1 and regime invariant by A.6. By A.3-A.4 in Assumption 1,
                     j a
the parameters ηi , ηi are such that ηij ≥ ηia ≥ 0. By A.2 and A.5 in Assumption 1 κi > 0 and
regime invariant. By A.5 in Assumption 1 φi is regime invariant and by A.7 in Assumption 1 φi is
bounded below by φi ≡ maxE∈[F P Li ,E i ] [v (E − µi + Gai (F P Li )) − v (E − µi )]. For convenience we
assume that αi ≥ 0, that is, leisure is a good. We consider three forms of v (.): the identity function
(hence v (.) linear), a strictly concave function (hence the marginal utility of consumption is strictly
decreasing in consumption), a strictly convex function (hence the marginal utility of consumption
is strictly increasing in consumption). When v (.) is linear the lower bound on the stigma disutility
implied by A.7 in Assumption 1 simplifies to φi ≡ Gai (F P Li ).

Assumption 2 (Ineligible Earning Levels). No woman may be on welfare assistance and truth-
fully report earnings above F P Li under regime j or above Ēi under regime a.

Assumption 3 (Utility Maximization). Under regime t, woman i makes choices by solving the
optimization problem:

                              Uit H, Cit (W H, D, E r ) , D, Z (D, E r ) , R (W H, D, E r ) .
                                                                                           
                   max
      (W,H)∈Θi ∪(0,0),D∈{0,1},E r ∈[0,W H]

Assumption 4 (Breaking Indifference). Women break indifference in favor of the same alter-
native irrespective of the regime.

Intermediate Lemmas
Lemma 1 (State 2r). Given Assumptions 1, 2, and 3, no woman chooses an alternative compatible
with state 2r.

Proof. Under regime j no alternative is compatible with state 2r by Assumption 2. Consider now
a woman with E i ≤ F P Li under regime a. By Assumption 2 she may not be on assistance and
truthfully report earnings above F P Li (range 2). Finally, consider a woman with E i > F P Li
under regime a. By Assumption 2 she may not be on assistance and truthfully report earnings
above E i . By A.7 in Assumption 1 she will not truthfully report earnings in F P Li , E i because
she can attain a higher utility level by being off assistance (Assumption 3): the extra consumption
due to the transfer income does not suffice to compensate the woman for the stigma disutility she
incurs when being on assistance.

Lemma 2 (Optimal Reporting). Write woman i’s optimization problem (Assumption 3) as a
nested maximization problem:
                                                                                     
                                t     t           r              r                r
                                                                                    
           max             max Ui H, Ci (W H, D, E ) , D, Z (D, E ) , R (W H, D, E ) . (4)
   (W,H)∈Θi ∪(0,0),D∈{0,1} E r ∈[0,W H]



                                                   9
Focus on the inner maximization problem in (4) for given sub-alternative (W, H, D) with D = 1. Let
E ≡ W H and Eir,t ≡ Eir,t (W, H) denote woman i’s utility maximizing earning report conditional
on (W, H, 1). Given Assumptions 1-4:
  1. under regime j: Eir,j entails either truthful reporting, that is, Eir,j = E, or under-reporting
     such that E > Eir,j ∈ [0, F P Li ]; in particular, state 1u is dominated;
  2. under regime a: Eir,a entails either truthful reporting, that is, Eir,a = E, or under-reporting
     such that E > Eir,a ∈ [0, δi ].
Proof. We prove each part of the Lemma in turn. In what follows, for convenience, we let Uit serve
                             t     t         r              r              r
                                                                             
as be shortcut notation for Ui H, Ci (E, 1, E ) , 1, Z (1, E ) , R (E, D, E ) .
  1. Under regime j, consider three mutually exclusive pairs (W, H) spanning the range of values
     for E:

      (a) (W, H) such that E = 0
          A woman cannot over-report earnings (Assumption 3). Thus, Eir,j = E.
      (b) (W, H) such that E ∈ (0, F P Li ]
          Woman i’s utility while on welfare depends on reported earnings E r as follows:
                                              j                    
                                     [1] : Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 1, 1 if E r = 0
                                    

                              Uij =   [2] : Uij H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 if E r ∈ (0, E) .              (5)
                                      [3] : Uij H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 0 if E r = E
                                    

          By A.2 in Assumption 1, truthful reporting yields higher utility than any under-report
          E r ∈ (0, E): [3] > [2] in (5). By A.3 in Assumption 1, any under-report E r ∈ (0, E)
          yields at least as much utility as reporting E r = 0: [2] ≥ [1] in (5). Thus, truthful
          reporting solves the inner maximization problem in (4) hence Eir,j = E. This shows
          that state 1u is dominated under regime j because the previous arguments holds for all
          E ∈ (0, F P Li ] and (0, F P Li ] corresponds to range 1 (Definition 2).
      (c) (W, H) such that E > F P Li
          Woman i must be under-reporting (Lemma 1). Her utility while on welfare depends on
          reported earnings E r as follows:
                                          [1] : Uij H, E + Gi , 1, 1, 1 if E r = 0
                                                                      
                            Uij   =                                                           .     (6)
                                          [2] : Uij H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 if E r ∈ (0, F P Li ]

          By A.3 in Assumption 1, any report E r ∈ (0, F P Li ] yields at least as much utility as
          reporting E r = 0: [2] ≥ [1] in (6). If A.3 in Assumption 1 holds as an equality then
          [2] = [1] in (6) and woman i is indifferent among reports in [0, F P Li ]. In this case, any
          E r ∈ [0, F P Li ] solves the inner maximization problem in (4) thus Eir,j ∈ [0, F P Li ]. If
          A.3 in Assumption 1 holds as a strict inequality then [2] > [1] in (6) and woman i is
          indifferent among (under-) reports in (0, F P Li ] and prefers them to (under-) reporting
          E r = 0. In this case, any report E r ∈ (0, F P Li ] solves the inner maximization problem
          in (4) thus Eir,j ∈ (0, F P Li ].

  2. Under regime a, consider four mutually exclusive pairs (W, H) spanning the range of values
     for E:

      (a) (W, H) such that E = 0
          A woman cannot over-report earnings (Assumption 3). Thus, Eir,a = E.

                                                       10
      (b) (W, H) such that E ∈ (0, δi ]
          Woman i’s utility while on welfare depends on reported earnings as follows:
                                                                   
                                      [1] : Uia H, E + Gi , 1, 1, 1 if E r = 0
                               Uia =   [2] : Uia H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 if E r ∈ (0, E) .                 (7)
                                       [3] : Uia H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 0 if E r = E
                                     

          By A.3 and A.2 in Assumption 1: [3] > [2] ≥ [1] in (7). Thus, truthful reporting solves
          the inner maximization problem in (4) hence Eir,a = E.
      (c) (W, H) such that E ∈ (δi , F P Li ]
          Woman i’s utility while on welfare depends on reported earnings as follows:
                                                                  
                                  
                                   [1] : Uia H, E + Gi , 1, 1, 1          if E r = 0
                                            a
                                    [2] : Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1            if E r ∈ (0, δi ]
                                  
                            Uia =           a           a    r                   r            .         (8)
                                   [3] : Ui (H, E + Gi (E ) , 1, 0, 1) if E ∈ (δi , E)
                                  
                                    [4] : Uia (H, E + Gai (E r ) , 1, 0, 0) if E r = E
                                  


          By A.1 and A.3 in Assumption 1, and the fact that Gi = Gai (0) > Gai (E r ) for all
          E r in (δi , F P Li ]: [1] ≤ [2] and [3] < [2] in (8). Thus, only truthful reports or under-
          reports in [0, δi ] may solve the inner maximization problem in (4). Specifically, if A.3
          in Assumption 1 holds as an equality then [1] = [2] in (8) and woman i is indifferent
          among (under-) reports in [0, δi ]. In this case Eir,a = E or Eir,a ∈ [0, δi ] depending on
          whether [4] ≥ [2] or [4] ≤ [2]. If A.3 in Assumption 1 holds as a strict inequality then
          [1] < [2] in (8) and woman i is indifferent among (under-) reports in (0, δi ]. In this case
          Eir,a = E or Eir,a ∈ (0, δi ] depending on whether [4] ≥ [2] or [4] ≤ [2].
      (d) (W, H) such that E > F P Li
          Woman i must be under-reporting (Lemma 1). Her utility while on welfare depends on
          reported earnings as follows:
                                                             
                                [1] : Uia H, E + Gi , 1, 1, 1      if E r = 0
                           a             a
                          Ui =   [2] : Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1        if E r ∈ (0, δi ]       .          (9)
                                 [3] : Ui (H, E + Gi (E ) , 1, 0, 1) if E r ∈ (δi , F P Li ]
                                         a         a      r
                               


          By A.1 and A.3 in Assumption 1, and the fact that Gi = Gai (0) > Gai (E r ) for all E r
          in (δi , F P Li ]: [3] < [2] and [1] ≤ [2] in (9). Thus, only under-reports in [0, δi ] may solve
          the inner maximization problem in (4). Specifically, if A.3 in Assumption 1 holds as
          an equality then [1] = [2] in (9)) and woman i is indifferent among (under-) reports in
          [0, δi ]. In this case Eir,a ∈ [0, δi ]. If A.3 in Assumption 1 holds as a strict inequality then
          [1] < [2] in (9)) and woman i is indifferent among (under-) reports in (0, δi ] and prefers
          them to reporting E r = 0. In this case Eir,a ∈ (0, δi ].



Corollary 1 (Optimal Reporting and Policy Invariance). Given Assumptions 1-4, the utility
associated with any alternative compatible with states 1u and 2u and entailing optimal reporting is
regime invariant.

Proof. We examine each state in turn.

  1. State 1u


                                                     11
      (a) Consider a woman i and any sub-alternative (W,H, 1) such that, letting     E ≡ W H, E is in
                          r,j                                             r,j
          range 1 and Ei (W, H) < E. Thus alternative W, H, 1, Ei (W, H) is compatible with
                                                                                                        
          state 1u and entails optimal reporting under regime j. Let Cij ≡ Cij E, 1, Eir,j (W, H) ,
                                                                     
          Zij ≡ Z 1, Eir,j (W, H) , and Rij ≡ Rij E, 1, Eir,j (W, H) . We next show that
                                                           
          Uij H, Cij , 1, Zij , Rij = Ui H, Cij , 1, Zij , Rij . By Lemma 2, Eir,j (W, H) ∈ (0, F P Li ] or
          Eir,j (W, H) ∈ [0, F P Li ] depending on the woman’s preferences. In the first case, the util-
          ity woman i enjoys is Uij H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 which equals Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 by A.5
                                                                                            
                                                                                   j                   
          in Assumption 1. In the second case, the   utility woman i enjoys is Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1
          which also equals Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 by A.5 in Assumption 1 and because she is in-
          different between (under-)     reports in (0, F P Li ] and reporting zero earnings, that is,
          Uij H, E + Gi , 1, 1, 1 = Uij H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 .
                                 

      (b) Consider any sub-alternative (W, H, 1) such that, letting E ≡ W H, E is in range 1
          and Eir,a (W, H) < E. Thus alternative (W, H, 1, Eir,a (W, H)) is compatible with state
          1u and entails optimal reporting under regime a. Let Cia ≡ Cia (E, 1, Eir,a (W, H)),
          Zia ≡ Z (1, Eir,a (W, H)), and Ria ≡ Ria (E, 1, Eir,a (W, H)). We next show that
          Uia (H, Cia , 1, Zia , Ria ) = Ui (H, Cia , 1, Zia , Ria ). By Lemma 2, Eir,a (W, H) ∈ (0, δi ] or
          Eir,a (W, H) ∈ [0, δi ] depending on the woman’s             preferences. In the first case, the utility
                                      a
                                                            
          woman i enjoys is Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 which equals Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 by A.5 in
          Assumption 1. In the second case, the utility woman                i enjoys is also
            a
                                                                     
          Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 = Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 by A.5 in Assumption 1 and because
          she is indifferent between      (under-) reports in (0,     δi ] and reporting zero earnings, that is,
          Uia H, E + Gi , 1, 1, 1 = Uia H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 .
                                      

      (c) In 1.(a) and 1.(b) we have shown that any alternative compatible with state 1u and
          entailing optimal reporting yields regime-invariant
                                                             consumption E + Gi and regime-
          invariant utility level Ui H, E + Gi , 1, 0, 1 .

  2. State 2u
     The proof corresponding to state 2u is the same as that for state 1u once we consider a
     sub-alternative (W, H, 1) such that, letting E ≡ W H, E is in range 2 (Lemma 2).

Remark 4 (Optimal under-Reporting and Alternatives Considered). In what follows, it is
without loss of generality that we only focus on alternatives entailing optimal (under-) reporting
among those compatible with states 1u and 2u. No woman would select an alternative compatible
with states 1u or 2u not entailing optimal (under-) reporting (Assumption 3). Additionally, it is
without loss of generality that we disregard alternatives compatible with state 1u under regime
j. No woman would select an alternative compatible with state 1u under regime j because it is
dominated (Lemma 2, part 1.(b)).
Lemma 3 (Policy Impact on Attractiveness of States). Given Assumptions 1-4:
  1. the states in C+ are no worse under regime j than under regime a;

  2. the states in C− are no better under regime j than under regime a;

  3. the states in C0 are equally attractive under regime j and regime a.
Proof. We prove each statement in turn.

                                                       12
   1. The only state in C+ is 1r. All alternatives compatible with state 1r entail E in range
      1, D = 1, and E r = E hence Z = 0. Thus, the utility function associated with each
      of these alternatives is invariant to the treatment (A.5 in Assumption 1). Accordingly, it
      suffices to show that the consumption associated with any one of these alternatives is not
      lower under regime j than under regime a. Because Gai (E) ≤ Gi for all E in range 1,
      Cij (E, 1, E) = E + Gi ≥ E + Gai (E) = Cia (E, 1, E), which verifies the desired inequality (A.1
      in Assumption 1).

   2. The only state in C− is 0r. All the alternatives compatible with state 0r entail E = H = 0,
      D = 1, and E r = 0 hence Z = 1 and R = 0. Thus, it suffices to show that Uia 0, Gi , 1, 1, 0 ≥
      Uij 0, Gi , 1, 1, 0 . This inequality holds by A.4 in Assumption 1.
                         

   3. All alternatives compatible with states {0n, 1n, 2n} entail D = 0. Thus, the utility associated
      with each of these alternatives is invariant to the policy regime (A.6 in Assumption 1).
      Accordingly, it suffices to show that the consumption associated with any of these alternatives
      is the same under regime j than under regime a. Because off assistance consumption is either
      zero, when si = 0n, or E, when si ∈ {1n, 2n} consumption is unaffected by the regime.
      Finally consider states {1u, 2u} entailing 0 ≤ E r < E and D = 1. Given optimal reporting,
      the utility function associated with each of these alternatives is invariant to the policy regime
      (Corollary 1). Accordingly, it suffices to show that the consumption associated with any
      one of these alternatives is the same under regime j and under regime a. If si ∈ {1u, 2u}
      consumption is E + Gi under both regimes (see Lemma 2). Thus consumption is also policy
      invariant.



Lemma 4 (Revealed Preferences). Consider any pair of states sa , sj obeying: I) sa 6= sj ; II)
                                                                                            

state sa is no worse under regime j than under regime a; III) state sj is no better under regime j
than under regime a. Given Assumptions 3 and 4, no woman pairs states sa and sj .

Proof. The proof is by contradiction. Consider any pair of states sa , sj satisfying properties
                                                                                              

I)-III) and suppose that there exists a woman i who pairs states sa and sj . By Assumption 3,
this means that there exists an alternative (W, H, D, E r ) that is compatible with state sa and
utility maximizing under regime a; and an alternative (W 0 , H 0 , D0 , E r0 ) compatible with state sj
and utility maximizing under regime j. Define E ≡ W H and E 0 ≡ W 0 H 0 . Let Cit = Cit (E, D, E r )
and Cit0 = Cit (E 0 , D0 , E r0 ) for all t ∈ {a, j}, Z = Z (D, E r ) and Z 0 = Z (D0 , E r0 ), R = R (E, D, E r )
and R0 = R (E 0 , D0 , E r0 ). Thus, the woman’s choices under regime a and, respectively, j reveal that

                                  Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) ≥ Uia H 0 , Cia0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 ,
                                                                                         


and                                                                            
                             Uij H 0 , Cij0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 ≥ Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R .

By property II)                                    
                                Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R ≥ Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) .

Combining the above three inequalities we have
                                                   
 Uij H 0 , Cij0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 ≥ Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R ≥ Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) ≥ Uia H 0 , Cia0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 .
                                                                                                                

                                                                                                               (10)

                                                        13
If any of the inequalities in (10) is strict, property III) is violated therefore we have a contradiction.
If no inequality is strict, (10) rewrites as
                                                    
  Uij H 0 , Cij0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 = Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R = Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) = Uia H 0 , Cia0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 .
                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                (11)
The first equality in (11) means that woman i is indifferent between allocation (W, H, D, E ) and             r

(W 0 , H 0 , D0 , E r0 ) under regime j and the last equality in (11) means that woman i is indifferent
between allocation (W, H, D, E r ) and (W 0 , H 0 , D0 , E r0 ) under regime a. She breaks the indifference
in favor of allocation (W, H, D, E r ) under regime a and in favor of allocation (W 0 , H 0 , D0 , E r0 ) under
regime j. By Assumption 4 this means that (W, H, D, E r )=(W 0 , H 0 , D0 , E r0 ) which implies that
sa = sj which violates property I) therefore we have a contradiction.

Main Propositions
Proposition 1 (Restricted Pairings). Given Assumptions 1-4, the pairings of states correspond-
ing to the “-” entries in Table 3 are disallowed and the pairings of states (1r, 1r) and (1u, 1r) must
occur.

Proof. We begin with the pairings that are disallowed. State 1u is dominated under regime j
(Lemma 2). Therefore no woman will pair state sa with state sj = 1u for any      a
                                                                               s ∈ S. Next, by
                                     a            j                       a j
Lemmas 4 and 3, no pairing of state s with state s can occur for all s , s in the collection
                         a j a
                          s , s : s ∈ C0 ∪ C+ , sj ∈ C0 ∪ C− , sa 6= sj .                   (12)

Thus, it suffices to show that the properties I)-III) of Lemma 4 are met. Property I) holds
trivially and properties II) and III) hold by Lemma 3. Therefore no woman will select any of
the pairings in (12). We next turn to the responses that must occur. By Lemma 1, the al-
lowable  states are given by S = {0n, 1n, 2n, 0r, 1r, 1u, 2u}. We just argued that the pairings
   1r, sj : sj ∈ {0n, 1n, 2n, 0r, 1u, 2u} are disallowed,

                                                       therefore the pairing (1r, 1r) must occur.
Similarly, we just argued that the pairings 1u, sj : sj ∈ {0n, 1n, 2n, 0r, 1u, 2u} are disallowed,
                                              

therefore the pairing (1u, 1r) must occur.

Corollary 2 (Additional Restricted Pairings under Utility Specification (2)). Given As-
sumptions 1-4 and subject to specification (2) of the utility function, the pairing of states (0r, 1n)
is disallowed.

Proof. To enhance readability we employ the symbol s %t s0 to signify that under regime t an
                                                               

alternative compatible with state s is weakly preferred to an alternative compatible with state s0 .
The proof is by contradiction. Suppose there is a woman i who selects an alternative compatible
with state 0r under regime a and selects an alternative compatible with state 1n under regime j
entailing earnings E k ≡ W k H k . By Assumption 3, her choice under regime a reveals that

                            [0r %a 0n] : Uia 0, Gi − φi − ηia ≥ Ui (0, 0)
                                                             


which implies Gi ≥ φi + ηia . Her choice under regime j reveals that
                                                                            
                    1n %j 1r : Ui H k , E k − µi ≥ Ui H k , E k − µi + Gi − φi
                             


which implies Gi ≤ φi . Thus, optimality implies φi ≥ Gi ≥ φi + ηia . If the inequality in A.3 of
Assumption 1 holds as a strict inequality ηia > 0 and a contradiction ensues. If the inequality in

                                                        14
A.3 of Assumption 1 holds as an equality ηia = 0. Thus, φi = Gi and woman i must be indifferent
between the alternative compatible with state 0r and the alternative compatible          with state 0n
under regime a which means that Ui (0, 0) ≥ Ui H l , E l for any offer wl , H l entailing earnings
                                                                                    

E l ≡ W l H l in range 1, including E k . The choice of the alternative compatible
                                                                                   with state 1n under
                               k   k                                        l   l
regime j reveals that Ui H , E ≥ Ui (0, 0). Thus, Ui (0, 0) ≥ Ui H , E ≥ Ui (0, 0). If either
inequality is strict a contradiction ensues. Otherwise Ui (0, 0) = Ui H l , E l = Ui (0, 0) and the
woman must be indifferent under regime a between the alternative compatible with state 0n and
the alternative entailing earnings E k off assistance. If however she does not choose earnings E k off
assistance under regime a then she breaks indifference in the same way under j (Assumption 4),
which contradicts her choosing earnings E k off assistance under regime j.

Proposition 2 (Unrestricted Pairings). Given Assumptions 1-4, the pairings of states corre-
sponding to the non “-” entries in Table 3 are allowed.

Proof. State pairings (1r, 1r) and (1u, 1r) must occur by Proposition 1. Table 3’s remaining allowed
state pairings can be conveniently organized in two collections:

                                   {(sa , 1r) : sa ∈ {0n, 1n, 2n, 2u}} ,                           (13)
                                     (0r, sj ) : sj ∈ {0n, 1n, 2n, 1r, 2u} .
                                   
                                                                                                   (14)

    We start by considering the collection of pairs in (13). The common feature of the states in
{0n, 1n, 2n, 2u} is that they are equally attractive under regimes a and j (Lemma 3). Instead, state
1r is no worse under regime j than under regime a (Lemma 3). In light of Proposition (1), to prove
that the pairs in collection (13) are allowed it suffices to provide examples where two women occupy
the same state sa ∈ {0n, 1n, 2n, 2u} under regime a, but the first woman occupies state sj = sa
under regime j and the second woman occupies state sj = 1r under regime j. This also proves that
no pairing in collection (13) is constrained to occur. We then turn to the collection of state pairs
in (14). The common feature of the states in {0n, 1n, 2n, 1r, 2u} is that they are no worse under
regime j than under regime a (Lemma 3). Instead, state 0r is no better under regime j than under
regime a (Lemma 3). To prove that the pairs in collection (14) are allowed it suffices to provide
the example of a woman who occupies state 0r under regime a and state sj ∈ {0n, 1n, 2n, 1r, 2u}
under regime j. This also proves that no pairing in collection (14) is constrained to occur.
    When providing examples we consider the specification of the utility function given in (3).
Finally, we assume that woman i receives either one or two job       offers, that is, either Ki = 1 or
Ki = 2. To enhance readability we employ the symbol s %t s0 to signify that under regime t an
alternative compatible with state s is weakly preferred to an alternative compatible with state s0 .

  1. Pairings (0n, 1r) and (0n, 0n) are allowed, hence neither must occur.
      Consider two women i0 and i00 with preferences represented by (3) with v (x) = x. Let Ki = 1.
      Assume that each woman’s job offer entails earnings in range 1. That is, for i ∈ {i0 , i00 },
      Eik ≡ Wik Hik is in range 1. Let

       (a) woman i = i0 be such that µi = 0, and αi ≥ Wik and

                                                    Gi − φi ≤ 0,

      (b) woman i = i00 be such that µi = 0, and αi ≥ Wik and
                                       n                                          o
          Hik αi − Wik < Gi −φi ≤ min ηia , Hik αi − Wik + κi , Hik αi − Wik + Gi − Gai Eik .


                                                   15
  Both women chose an alternative compatible with state 0n under regime a. We now show
  that woman i0 chooses an alternative compatible with state 0n under regime j while woman i00
  selects an alternative compatible with state 1r under regime j. For both women, the choice
  of the alternative compatible with state 0n under regime a reveals (Assumption 3) that
  this alternative yields as much utility as the available alternatives compatible with states
  {0r, 1r, 1u, 1n}. Thus, for i ∈ {i0 , i00 }:

                          [0n %a 0r] : 0 ≥ Gi − φi − ηia ,                                  (15)
                          [0n %a 1r] : 0 ≥ Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik ,
                                                          
                                                                                            (16)
                          [0n %a 1u] : 0 ≥ Eik + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hik ,                    (17)
                          [0n %a 1n] : 0 ≥ Eik − αi Hik .                                   (18)

  It is easy to verify that descriptions (1a) and (1b) are compatible with optimality under
  regime a, that is, with (15)-(18). Both women prefer state 0n under regime j to the available
  alternatives compatible with states {0r, 1n, 1u} by Proposition 1. Woman i = i0 also prefers
  state 0n to the available alternatives compatible with state 1r under regime j because by
  description (1a) we have Gi − φi ≤ 0 and αi ≥ Wik which imply (19):

                               [0n %j 1r] : 0 ≥ Eik + Gi − φi − αi Hik .                    (19)

  By Assumption 4 she breaks an indifference situation in favor of state 0n. Instead, woman
  i = i00 prefers an alternative available and compatible with state 1r under regime j to state
  0n because by description (1b) we have Hik αi − Wik < Gi − φi which imply (20):

                               [1r %j 0n] : Eik + Gi − φi − αi Hik > 0.                     (20)

2. Pairings (1n, 1r) and (1n, 1n) are allowed, hence neither must occur.
  Consider two women i0 and i00 with preferences represented by (3) with v (x) = x. Let Ki = 1.
  Assume that each woman’s job offer entails earnings in range 1. That is, for i ∈ {i0 , i00 },
  Eik ≡ Wik Hik is in range 1. Let

   (a) woman i = i0 be such that µi = ηia = ηij = αi = 0 and

                                               Gi − φi ≤ 0,

   (b) woman i = i00 be such that µi = ηia = ηij = αi = 0 and
                                                 n                o
                            0 < Gi − φi ≤ min κi , Eik , Gi − Gai Eik .

  Both women chose an alternative compatible with state 1n under regime a. We now show
  that woman i0 chooses an alternative compatible with state 1n under regime j while woman i00
  selects an alternative compatible with state 1r under regime j. For both women, the choice
  of the alternative compatible with state 1n under regime a reveals (Assumption 3) that
  this alternative yields as much utility as the available alternatives compatible with states
  {0n, 0r, 1r, 1u, 1n}. Thus, for i ∈ {i0 , i00 }:

                             [1n %a 0n] : Eik ≥ 0,                                          (21)
                             [1n %a 0r] : Eik ≥ Gi − φi ,                                   (22)
                             [1n %a 1n] : Eik ≥ Eil ∀Eil ,                                  (23)
                             [1n %a 1r] : Eik ≥ Eik + Gai Eik − φi ,
                                                             
                                                                                            (24)
                             [1n %a 1u]    : Eik ≥ Eik + Gi − φi − κi .                     (25)

                                              16
  It is easy to verify that descriptions (2a) and (2b) are compatible with optimality under
  regime a, that is, with (21)-(25). Both women prefer state 1n under regime j to the available
  alternatives compatible with states {0r, 0n, 1u}, by Proposition 1. Woman i = i0 also prefers
  state 1n to the available alternatives compatible with state 1r under regime j because by
  description (2a) we have Gi − φi ≤ 0 which implies (26):

                                   [1n %j 1r] : Eik ≥ Eik + Gi − φi .                          (26)

  By Assumption 4 she breaks an indifference situation in favor of state 1n. Instead, woman
  i = i00 prefers earning Eik on assistance to earning the same amount off assistance under regime
  j because by description (2b) we have Gi − φi > 0 which implies (27):

                                   [1r %j 1n] : Eik + Gi − φi > Eik .                          (27)

  Thus, the available alternative entailing earnings Eik on assistance is preferred under regime
  j to the available alternatives compatible with all states but 1r.

3. Pairings (2n, 1r) and (2n, 2n) are allowed, hence neither must occur.
  Consider two women i0 and i00 with preferences represented by (3) with v (x) = x. Let Ki = 2.
  Assume that each woman’s two job offers entail earnings in range 1 and in range 2 respectively.
  That is, for i ∈ {i0 , i00 }, Eil ≡ Wil Hil is in range 1 and Eik ≡ Wik Hik is in range 2. Let

   (a) woman i = i0 be such that µi = ηia = ηij = αi = 0, Wik ≥ Wil and

                                               Gi − φi ≤ 0,

   (b) woman i = i00 be such that µi = ηia = ηij = αi = 0, Wik ≥ Wil and
                                              n                               o
                   Eik − Eil < Gi − φi ≤ min κi , Eik , Gi − Gai Eil + Eik − Eil .

  Both women chose an alternative compatible with state 2n under regime a. We now show
  that woman i0 chooses an alternative compatible with state 2n under regime j while woman i00
  selects an alternative compatible with state 1r under regime j. For both women, the choice
  of the alternative compatible with state 2n under regime a reveals (Assumption 3) that
  this alternative yields as much utility as the available alternatives compatible with states
  {0n, 0r, 1n, 1r, 1u, 2u}. Thus, for i ∈ {i0 , i00 }:

                               [2n %a 0n] : Eik ≥ 0,                                           (28)
                               [2n %a 0r] : Eik ≥ Gi − φi ,                                    (29)
                               [2n %a 1n] : Eik ≥ Eil ,                                        (30)
                               [2n %a 1r] : Eik ≥ Eil + Gai Eil − φi ,
                                                               
                                                                                               (31)
                               [2n %a 1u] : Eik ≥ Eil + Gi − φi − κi ,                         (32)
                               [2n %a 2u] : Eik ≥ Eik + Gi − φi − κi .                         (33)

  It is easy to verify that descriptions (3a) and (3b) are compatible with optimality under
  regime a, that is, with (28)-(33). Both women prefer state 2n under regime j to the available
  alternatives compatible with states {0r, 2u, 0n, 1n, 1u}, by Proposition 1. Woman i = i0 also
  prefers state 2n to the available alternatives compatible with state 1r under j because Eik ≥ Eil
  by (30) and by description (3a) we have Gi − φi ≤ 0 which implies (34):

                                   [2n %j 1r] : Eik ≥ Eil + Gi − φi .                          (34)


                                               17
   By Assumption 4 she breaks indifference in favor of state 1n. Instead, woman i = i00 prefers
   earning Eil on assistance to earning Eik off assistance under regime j because by description
   (3b) we have Gi − φi > Eik − Eil which implies (35):
                                        [1r %j 2n] : Eil + Gi − φi > Eik .                               (35)

4. Pairings (2u, 1r) and (2u, 2u) are allowed, hence neither must occur.
   Consider two women i0 and i00 with preferences represented by (3) with v (x) = x. Let Ki = 2.
   Assume that each woman’s two job offers entail earnings in range 1 and in range 2 respectively.
   That is, for i ∈ {i0 , i00 }, Eil ≡ Wil Hil is in range 1 and Eik ≡ Wik Hik is in range 2. Let

    (a) woman i = i0 be such that µi = ηia = ηij = αi = 0, φi > φi , Wik ≥ Wil and
                                             n                  o
                                    κi ≤ min Gi − φi , Eik − Eil ,

    (b) woman i = i00 be such that µi = ηia = ηij = αi = 0, φi > φi , Wik ≥ Wil and
                                            n                               o
                      Eik − Eil < κi ≤ min Gi − φi , Eik − Eil + Gi − Gai Eil .

   Both women chose an alternative compatible with state 2u under regime a. We now show
   that woman i0 chooses an alternative compatible with state 2u under regime j while woman i00
   selects an alternative compatible with state 1r under regime j. For both women, the choice
   of the alternative compatible with state 2u under regime a reveals (Assumption 3) that
   this alternative yields as much utility as the available alternatives compatible with states
   {0n, 0r, 1n, 1r, 1u, 2n}. Thus, for i ∈ {i0 , i00 }:
                           [2u %a 0n] : Eik + Gi − φi − κi      ≥ 0,                                     (36)
                           [2u %a 0r] : Eik + Gi − φi − κi      ≥ Gi − φ i ,                             (37)
                           [2u %a 1n] : Eik + Gi − φi − κi      ≥ Eil ,                                  (38)
                           [2u %a 1r] : Eik + Gi − φi − κi      ≥ Eil + Gai Eil − φi ,
                                                                               
                                                                                                         (39)
                           [2u %a 1u] : Eik + Gi − φi − κi ≥ Eil + Gi − φi − κi ,                        (40)
                           [2u %a 2n] : Eik + Gi − φi − κi ≥ Eik .                                       (41)
   It is easy to verify that descriptions (4a) and (4b) are compatible with optimality under
   regime a, that is, with (36)-(41). Both women prefer state 2u under regime j to the available
   alternatives compatible with states {0r, 0n, 1n, 2n, 1u}, by Proposition 1. Woman i = i0 also
   prefers state 2u to the available alternative compatible with state 1r under regime j because
   by description (4a) we have κi ≤ Eik − Eil which implies (42):
                                 2u %j 1r : Eik + Gi − φi − κi ≥ Eil + Gi − φi .
                                        
                                                                                                         (42)
   By Assumption 4 she breaks an indifference situation in favor of state 2u. Instead, woman
   i = i00 prefers earning and truthfully reporting Eil on assistance to under-reporting earnings
     k                                                   a   l
                                                               
   Ei on assistance under regime j because Gi ≥ Gi Ei and by description (4b) we have
   κi > Eik − Eil which implies (43):
                                 1r %j 2u : Eil + Gi − φi > Eik + Gi − φi − κi .
                                        
                                                                                                         (43)

5. Pairings 0r, sj with sj ∈ {0r, 0n, 2n, 1r, 2u} are allowed.
                    

   Consider five women i0 , i00 , i000 , iIV , iV with preferences represented by (3) with v (x) = x.
                         

   Let Ki = 2. Assume that each       woman’s two job offers entail earnings in range 1 and in range
   2 respectively. That is, for i ∈ i0 , i00 , i000 , iIV , iV , Eil ≡ Wil Hil is in range 1 and Eik ≡ Wik Hik
   is in range 2. Let

                                                    18
 (a) woman i = i0 be such that µi = 0, ηia = ηij = ηi , φi > φi , Wil = Wik = Wi ≤ αi , and
                                           n                        o
                               0 ≤ ηi ≤ min Gi − φi , Hil (αi − Wi ) ,

(b) woman i = i00 be such that µi = 0, ηia = ηij = ηi , φi > φi , Wil = Wik = Wi ≤ αi , and
                          n                                                          o
     Hil αi − Wil < ηi ≤ min Gi − φi , Hil (αi − Wi ) + κi , Hil (αi − Wi ) + Gi − Gai Eil ,

 (c) woman i = i000 be such that µi = 0, ηia < ηij , Wil = Wik = Wi < αi and
                                                    n                o
                             ηia ≤ Gi − φi < min Hil (αi − Wi ) , ηij ,

(d) woman i = iIV be such that ηia ≤ µi ≤ Hik Wik − αi , φi > φi , ηia < ηij , Wik > αi = Wil
                                                      

    and
                                        n                                         o
    Hik Wik − αi −µi +ηia ≤ Gi −φi < min Hik Wik − αi − µi + ηij , Hik Wik − αi , κi ,

 (e) woman i = iV be such that ηia ≤ µi ≤ Hik Wik − αi , φi > φi , ηia < ηij , Wik > αi = Wil
                                                      

     and
                                    n                                                 o
     Hik Wik − αi −µi +ηia ≤ κi ≤ min Hik Wik − αi − µi + ηij , Hik Wik − αi , Gi − φi , .

All these women chose an alternative compatible with state 0r under regime a. We now show
that, under regime j, woman i0 selects an alternative compatible with state 0r, woman i00
selects an alternative compatible with state 1r, woman i000 selects an alternative compatible
with state 0n, woman iIV selects an alternative compatible with state 2n, and woman iV
selects an alternative compatible with state 2u. For all women, the choice of the alternative
compatible with state 0r under regime a reveals (Assumption 3) that this alternative yields
as much utility
               0 as00 the  available alternatives compatible with states {0n, 1n, 2n, 1r, 1u, 2u}.
                        000
Thus, for i ∈ i , i , i , iIV , iV :

                  [0r %a 0n] : Gi − φi − ηia   ≥ 0,                                            (44)
                  [0r %a 1n] : Gi − φi − ηia   ≥ Eil − µi − αi Hil ,                           (45)
                  [0r %a 2n] : Gi − φi − ηia   ≥ Eik − µi − αi Hik ,                           (46)
                  [0r %a 1r] : Gi − φi − ηia   ≥ Eil − µi + Gai Eil − φi − αi Hil ,
                                                                     
                                                                                               (47)
                  [0r %a 1u]   : Gi − φi − ηia ≥ Eil − µi + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hil ,            (48)
                  [0r %a 2u]   : Gi − φi − ηia ≥ Eik − µi + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hik .            (49)

It is easy to verify that descriptions (5a)-(5e) are compatible with optimality under regime
a, that is, with (44)-(49). Because ηia = ηij for i ∈ {i0 , i00 }, state 0r has the same utility
value under both regimes hence both women prefer state 0r under regime j to the available
alternatives compatible with states {0n, 1n, 2n, 1u, 2u}, by Proposition 1. Woman i = i0 also
prefers state 0r to the available alternative compatible with state 1r under regime j because
by description (5a) we have ηi ≤ Hil (αi − Wi ) and µi = 0 which imply (50):

                         [0r %j 1r] : Gi − φi − ηi ≥ Eil + Gi − φi − αi Hil .                  (50)

By Assumption 4 she breaks an indifference situation in favor of state 0r. Instead, woman
i = i00 prefers earning and truthfully reporting Eil on assistance to not working on assistance

                                              19
  under regime j because by description (5b) we have ηi > Hil (αi − Wi ) and µi = 0 which
  imply (51):
                                [1r %j 0r] : Eil + Gi − φi − αHil > Gi − φi − ηi .                                      (51)
  Consider now women i000 , iIV , iV . None selects an alternative compatible with state 1u
                         

  under regime j by Proposition 1. Woman i = i000 prefers not working off assistance (state
  0n) to the available alternatives compatible with states {0r, 1n, 1r, 2n, 2u} under regime j
  because, by description (5c), we have µi = 0 and, respectively, Gi −φi < ηij which implies (52);
  Hil (αi − Wi ) ≥ 0 which implies (53); Hik (αi − Wi ) ≥ 0 which implies (54); Hil (αi − Wi ) ≥
  Gi − φi which implies (55); and Hik (αi − Wi ) + κi ≥ Gi − φi which implies (56):

                                  0n %j 0r           0 > Gi − φi − ηij ,
                                          
                                                 :                                                                      (52)
                                 0n %j 1n                 Eil − αi Hil ,
                                          
                                                 :   0≥                                                                 (53)
                                 0n %j 2n                 Eik + −αHiik ,
                                          
                                                 :   0≥                                                                 (54)
                                  0n %j 1r                Eil + Gi − φi −          αi Hil ,
                                          
                                                 :   0≥                                                                 (55)
                                  0n %j 2u                Eik                              αi Hik .
                                          
                                                 :   0≥         + Gi − φi − κi −                                        (56)

  Woman i = iIV prefers earning Eik off assistance (state 2n) to the available alternatives
  compatible with states {0n, 0r, 1n, 1r, 2u} under regime j because, by description (5d), we
  have Hik Wik − αi ≥ µi which implies (57); Gi − φi < Hik Wik − αi − µi + ηij which implies
                                                                    

  (58); Wik > αi = Wil which imply (59); Gi − φi < Hik Wik − αi and Wik > αi = Wil which
                                                                 

  imply (60); Gi − φi < κi which implies (61):

                   2n %j 0n        : Eik − µi − αi Hik ≥ 0,
                            
                                                                                                                        (57)
                    2n %j 0r            Eik            αi Hik                      ηij ,
                            
                                   :          − µi −            > G i − φi −                                            (58)
                   2n %j 1n             Eik            αi Hik       Eil − µi − αi Hil ,
                            
                                   :          − µi −            ≥                                                       (59)
                    2n %j 1r            Eik            αi Hik       Eil − µi + Gi − φi − αi Hil ,
                            
                                   :          − µi −            ≥                                                       (60)
                    2n %j 2u            Eik            αi Hik       Eik − µi + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hik .
                            
                                   :          − µi −            ≥                                                       (61)

  Woman i = iV prefers under-reporting earning Eik on assistance (state 2u) to the available
  alternatives compatible with states {0n, 0r, 1n, 1r, 2n} under regime j because, by description
  (5e), we have Hik Wik − αi ≥ µi and Gi −φi ≥ κi which imply (62); Hik Wik − αi +ηij −µi ≥
                                                                                    

  κi which implies (63); Hik Wik − αi ≥ µi , Gi − φi ≥ κi and Wil = αi which imply (64);
                                       

  Hik Wik − αi ≥ κi and Wil = αi which imply (65); Gi − φi ≥ κi which implies (66):
                

              2u %j 0n      : Eik − µi + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hik ≥ 0,
                       
                                                                                                                        (62)
               2u %j 0r          Eik                                  αi Hik                     ηij ,
                       
                            :          − µi + Gi − φi − κi −                   > G i − φi −                             (63)
              2u %j 1n           Eik                                  αi Hik   ≥ Eil − µi − αi Hil ,
                       
                            :          − µi + Gi − φi − κi −                                                            (64)
               2u %j 1r          Eik                                  αi Hik       Eil − µi + Gi − φi        αi Hil ,
                       
                            :          − µi + Gi − φi − κi −                   ≥                         −              (65)
              2u %j 2n           Eik                                  αi Hik       Eik − µi − αi Hik .
                       
                            :          − µi + Gi − φi − κi −                   ≥                                        (66)

6. Pairing (0r, 1n) is allowed.
  Consider a woman i with preferences represented by (3) with v (.) strictly concave. Let
  Ki = 1. Assume that her job offer entails earnings in range 1. That is, Eik ≡ Wik Hik is in
  range 1. Let




                                                         20
        (a) woman i be such that ηia = µi = 0 and2
                                                j 
                                                                            
                    v Gi − v Eik  + αi Hik −
                                                                                      
                                              ηi ,                    v  G i   − v (0) ,
              max                                   < φi ≤ min                             ,
                                                                  v Gi − v Eik + αi Hik
                                                                                 
                       v Eik + Gi − v Eik
                                            

                     v Eik + Gai Eik  − v Gi  ,
                                                             
                                                           k
               max                                  ≤ α  H
                                                        i i  ≤ v  Eik − v (0) .
                      v Eik + Gi − κi − v Gi

       Woman i chooses an alternative compatible with state 0r under a. We now show that, under
       regime j, she selects an alternative compatible with state 1n. The choice of the alternative
       compatible with state 0r under regime a reveals (Assumption 3) that this alternative yields
       as much utility as the available alternatives compatible with states {0n, 1n, 1r, 1u}. Thus:

                            [0r %a 0n]
                                              
                                       : v G i − φi       ≥ v (0) ,                                              (67)
                            [0r %a 1n] : v Gi − φi              Eik    − αi Hik ,
                                                                     
                                                          ≥v                                                     (68)
                            [0r %a 1r] : v Gi − φi              Eik   + Gai Eik        − φi − αi Hik ,
                                                                                 
                                                          ≥v                                                     (69)
                            [0r %a 1u] : v Gi − φi              Eik                   − φi − αi Hik .
                                                                                 
                                                          ≥v          + Gi − κi                                  (70)

       It is easy to verify that description (6a) is compatible with optimality under regime a, that
       is, with (67)-(70). Woman i will not selected an alternative compatible with state 1u under
       regime j by Proposition 1. She prefers earning Eik off assistance (state 1n) to the available
       alternatives compatible with states {0n, 0r, 1r} under j because, by description (6a), we have
       v Eik − v (0) ≥ αi Hik which implies (71); v Gi − v Eik + αHik − ηij < φi which implies
                                                                 

       (72); and v Eik + Gi − v Eik ≤ φi which implies (73):
                                      

                              1n %j 0n : v Eik − αi Hik ≥ v (0) ,
                                             
                                                                                                                 (71)
                               1n %j 0r : v Eik − αi Hik > v Gi − φi − ηij ,
                                                             
                                                                                                                 (72)
                               1n %j 1r : v Eik − αi Hik ≥ v Eik + Gi − φi − αi Hik .
                                                                  
                                                                                                                 (73)

   7. We conclude the proof by remarking that, because pairings 0r, sj with sj ∈ {0r, 0n, 1n, 2n, 1r, 2u}
                                                                      

      are allowed, none of them must occur.




   2
              of v (.) enables the conditions imposed. For instance, the first condition requires v Eik + Ḡi −v Eik <
                                                                                                                   
    Concavity
     
v Ḡi − v (0) which cannot hold unless v (.) is (strictly) concave.


                                                         21
5    Testable Revealed Preference Restrictions
Lemma 5 (Revealed Preference Restrictions). Consider the system of equations:

                     pj0n − pa0n = −π0n,1r pa0n + π0r,0n pa0p
                     pj1n − pa1n = −π1n,1r pa1n + π0r,1n pa0p
                     pj2n − pa2n = −π2n,1r pa2n + π0r,2n pa0p                        .                  (74)
                      j      a                                                    a
                     p0p − p0p = − (π0r,0n + π0r,2n + π0r,1r + π0r,1n + π0r,2u ) p0p
                     pj2p − pa2p = π0r,2u pa0p − π2u,1r pa2p

System (74) implies 16 inequality restrictions on pj − pa :
                                                                                           
                                                                                pa0p − pj0p     ≥   0   (75)
                                                                                         
                                                                pa0p − pj0p + pa0n − pj0n       ≥   0   (76)
                                                                                         
                                                                pa0p − pj0p + pa1n − pj1n       ≥   0   (77)
                                                                                         
                                                                pa0p − pj0p + pa2n − pj2n       ≥   0   (78)
                                                                                         
                                                                 pa0p − pj0p + pa2p − pj2p      ≥   0   (79)
                                                                                       
                                                pa0p − pj0p + pa0n − pj0n + pa1n − pj1n         ≥   0   (80)
                                                                                       
                                                pa0p − pj0p + pa2n − pj2n + pa0n − pj0n         ≥   0   (81)
                                                                                       
                                                 pa0p − pj0p + pa0n − pj0n + pa2p − pj2p        ≥   0   (82)
                                                                                       
                                                pa0p − pj0p + pa2n − pj2n + pa1n − pj1n         ≥   0   (83)
                                                                                       
                                                 pa0p − pj0p + pa2p − pj2p + pa1n − pj1n        ≥   0   (84)
                                                                                       
                                                 pa0p − pj0p + pa2n − pj2n + pa2p − pj2p        ≥   0   (85)
                                                                                     
                                pa0p − pj0p + pa2n − pj2n + pa0n − pj0n + pa1n − pj1n           ≥   0   (86)
                                                                                     
                                 pa0p − pj0p + pa0n − pj0n + pa2p − pj2p + pa1n − pj1n          ≥   0   (87)
                                                                                     
                                 pa0p − pj0p + pa2n − pj2n + pa0n − pj0n + pa2p − pj2p          ≥   0   (88)
                                                                                     
                                 pa0p − pj0p + pa2n − pj2n + pa2p − pj2p + pa1n − pj1n          ≥   0   (89)
                                                                                   
                  pa0p − pj0p + pa2n − pj2n + pa0n − pj0n + pa2p − pj2p + pa1n − pj1n           ≥   0   (90)

Proof. Restrictions
                 P (75-90) are obtained      by using the fact that, by definition, 0 ≤ πsa ,sj ≤ 1 all
 a   j
s , s ∈ S and                              a
                    sj ∈S πsa ,sj = 1 all s ∈ S. The response margins (π0n,1r , π1n,1r , π2n,1r , π2u,1r )
may each take value 0 or 1. The response margins (π0r,0n , π0r,1n , π0r,1r , π0r,2n , π0r,2u ) may each
take value 0 or 1 but if one of them takes the value 1 the others are constrained to take the
value 0. Thus, there are 24 + 1 + 5 = 22 viable ordered arrangements of 9 elements each taking
the boundary value 0 or 1. Each arrangement implies restrictions on pj − pa through system
(74). 16 restrictions are non redundant: they are inequalities (75-90). For instance, consider
the fourth equation in system (74). Letting π0r,0n + π0r,2n + π0r,1r + π0r,1n + π0r,2u = 0, this
equation implies
                  (75). Asanother example,
                                               sum the first and the fourth equations in system (74)
              j                 j
to obtain p0n − p0n + p0p − p0p = −π0n,1r pa0n − (π0r,2n + π0r,1r + π0r,1n + π0r,2u ) pa0p . Letting
                     a               a

π0r,2n + π0r,1r + π0r,1n + π0r,2u = 0 and π0n,1r = 0, this equation implies (76).


                                                         22
Remark 5 (Easy to Describe Testable Restrictions). In Section VII of the paper we explicitly
refer to five of the inequalities in (75-90). They are: inequality (75), inequality (76) which rewrites
as pa0 − pj0 ≥ 0 where pt0 ≡ pt0n + pt0p for t ∈ {a, j}; inequality (86) which rewrites as pa1+,p − pj1+,p ≤ 0
where pt1+,p ≡ pt1p + pt2p for t ∈ {a, j}; inequality (88) which rewrites as pa1 − pj1 ≤ 0 where
pt1 ≡ pt1n + pt1p for t ∈ {a, j}; and inequality (90) which rewrites as pa1p − pj1p ≤ 0.

Corollary 3 (Additional Testable Restrictions under a Special Form of Preferences).
Subject to specification (2) of the utility function, revealed preference imply a testable restriction in
addition to (75-90):
                                              pa1n − pj1n ≥ 0.                                       (91)
Subject to (91), inequalities (77), (80), (83), (84), (86), (87), (89), and (90) are redundant.

Proof. Subject to specification (2) of the utility function, π0r,1n = 0 by Corollary 2. System (74)
simplifies accordingly. In particular, the second equation writes pa1n − pj1n = π1n,1r pa1n . Letting
π1n,1r = 0 we obtain restriction (91). Redundancy of inequalities (77), (80), (83), (84), (86), (87),
(89), and (90) is easily verified. For instance, inequality (77) is implied by (75) and (91).




                                                     23
6        Bounds on the Response Margins
Derivation of Bounds
The identified set Ξ of response probabilities consists of the set of vectors π obeying (74) that
satisfy the usual adding up and non-negativity conditions of probability distributions.3 The upper
and lower bounds on each of the response probabilities correspond to vertices of the identified set
Ξ since a solution to any linear programming problem has to occur at one of the vertices of the
problem’s constraint space (see Murty, 1983). Accordingly, to obtain the set of possible solutions
to the linear programming problem

                                                  max π 0 λ subject to π ∈ Ξ,
                                                   π

we enumerated all vertices of the convex polytope defined by the intersection of the hyperplane
defined by the equations in (74) with the hypercube defined by the unit constraints on the parame-
ters. In practice, this amounted to setting all possible choices of four of the
                                                                               nine parameters in (74)
                                                                            9
to 0 or 1 and solving for the remaining five parameters. There were 4 = 126 different possible
choices of four parameters and 24 = 16 different binary arrangements those parameters could take,
yielding 2016 possible vertices. However we were able to use the structure of our problem to rule out
the existence of solutions at certain vertices – e.g., π2n,1r and π0r,2n cannot both be set arbitrarily
because this would lead to a violation of the third equation in (74). Such restrictions reduced the
problem to solving the system at a manageable number of vertices. We then enumerated the set of
minima and maxima each parameter could achieve across the relevant solutions. After eliminating
dominated solutions, we arrived at the stated bounds.

Lists of Bounds
The analytical expressions for the bounds on the response probabilities are presented below. The
symbol (*) is placed next to a solution, or a term, that is redundant subject to the specification of
the utility function given in (2).

Simple Response Margins
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                   1,                                   
                                                                                              j
                                                                                        pa         )+(pa0p −pj0p )
                                                                                                                                        
                                                         
                                                                                   (    2n −p2n
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                                                              pa
                                                                                                               ,                         
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                2n                                      
                                                                             (pa2n −pj2n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa0n −pj0n )
                                                         
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                         ,
                                                         
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                         
                                                         
                                                                                                  pa
                                                                                                    2n
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                             (pa2n −pj2n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2p −pj2p )
                                                         
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                        
                                                         
                                                         
                                                                                               pa
                                                                                                                      ,                  
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                         
                (                  )                                                           2n                                      
                     pa2n − pj2n                                      (pa2n −pj2n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa0n −pj0n )+(pa2p −pj2p )
                                                         
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                         
           max 0,                       ≤ π2n,1r ≤ min                                          pa
                                                                                                                                   ,         .
                         pa2n                            
                                                                        (pa
                                                                                   j
                                                                               −p2n )+(pa
                                                                                                  2n
                                                                                                   j
                                                                                               −p0p )+(pa
                                                                                                                   j
                                                                                                               −p1n )
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                            2n              0p              1n
                                                                                                                                        
                                                         
                                                         
                                                                                            pa
                                                                                                                        , (∗)            
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                              2n                                        
                                                                   a     j          a    j          a    j          a     j             
                                                         
                                                                (p 2n −p 2n  ) +( p 0p −p0p )+  ( p 0n −p0n  ) +(p  1n −p 1n )
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                                                            p a                                , (∗)    
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                              2n                                        
                                                                 (pa2n −pj2n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2p −pj2p )+(pa1n −pj1n )
                                                         
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                , (∗)
                                                         
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                         
                                                         
                                                                                            pa2n
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                   j                j               j               j                j
                                                            a               a              a                a               a
                                                                                                                                         
                                                          (p2n −p2n )+(p0p −p0p )+(p0n −p0n )+(p2p −p2p )+(p1n −p1n ) (∗)
                                                         
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                              pa
                                                                                               2n

    3
        Here this means that π ∈ [0, 1]9 and π0r,1n + π0r,1r + π0r,2u + π0r,2n + π0r,0n ≤ 1.




                                                                      24
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                      1,                                                       
                                                                                                                 j
                                                                                                           pa         )+(pa0p −pj0p )
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                                                      (    0n −p0n
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                                                                pa
                                                                                                                                 ,                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                  0n                                                           
                                                                                               (pa0n −pj0n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2n −pj2n )
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                         
                                                                                                                     pa
                                                                                                                       0n
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                               (pa0n −pj0n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2p −pj2p )
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                                                        ,                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                
            (                              )                                                                     0n                                                           
                      pa0n      −   pj0n                                                (pa0n −pj0n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2n −pj2n )+(pa2p −pj2p )
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                
       max 0,                                    ≤ π0n,1r ≤ min                                                 pa
                                                                                                                                                   ,                                .
                               pa0n                                      
                                                                                        (pa
                                                                                                   j
                                                                                               −p0n )+(pa
                                                                                                                  0n
                                                                                                                   j
                                                                                                               −p0p )+(pa
                                                                                                                                   j
                                                                                                                               −p1n )
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                            0n              0p              1n
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                                                            pa
                                                                                                                                        , (∗)                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                              0n                                                               
                                                                                   a     j          a    j          a    j          a     j                                    
                                                                         
                                                                                (p 0n −p 0n  ) +( p 0p −p0p )+  ( p 1n −p1n  ) +(p  2n −p 2n )
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                                                            p a                                , (∗)                           
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                              0n                                                               
                                                                                 (pa0n −pj0n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa1n −pj1n )+(pa2p −pj2p )
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                , (∗)
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                         
                                                                                                            pa0n
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                   j                j               j               j                j
                                                                            a               a              a                a               a
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                          (p0n −p0n )+(p0p −p0p )+(p1n −p1n )+(p2n −p2n )+(p2p −p2p ) (∗)
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                  pa
                                                                                                                   0n
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                         
                                                                                                                   1,                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                       (pa2p −pj2p )+(pa0p −pj0p )
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                  pa
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                         
                                                                                                                  2p                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                               (pa2p −pj2p )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2n −pj2n )
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                      pa
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                         
                                                                                                                      2p                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                               (pa2p −pj2p )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa0n −pj0n )
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                      pa
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                            
            (                              )                            
                                                                                                                      2p                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                               j               j                j                    j
                      pa2p      −   pj2p                                             (   pa     )+(
                                                                                          2p −p2p        pa     )+(
                                                                                                          0p −p0p         pa
                                                                                                                           0n −p0n)+(          pa   )
                                                                                                                                                2n −p2n
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                            
       max 0,                                    ≤ π2u,1r ≤ min                                                  pa
                                                                                                                                                      ,                             .
                                                                                                                   2p
                               pa2p                                      
                                                                                         ( p a
                                                                                                −p
                                                                                                  j
                                                                                                      ) +( p a
                                                                                                                −p
                                                                                                                   j
                                                                                                                      )+  ( p a
                                                                                                                                 −p
                                                                                                                                    j
                                                                                                                                        )
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                             2p              0p               1n
                                                                                                 2p               0p               1n
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                                                              pa
                                                                                                                                          , (∗)                             
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                         
                                                                                                               2p                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                           j               j                j                 j
                                                                                  ( p2p −p2p )+(p0p −p0p )+(p1n −p1n )+(pa
                                                                                     a              a               a
                                                                                                                                         −p0n )
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                      0n
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                                                              pa
                                                                                                                                                   , (∗)                    
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                         
                                                                                                               2p                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                     a     j        a      j        a       j         a       j
                                                                         
                                                                                 (p2p −p2p )+(p0p −p0p )+(p1n −p1n )+(p2n −p2n )                                           
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                                                              pa
                                                                                                                                                   , (∗)                    
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                         
                                                                                                               2p                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                              a     j        a     j         a      j          a     j           a      j
                                                                         
                                                                          ( p2p −p 2p )+ (p 0p −p 0p ) + ( p1n −p  1n ) + ( p 0n −p 0n  )+  ( p 2n −p2n )
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                         
                                                                                                                ap2p
                                                                                                                                                           (∗)              
                                                                                                                                                                            


                                                                                                                                                    (pa0p −pj0p )
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                                                                                    ,                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                          0p                                           
                                                                                                                                          (pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2p −pj2p )
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                                                                                                ,                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                          0p                                           
                                                                                                                                          (pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2n −pj2n )
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                                                                                                ,                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                          0p                                           
                                                                                                                                                  j                   j
                                                                                                                                            pa                  pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                         (  0p −p0p      )+(    0n −p0n    )                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                                                                                                ,                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                          0p                                           
                                                                                                                                          j            j            j
                                                                                                                                    pa    + pa                  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               (    0p −p0p   ) (
                                                                                                                                                2p −p2p + p2n −p2n) (                   )               
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                  p0p
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,           
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                       j               j            j
                                                                                                                             pa                 a               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               (              ) (
                                                                                                                               0p −p0p + p2p −p2p + p0n −p0n      ) (                   )               
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,           
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                  0p                                                   
                                                                                                                                      j                j             j
                                                                                                                             pa                 a               a
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                (              ) (                ) (                   )
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                               0p −p0p + p2n −p2n + p0n −p0n
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                  pa
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                   0p
   (                                                                          )
         pa0p       pj0p           pj0n      pj2p       pj2n       pj1n (∗)
                           
                −              −          −         −          −
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                             j                j                j           j
                                                                                                                     pa
                                                                                                                      (                 a
                                                                                                                                      ) (                a
                                                                                                                                                          ) (          a
                                                                                                                                                                            ) (                 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                      0p −p0p + p2n −p2n + p0n −p0n + p2p −p2p
max 0,                                                                            ≤ π0r,1r ≤ min                                                  pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,       .
                                          pa0p                                                       
                                                                                                                                           j
                                                                                                                                                   0p
                                                                                                                                                           j
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                   pa (               a
                                                                                                                                                     ) (                )
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                     0p −p0p + p1n −p1n
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                         , (∗)
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                               pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                 0p
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                   j                j             j
                                                                                                                          pa(                a
                                                                                                                                              ) (            a
                                                                                                                                                                ) (            )
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                            0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p2p −p2p
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                 , (∗)
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                               pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                 0p
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                   j                j             j
                                                                                                                         pa (               a
                                                                                                                                              ) (            a
                                                                                                                                                                ) (            )
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                            0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p2n −p2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                 , (∗)
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                               pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                 0p
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                   j                j             j
                                                                                                                         pa (               a
                                                                                                                                              ) (            a
                                                                                                                                                                ) (            )
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                            0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p0n −p0n
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                 , (∗)
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                               pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                 0p
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                          j                j               j             j
                                                                                                                  (pa                a
                                                                                                                                    ) (               a
                                                                                                                                                         ) (       a
                                                                                                                                                                        ) (            )
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p2p −p2p + p0n −p0n
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                         , (∗)
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                               pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                 0p
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                          j                j               j             j
                                                                                                                  (pa                a
                                                                                                                                    ) (               a
                                                                                                                                                         ) (       a
                                                                                                                                                                        ) (            )
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p2p −p2p + p2n −p2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                         , (∗)
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                               pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                 0p
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                   j                j                j            j          j
                                                                                                             pa             a                 a              a             a
                                                                                                      (                  ) (                 ) (               ) (             ) (            )
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                              0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p2p −p2p + p2n −p2n + p0n −p0n
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (∗) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                pa0p




                                                                                        25
                                                                                              j
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                          p2n
                                                
                                                                                         pa
                                                                                              ,                                                    
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                           0p
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                      (pa0p −pj0p )
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                               ,
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                       pa
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                        0p
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                           (pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2p −pj2p )
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                     ,
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                          pa
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                           0p
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                           (pa0p −pj0p )+(pa0n −pj0n )
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                     ,
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                               pa
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                 0p
   (                      )                                                                                                                      
       pj − pa2n
                                                                         j         j         j
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                (   pa  + pa     ) (      a
                                                                                                       ) (                       )
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                     0p −p0p 0n −p0n + p2p −p2p
max 0, 2n a                    ≤ π0r,2n ≤ min                                  pa
                                                                                                                                     ,                 .
          p0p                                                           j
                                                                                 0p
                                                                                      j
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                  pa  (            a
                                                                                       ) (                   )
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                    0p −p0p + p1n −p1n
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                 , (∗)
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                
                                                
                                                                            pa
                                                                              0p
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                  j               j         j
                                                            pa
                                                            (              a
                                                                               ) (      a
                                                                                                      ) (                )
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                             0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p2p −p2p
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                             , (∗)
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                
                                                
                                                                            pa
                                                                              0p
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                  j              j          j
                                                           pa
                                                            (             a
                                                                               ) (      a
                                                                                                  ) (                    )
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                             0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p0n −p0n
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                             , (∗)
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                
                                                
                                                                            pa
                                                                              0p
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                            j             j            j        j
                                                      pa            a               a         a
                                                 (                 ) (                 ) (                  ) (                         )
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                       0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p2p −p2p + p0n −p0n
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                             (∗)
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                              pa
                                                                               0p
                                                                                             j                                                    
                                                                                          p2p
                                                
                                                
                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                  ,                                                
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                          0p                                                      
                                                                                      (pa0p −pj0p )
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                
                                                
                                                                                      pa
                                                                                               ,                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                       0p                                                         
                                                                           (pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2n −pj2n )
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                
                                                
                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                                     ,                             
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                          0p                                                      
                                                                                     j                  j
                                                                               pa                 pa
                                                
                                                                           (              )+(                    )
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                0p −p0p            0n −p0n
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                     ,
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                          pa
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                           0p
   (                      )
           pj2p−   pa2p
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                            j                     j                      j
                                                                (pa0p −p0p )+(pa2n −p2n )+(pa0n −p0n )
                                                                                                                                                  
max 0,                         ≤ π0r,2u ≤ min                                pa
                                                                                                         ,                                             .
              pa0p                              
                                                                      j
                                                                               0p
                                                                                       j
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                              ( pa        )   (   a
                                                                                           )
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                0p −p0p   +    p 1n −p1n
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                             , (∗)
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                          pa
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                            0p
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                        (p0p −p0p )+(p1n −p1n )+(pa2n −pj2n )
                                                          a    j        a       j
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      , (∗)
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                          pa
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                            0p
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                          a    j        a       j        a       j
                                                        ( 0p 0p ) ( 1n 1n ) ( 0n 0n )
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                        p   −p    +  p    −p        + p    −p                                                     
                                                                                                      , (∗)
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                          pa
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                            0p
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                         j             j                j                  j
                                                  (p0p −p0p )+(pa
                                                    a
                                                                           )   (   a
                                                                                            )   (   a
                                                                                                    0n −p0n )
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                1n −p 1n    +   p 2n −p2n   +    p                                                
                                                                                                              (∗)
                                                
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                             a          p0p
                                                                                          j
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                        p0n
                                                
                                                                                       pa
                                                                                            ,                                                 
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                         0p
                                                
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                  (pa0p −pj0p )
                                                
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                           ,
                                                
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                    0p
                                                
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                       (pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2p −pj2p )
                                                
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                 ,
                                                
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                          0p
                                                
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                       (pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2n −pj2n )
                                                
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                 ,
                                                
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                              pa
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                               0p
                                                                                                                                             
            pj0n     pa0n
                                                                                                                                           
                   −                            
                                                            (   pa
                                                                      j
                                                                 0p −p0p+ pa
                                                                                  j
                                                                                ) (     a   j
                                                                            2p −p2p + p2n −p2n        ) (                    )
                                                                                                                                              
  max 0,                       ≤ π0r,0n ≤ min                                 pa
                                                                                                                                 ,                 .
                  pa0p                                                   j
                                                                               0p
                                                                                       j
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                   pa  (            a
                                                                                        ) (                  )
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                     0p −p0p + p1n −p1n
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                 ,
                                                
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                           
                                                
                                                                              a
                                                                              p0p                                                          
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                  j               j        j
                                                                                                                                           
                                                            (pa             a
                                                                                ) (      a
                                                                                                      ) (                    )
                                                                                                                                          
                                                              0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p2p −p2p
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                           
                                                
                                                
                                                                             pa
                                                                               0p
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                   j              j         j
                                                            (pa            a
                                                                                ) (      a
                                                                                                      ) (                    )
                                                                                                                                          
                                                              0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p2n −p2n
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                           
                                                
                                                
                                                                             pa
                                                                               0p
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                           
                                                             j            j            j        j
                                                       pa            a               a        a
                                                 (                  ) (                 ) (                 ) (                         ) 
                                                                                                                                          
                                                        0p −p0p + p1n −p1n + p2p −p2p + p2n −p2n
                                                
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                              pa0p




                                                       26
                                                                                                   j
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                  p1n
                                                                  
                                                                                                 pa
                                                                                                      ,                             
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   0p
                                                                  
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                              (pa0p −pj0p )
                                                                  
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                          ,
                                                                  
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                  pa
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   0p
                                                                  
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                      (pa0p −pj0p )+(pa0n −pj0n )
                                                                  
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                  
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                  pa
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   0p
                                                                  
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                      (pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2n −pj2n )
                                                                  
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                              ,
                                                                  
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                            pa
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                             0p
              (             )                                                                                                     
               pj1n − pa1n
                                                                        j               j
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                   a              a
                                                                (p0p −p0p )+(p2p −p2p )
                                                                                                                                   
        max 0,              (∗) ≤ π0r,1n ≤ min                              pa
                                                                                              ,                                            .
                   pa0p                        
                                                          a      j        a
                                                                             0p
                                                                                j          a     j
                                                                                                                                    
                                                       (            )  (            )  (         2n )
                                                                                                                                   
                                                        p0p −p  0p   + p 0n −p 0n    +  p 2n −p                                    
                                                                                                      ,
                                               
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                               
                                               
                                                                           pa
                                                                             0p
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                 j              j                j
                                                       ( pa   −p0p )+(pa     −p0n )+(pa       −p2p )
                                               
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                           0p             0n               2p
                                                                                                      ,
                                               
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                               
                                               
                                                                           pa
                                                                             0p
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    
                                                           a     j        a     j          a     j
                                                       (p0p −p0p )+(p2n −p2n )+(p2p −p2p )
                                               
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                      ,
                                               
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                               
                                               
                                                                           pa
                                                                             0p
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    
                                                    a    j         a     j         a      j        a    j
                                                ( 0p 0p ) ( 0n 0n ) a ( 2n 2n ) ( 2p −p2p )
                                               
                                                 p   −p      +  p    −p     +   p    −p       +  p
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   p0p
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                1,                                            
                                                                                    (pa1n −pj1n )+(pa0p −pj0p )
                                                         
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                              
                                                         
                                                         
                                                                                             pa
                                                                                                                  ,                            
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                               1n                                             
                                                                            (pa1n −pj1n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa0n −pj0n )
                                                         
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                          ,
                                                         
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                               
                                                         
                                                                                               pa
                                                                                                 1n
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                             (pa1n −pj1n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2p −pj2p )
                                                         
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                              
                                                         
                                                         
                                                                                               pa
                                                                                                                          ,                    
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               
        (                        )                                                             1n                                            
              pa1n   −    pj1n                                              (pa1n −pj1n )+(pa0p −pj0p )+(pa2n −pj2n )
                                                         
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                               
     max 0,                           ≤ π1n,1r ≤ min                                           pa
                                                                                                                         ,                         .
                    pa1n                                 
                                                                  ( pa
                                                                            j
                                                                         −p1n )+(pa
                                                                                            j
                                                                                                 1n
                                                                                         −p0p )+(pa
                                                                                                            j
                                                                                                         −p0n )+(pa
                                                                                                                            j
                                                                                                                         −p2p )
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                      1n              0p              0n              2p
                                                                                                                                              
                                                         
                                                         
                                                                                              pa
                                                                                                                                   ,           
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                1n                                            
                                                                     a     j         a     j         a     j        a      j                  
                                                         
                                                                 ( p 1n −p 1n ) +( p 0p −p 0p ) +( p 0n −p 0n ) +( p2n  −p 2n   )             
                                                                                                                                               
                                                         
                                                         
                                                                                              pa
                                                                                                                                   ,           
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                1n                                            
                                                                      a     j         a     j         a     j        a      j
                                                                  ( p1n −p1n )+(p0p −p0p )+(p2p −p2p )+(p2n −p2n )
                                                         
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                         
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                               
                                                         
                                                                                              pa1n
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                     j              j                j              j                j
                                                             a               a               a               a                a
                                                                                                                                               
                                                         
                                                         
                                                          (p 1n −p  1n ) +( p0p −p 0p  )+ (p 0n −p  0n ) +( p2p −p 2p ) + ( p 2n −p2n )
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                pa
                                                                                                 1n



Composite Response Margins

                                          (                                                    )
                                             pa0n − pj0n + pa2n − pj2n + pa1n − pj1n (∗)
                                                                                        
              π0r,n        ≥     max 0, −                                                        ,
                                                                  pa0p
                                     (                                 j
                                                                                                        )
                                                               a
                                                                              pa0p − pj0p + pa2p − pj2p
                                                                                        
                                       pj0n + pj2n + pj1n (∗) p0p − p0p
              π0r,n        ≤     min                         ,              ,                              .
                                                pa0p             pa0p                     pa0p

                                      (                                                         )
                                             pa0n − pj0n + pa2n − pj2n + pa1n − pj1n (∗)
                                                                                         
            πp,n      ≥        max 0, −                                                            ,
                                                            pa0p + pa1p + pa2p
                                   (                                                                         )
                                                                  pa0p − pj0p      pa0p − pj0p + pa2p − pj2p
                                                                                             
                                     pj0n + pj2n + pj1n (∗)
            πp,n      ≤        min                          ,                    ,                              .
                                        pa0p + pa1p + pa2p    pa0p + pa1p + pa2p        pa0p + pa1p + pa2p

                                           (                                                       )
                                               pa0n − pj0n + pa1n − pj1n + pa2n − pj2n
                                                                               
                   πn,p     ≥         max 0,                                                           ,
                                                               pa0n + pa1n + pa2n
                                                                                                                         
                                                                             1,                                          
                                                   (pa0n −pj0n )+(pa1n −pj1n )+(pa2n −pj2n )+(pa0p −pj0p )
                                          
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                          
                   πn,p     ≤         min                              pa     a     a                      ,                  .
                                                                        0n +p1n +p2n
                                                     j             j              j           j              j
                                           (pa0n −p0n )+(pa1n −p1n )+(pa2n −p2n )+(pa0p −p0p )+(pa2p −p2p )
                                          
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                          
                                                                         pa    a    a
                                                                          0n +p1n +p2n


                                                             pa0n − pj0n + pa0p − pj0p
                                                                                      
                                                π0,1+ =                                  .
                                                                     pa0p + pa0n



                                                                      27
7    Inference on Bounds
We begin with a description of the upper limit of our confidence interval. For each response
probability π we have a set of possible upper bound solutions {ub1 , ub2 , ..., ubK }. We know that:

                                     π ≤ π ≡ min {ub, 1}
                                    ub ≡ min {ub1 , ub2 , ..., ubK } .

A consistent estimate of the least upper nbound ub can beohad by plugging in consistent sample
               p
moments ubk → ubk and using ub ≡ min ub
          c                    c           c1 , ub
                                                c2 , ..., ub
                                                          cK as an estimate of ub. This estimator
is consistent by continuity
                   n     o of probability limits. We can then form a corresponding consistent
estimator π ≡ min ub, 1 of π.
           b         c
    To conduct inference on π, we seek a critical value r that obeys:
                                                    
                                     P ub ≤ ubc + r = 0.95,                                  (92)

as such an r implies:
                     n          o           n          o
            P π ≤ min ubc + r, 1    ≥ P π ≤ min ub
                                                 c + r, 1
                                              n          o          
                                    = P π ≤ min ub
                                                 c + r, 1 |ub ≤ ub
                                                                c + r 0.95
                                                n          o          
                                      +P π ≤ min ubc + r, 1 |ub > ub
                                                                  c + r 0.05
                                              n          o          
                                    ≥ P π ≤ min ub
                                                 c + r, 1 |ub ≤ ub
                                                                c + r 0.95
                                         = 0.95

                       n bindingo when π = π. The last line follows because ub ≤ ub + r implies
with the first inequality                                                        c
min {ub + r, 1} ≤ min ub c + r, 1 .
   We can rewrite (92) as:
                               n                               o   
                     P − min ub            c2 − ub, ..., ub
                                  c1 − ub, ub            cK − ub ≤ r = 0.95,

or equivalently                 n                                 o      
                       P max ub − ub   c1 , ub − ub
                                                 c2 , ..., ub − ub
                                                                cK ≤ r = 0.95.
                                                          n                                   o
It is well known that the limiting distribution of max ub − ub   c1 , ub − ub
                                                                            c2 , ..., ub − ub
                                                                                           cK depends on
which and how many of the upper bound constraints bind. Several approaches to this problem have
been proposed which involve conducting pre-tests for which constraints are binding (e.g. Andrews
and Barwick, 2012).
     We take an alternative approach to inference that is simple to implement and consistent re-
gardless of the constraints that bind. Our approach is predicated on the observation that:
              n                          o                  n                          o    
       P max ub1 − ub                 cK ≤ r ≤ P max ub − ub
                      c1 , ..., ubK − ub                               c1 , ..., ub − ub
                                                                                       cK ≤ r ,     (93)

with equality holding in the case where all of the upper bound solutions are identical. We seek an
r0 such that:                    n                         o    
                         P max ub1 − ub                  cK ≤ r0 = .95.
                                         c1 , ..., ubK − ub                                   (94)

                                                   28
   From (93),                 n                       o   
                          P max ub − ub             cK ≤ r0 ≥ .95,
                                     c1 , ..., ub − ub

with equality holding when all bounds are identical.
                              p
   A bootstrap estimate r∗ → r0 of the necessary critical value can be had by considering the
bootstrap analog of condition (94) (see Proposition 10.7 of Kosorok, 2008). That is, by computing
the 95th percentile of:
                                             c∗ , ..., ub   c∗
                                      n                         o
                                 max ub c1 − ub        cK − ub
                                                1             K

across bootstrap replications, where stars refer to bootstrap quantities. An upper limit U of the
confidence region for π can then be formed as:
                                                n           o
                                      U = min ub  c + r∗ , 1 .

Note that this procedure is essentially an unstudentized version of the inference method of Cher-
nozhukov et al. (2013) where the set of relevant upper bounds (V0 in their notation) is taken here
to be the set of all upper bounds, thus yielding conservative inference.
    We turn now to the lower limit of our confidence interval. Our greatest lower bounds are all of
the form:
                                       π ≥ π ≡ max {lb, 0} .
                                               p
                                         b → lb. By the same arguments as above we want to
We have the plugin lower bound estimator lb
               00
search for an r such that                        
                                           b − r00 = 0.95.
                                   P lb ≥ lb

       b is just a scalar sample mean, we can choose r00 = 1.65σlb where σlb is the asymptotic
Since lb
standard error of lb
                  b in order to guarantee the above condition holds asymptotically. To account for
the propensity score re-weighting, we use a bootstrap standard error estimator σblb of σlb which is
consistent via the usual arguments. Thus, our “conservative” 95% confidence interval for π is:
                            h     n              o     n           oi
                                      b − 1.65b
                              max 0, lb                  c + r∗ , 1 .
                                              σlb , min ub

This confidence interval covers the parameter π with asymptotic probability of at least 95%.




                                                   29
8    Extending the Baseline Model to Allow for State 2r
The Issue
In Section 4 of this Appendix we restrict a woman’s preferences when F P Li < E i . Specifically,
                                                                                      
A.7 in Assumption 1 states that for all offers (W, H) such that E ≡ W H ∈ F P Li , E i :

                     Uia (H, C a (E, 1, E) , 1, 0, 0) < Uia (H, Cia (E, 0, E) , 0, 0, 0) .

Thus, A.7 in Assumption 1 implicitly establishes a local lower bound on the stigma disutility at
earning levels in (F P Li , E i ] and it guarantees that woman i does not report earnings above F P Li
while on welfare under regime a when F P Li < E i . That is, state 2r is dominated under regime a
subject to A.7 in Assumption 1 and Assumption 2. Without A.7 in Assumption 1, participation
in welfare may decrease or increase utility (other things equal). The number of observations in
our control sample corresponding to alternatives compatible with state 2r is tiny. Nevertheless, it
is of pedagogical interest to consider what additional responses emerge if we do not rule out such
choices a priori, that is, when we do not impose A.7 in Assumption 1.

A Roadmap of the Results: Table A3 and Figure A1
Table A3 catalogs the allowed and disallowed responses when A.7 in Assumption 1 is not imposed.
The possible states are S ∪ {2r}. Accordingly, all but the last row and last column of Table A3
appear also in Table 3. The last row of Table A3 corresponds
                                                                 to the responses of a woman who
under regime a has earnings in the range F P Li , E i , is on assistance, and truthfully reports her
earnings to the welfare agency (state 2r).
    The presentation of the results is organized as follows. Proposition 3 pertains to the disallowed
pairings of states in Table A3. Corollary 4 derives additional restricted pairings when the utility
function is of the special form given in (2). Proposition 4 pertains to the allowed pairings of states
in Table A3. Interestingly, dispensing with A.7 in Assumption 1 enables the emergence of flows out
of the labor force, which were absent in the model of Section IV of the paper (and correspondingly
Section 4 of this Appendix). Figure A1 uses the special form of the utility function in (2) to
illustrate these flows and Corollary 5 formalizes the observation, born out in Figure A1, that labor
market constraints on job offers are essential to the emergence of these flows.

Propositions
With reference to Section 4 in this Appendix, all Lemmas and Corollaries hold but for Lemma 1
which hinges on A.7 in Assumption 1. Proposition 1, Corollary 2, and Proposition 2 in Section 4
are superseded by the following propositions and corollary.

Proposition 3 (Restricted Pairings). Given Assumption 1 but for A.7, and Assumptions 2-4,
the pairings of states corresponding to the “-” entries in Table A3 cannot occur and the pairings of
states (1r, 1r) and (1u, 1r) must occur.

Proof. We proved the entries in the first 7 rows and 7 columns of Table A3 in Propositions 1 and
Proposition 2. State 2r is not defined under regime j (Assumption 2) which proves the “-” entries
in Table A3 rows 1 through 7 and column 8. We are thus left to prove the disallowed pairings in
row 8 and columns 1 through 7 of Table A3. No woman pairs state 2r under regime a with state
1u under regime j because 1u is dominated by state 1r under j (Lemma 2).



                                                      30
Corollary 4 (Additional Restricted Pairings under Utility Specification (2)). Given As-
sumption 1 but for A.7, and Assumptions 2-4, and subject to specification (2) of the utility function,
the pairings of states (0r, 1n) and (2r, 1n) are disallowed.
Proof. To enhance readability we employ the symbol s %t s0 to signify that under regime t an
                                                                  

alternative compatible with state s is weakly preferred to an alternative compatible with state s0 .
The proof that the pairing of states (0r, 1n) is disallowed is contained in Corollary 2. The proof
that the pairings of state (2r, 1n) is disallowed is by contradiction. Suppose there is a woman i who
selects an alternative compatible with state 2r under regime a entailing earnings E k ≡ W k H k and
selects an alternative compatible with state 1n under regime j entailing earnings E l ≡ W l H l . By
Assumption 3, her choice under regime a reveals that
                                                                               
                [2r %a 2n] : Ui H k , E k − µi + Gai E k − φi ≥ Ui H k , E k − µi ,

which implies Gai E k ≥ φi . Her choice under regime j reveals that
                     

                                                                           
                    1n %j 1r : Ui H l , E l − µi ≥ Ui H l , E l − µi + Gi − φi ,
                            


                                                   Gi ≤ φi ≤ Gai E k which yields a contradiction
                                                                    
which implies Gi ≤ φi . Thus, optimality implies
because Gai (E) < Gi for all E ∈ F P Li , E i including E k .
                                             

Proposition 4 (Unrestricted Pairings). Given Assumption 1 but for A.7, and Assumptions
2-4, the non “-” entries in Table A3 correspond to pairings of states that are allowed.
Proof. The entries in the first 7 rows and 7 columns Table A3 were proven in Propositions 1 and
Proposition 2. We are left to prove the allowed pairings in row 8 and columns 1 through 7 of Table
A3. To prove that the pairs in collection

                                  2r, sj |sj ∈ {0n, 1n, 2n, 0r, 1r, 2u}
                                       
                                                                                              (95)

are allowed it suffices to provide examples where six women occupy the same state sa = 2r under
regime a but occupy state sj ∈ {0n, 1n, 2n, 0r, 1r, 2u} under regime j. This also proves that no
pairing in collection (95) is constrained to occur. When providing these examples we consider the
specification of the utility function given in (3). Finally, we assume that woman i receives either
one or two
          job offers, that is, either Ki = 1 or Ki = 2. To enhance readability we employ the
symbol s %t s0 to signify that under regime t an alternative compatible with state s is weakly
preferred to an alternative compatible with state s0 .
  1. Pairings (2r, 0n), (2r, 0r), and (2r, 2u) are allowed.
     Consider three women i0 , i00 , and i000 with preferences represented by (3) with v (x) = x.
                             0 00 000
     Let Ki = 1 for i ∈ {i , i ,ki }. Assume   that all three women’s job offer entails earnings in
     ∈ F P Li , E i . That is, Ei ≡ Wik Hik ∈ F P Li , E i for i ∈ {i0 , i00 , i000 }. Let
                                                          

      (a) woman i = i0 be such that αi = Wik , µi = 0, and
                                                                   
                                     ηia ≥ κi ≥ Gi − φi ≥ Gi − Gai Eik ,

      (b) woman i = i00 be such that αi = Wik , µi = 0, and
                                                                       
                                   κi ≥ Gi − φi ≥ ηij ≥ ηia ≥ Gi − Gai Eik ,


                                                 31
   (c) woman i = i000 be such that αi = Wik , µi = 0, and
                                                        n           o
                           Gi − Gai Eik ≤ ηia ≤ κi ≤ min ηij , Gi − φi .

                                                                          
  All women choose to earn and truthfully report earnings in F P Li , E i on assistance under
  regime a. We now show that woman i0 chooses an alternative compatible with state 0n under
  regime j, woman i00 chooses an alternative compatible with state 0r under regime j, and
  woman i000 chooses an alternative compatible with state 2u under regime j. For all women,
  the choice of the alternative compatible with state 2r under regime a reveals (Assumption
  3) that this alternative yields as much utility as the available alternatives compatible with
  states {0r, 0n, 2n, 2u}. Thus, for i ∈ {i0 , i00 , i000 }:

               [2r %a 0r] : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik   ≥ Gi − φi − ηia ,
                                         
                                                                                                   (96)
               [2r %a 0n] : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik
                                         
                                                          ≥ 0,                                     (97)
               [2r %a 2n] : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik       Eik       αi Hik ,
                                         
                                                          ≥         −                              (98)
               [2r %a 2u] : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik       Eik                      αi Hik .
                                         
                                                          ≥         + Gi − φi − κi −               (99)

  It is easy to verify that descriptions (1a), (1b), and (1c) are compatible with optimality under
  regime a for woman i0 , i00 , and i000 respectively, that is, with (96)-(99). No woman selects an
  alternative compatible with state 2r under regime j because it is not defined.
  Woman i0 prefers not working off assistance (state 0n) to the available alternatives compatible
  with states {0r, 2n, 2u} under regime j because, by description (1a), we have ηij ≥ Gi − φi
  (recall ηij ≥ ηia by A.4 in Assumption 1) which implies (100); αi = Wik which implies (101);
  and κi ≥ Gi − φi and αi = Wik which imply (102):

                              0n %j 0r : 0 ≥ Gi − φi − ηij ,
                                     
                                                                                                  (100)
                             0n %j 2n : 0 ≥ Eik − αi Hik ,
                                     
                                                                                                  (101)
                              0n %j 2u : 0 ≥ Eik + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hik .
                                     
                                                                                                  (102)

  Woman i00 prefers not working on assistance (state 0r) to the available alternatives compatible
  with states {0n, 2n, 2u} under regime j because, by description (1b), we have Gi − φi ≥ ηij
  which implies (103); Gi − φi ≥ ηij and αi = Wik which imply (104); and κi ≥ ηij which implies
  (105):

                       0r %j 0n : Gi − φi − ηij ≥ 0,
                               
                                                                                                  (103)
                       0r %j 2n : Gi − φi − ηij ≥ Eik − αi Hik ,
                               
                                                                                                  (104)
                        0r %j 2u : Gi − φi − ηij ≥ Eik + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hik .
                               
                                                                                                  (105)

  Woman i000 prefers earning Eik on assistance and under-report (state 2u) to the available
  alternatives compatible with states {0n, 0r, 2n} under regime j because, by description (1c),
  we have Gi − φi ≥ κi and αi = Wik which imply (106); ηij ≥ κi and αi = Wik which imply
  (107); and Gi − φi ≥ κi and αi = Wik which imply (108):

                       2u %j 0n : Eik + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hik ≥ 0,
                               
                                                                                                  (106)
                        2u %j 0r : Eik + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hik ≥ Gi − φi − ηij ,
                               
                                                                                                  (107)
                       2u %j 2n : Eik + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hik ≥ Eik − αi Hik .
                               
                                                                                                  (108)

2. Pairing (2r, 1r) is allowed.

                                              32
  Consider woman i with preferences represented by (3) with v (x) = x. Let Ki = 2. Assume
  that her first job offer entails earnings in F P Li , E i and her second job offer entails earnings
  in range 1. That is, Eik ≡ Wik Hik ∈ F P Li , E i and Eil ≡ Wil Hil ∈ (0, F P Li ]. Let

   (a) woman i be such that Wik > αi = Wil , µi = 0, and

             Gi − Gai Eik − ηia,
                                                                 
                                         k      k                  a   k
                                                                              
       max      a   l     a   k      ≤ Hi    W i  − αi   ≤ G i − G i Ei  ≤ min Gi − φi , κi .
              Gi Ei − Gi Ei
                                                                          
  Woman i chooses to earn and truthfully report earnings in F P Li , E i on assistance under
  regime a. We now show that she chooses an alternative compatible with state 1n under regime
  j. The choice of the alternative compatible with state 2r under regime a reveals (Assumption
  3) that this alternative yields as much utility as the available alternatives compatible with
  states {0r, 0n, 1n, 1r, 1u, 2n, 2u}. Thus:

               [2r %a 0r]   : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik               ≥ Gi − φi − ηia ,
                                           
                                                                                                                (109)
                    a
                            : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik
                                           
               [2r % 0n]                                                ≥ 0,                                    (110)
                    a
                            : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik                   Eil − αi Hil ,
                                           
               [2r % 1n]                                                ≥                                       (111)
                     a
                            : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik                   Eil + Gai Eil − φi − αi Hil ,
                                                                                          
               [2r % 1r]                                                ≥                                       (112)
                    a
                            : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik                   Eil + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hil ,
                                           
               [2r % 1u]                                                ≥                                       (113)
                    a
                            : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik                   Eik − αi − Hik ,
                                           
               [2r % 2n]                                                ≥                                       (114)
                    a
                            : Eik + Gai Eik − φi − αi Hik                   Eik + Gi − φi − κi − αi Hik .
                                           
               [2r % 2u]                                                ≥                                       (115)

  It is easy to verify that description (2a) is compatible with optimality under regime a for
  woman i, that is, with (109)-(115). Woman i does not select an alternative compatible
  with state 2r under regime j because it is not defined; she does not selects an alternative
  compatible with state 1u under regime j because it is dominated. Woman i prefers earning
  and truthfully report Eil on assistance (state 1r) to the available alternatives compatible with
  states {0n, 0r, 1n, 2n, 2u} under regime j because, by description (2a), we have Gi −φi ≥ 0 and
  Wil = αi which imply (116); ηij≥ 0 and Wil = αi which imply (117); Gi −φi ≥ 0 which implies
  (118); Gi − φi ≥ Hik Wik − αi and Wil = αi which imply (119); and κi ≥ Hik Wik − αi and
                                                                                             

  Wil = αi which imply (120):

                    1r %j 0n      : Eil + Gi − φi − αi Hil ≥ 0,
                             
                                                                                                                (116)
                     1r %j 0r     : Eil + Gi − φi − αi Hil ≥ Gi − φi −              ηij ,
                             
                                                                                                                (117)
                    1r %j 1n          Eil                  αi Hil       Eil − αi Hil ,
                             
                                  :         + Gi − φ i −            ≥                                           (118)
                    1r %j 2n          Eil                  αi Hil       Eik − αi Hik ,
                             
                                  :         + Gi − φ i −            ≥                                           (119)
                     1r %j 2u         Eil                  αi Hil       Eik + Gi − φi                αi Hik .
                             
                                  :         + Gi − φ i −            ≥                       − κi −              (120)

3. Pairing (2r, 1n) is allowed.
  Consider woman i with preferences represented by (3)       with v (x) convex. Let Ki = 2. Assume
  that her first job offer entails earnings in F P Li , E i and her second job offer entails earnings
  in range 1. That is, Eik ≡ Wik Hik ∈ F P Li , E i and Eil ≡ Wil Hil ∈ (0, F P Li ]. Let




                                                     33
        (a) woman i be such that αi > 0, µi = 0 and4

                  v Eil + Gi −v Eil ,                       v Eik + Gai Eik − v Eik  ,  
                                                                                            

            max     v Eik + Gi − κi − v Eil         ≤ φi ≤ min      v Eik + Gai Eik −v Eil          ,
                                 k     l                                          k
                                                                           −αi Hi − Hi   l
                          −αi Hi − Hi
                                                                                                 

                                                                                 v Eik + Gai Eik 
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                       l    a     l
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                −v Eki + Gai Eki  
                                                                                                                        
                                   v Eik − v Eil     ≤ αi Hik − Hil ≤ min                                                          ,
                                                                           
                                                                                 v Ei + Gi Ei                                
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                  −v Eil + Gi − κi
                                                                                                                              
                                                         
                                              αi Hil ≤ v Eil − v (0) ,
                                                                  
                                              αi Hik ≤ v Eik + Gai Eik − v Gi + ηia ,
                                                                                 
                                                                
                                   v Eik + Gi − κi   ≤ v Eik + Gai Eik .
                                                                               
       Woman i chooses to earn and truthfully report earnings in F P Li , E i on assistance under
       regime a. We now show that she chooses an alternative compatible with state 1n under regime
       j. The choice of the alternative compatible with state 2r under regime a reveals (Assumption
       3) that this alternative yields as much utility as the available alternatives compatible with
       states {0r, 0n, 1n, 1r, 1u, 2n, 2u}. Thus:
                 [2r %a 0r]    : v Eik + Gai Eik              − φi − αi Hik ≥ v Gi − φi − ηia ,
                                                                                
                                                                                                                     (121)
                       a
                                     Eik       Gai   Eik               αi Hik
                                                        
                 [2r % 0n]     : v         +                  − φi −            ≥ v (0) ,                            (122)
                       a
                                     Eik       Gai   Eik               αi Hik   ≥ v Eil − αi Hil ,
                                                                                      
                 [2r % 1n]     : v         +                  − φi −                                                 (123)
                       a
                                     Eik       Gai   Eik               αi Hik        Eil + Gai Eil − φi − αi Hil ,
                                                                                                   
                 [2r % 1r]     : v         +                  − φi −            ≥v                                   (124)
                       a
                                     Eik       Gai   Eik               αi Hik        Eil + Gi − κi − φi − αi Hil ,
                                                                                                 
                 [2r % 1u]     : v         +                  − φi −            ≥v                                   (125)
                       a
                                     Eik       Gai   Eik               αi Hik        Eik − αi Hik ,
                                                                                       
                 [2r % 2n]     : v         +                  − φi −            ≥v                                   (126)
                 [2r %a 2u]          Eik       Gai   Eik               αi Hik        Eik + Gi − κi − φi − αi Hik .
                                                                                                  
                               : v         +                  − φi −            ≥v                                   (127)

       It is easy to verify that description (3a) is compatible with optimality under regime a for
       woman i, that is, with (121)-(127). Woman i does not selects an alternative compatible
       with state 2r under regime j because it is not defined; she does not selects an alternative
       compatible with state 1u under regime j because it is dominated. Woman i prefers earning Eil
                                                                            states {0n, 0r, 1r, 2n, 2u}
       off assistance (state 1n) to the available alternatives compatible with
       under regime j because, by description (3a), we have αi Hil ≤ v Eil −v (0) which implies (128);
       αi Hil ≤ v Eil − v (0) which by convexity, and since ηij ≥ 0, implies αi Hil ≤ v Eil + Gi −
                                                                                                    

       v Gi + ηij which along with φi ≥ v Eil + Gi − v Eil imply (129); φi ≥ v Eil + Gi −
                                                                                                  

       v Eil which implies (130); v Eik − v Eil ≤ αi Hik − Hil which implies (131); and φi ≥
                                                                   

       v Eik + Gi − κi − v Eil − αi Hik − Hil which implies (132):
                                                 

                            1n %j 0n       : v Eil − αi Hil
                                                
                                                                     ≥ v (0) ,                                       (128)
                             1n %j 0r      : v Eil − αi Hil          ≥ v Gi − φi − ηij ,
                                                                          
                                                                                                                     (129)
                             1n %j 1r      : v Eil − αi Hil          ≥ v Eil + Gi − φi − αi Hil ,
                                                                              
                                                                                                                     (130)
                            1n %j 2n       : v Eil − αi Hil          ≥ v Eik − αi Hik ,
                                                                           
                                                                                                                     (131)
                             1n %j 2u      : v Eil − αi Hil          ≥ v Eik + Gi − κi − φi − αi Hik .
                                                                                     
                                                                                                                     (132)
   4
   Convexity of v (.) enables the conditions imposed. For instance, the first condition requires v Eik + Gai Eik
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                           −
v Eik ≥ v Eil + Gi − v Eil which cannot hold unless v is convex.
                           



                                                                34
Corollary 5 (Additional Restricted Pairings in the absence of Labor Market Con-                   
straints). Suppose that there are no hours constraints, that is, let Θi = (Wi (H) , H) |H ∈ 0, H i
in Assumption 3 and suppose that wages are continuous and weakly increasing in hours worked and
utility is a weakly decreasing function of hours worked. Then, given Assumption 1 but for A.7, and
Assumptions 2-4, no woman pairs state 2r under regime a with states {0n, 0r} under regime j .

Proof. We show that no woman pairs state 2r under regime a with state 0n under regime j; the
proof that no woman pairs state 2r under regime a with state 0r under regime j is similar. The
proof is by contradiction. Suppose that there is a woman i who selects an alternative    compatible
with state 2r under regime a, entailing earnings E k ≡ W H k H k ∈ F P Li , E i and selects an
                                                                                        

alternative compatible with state 0n under j. By Assumption 3, her choice under regime a reveals
that                                                         
                   [2r %a 0n] : Ui H k , E k + Gai E k , 1, 0, 0 ≥ Ui (0, 0, 0, 0, 0) .       (133)

Because there are no hour constraints   and  because program      rules are such that E i < F P Li +
                                     l     l                l              l   l                    l
         k     a   k
                      offer W kH , Hl such that E ≡ W H H is in range 1 and E +
Gi , there exists a job
Gi = E + Gi E .  Hence, H ≥ H because                wages
                                                            are weakly increasing in hours. Thus,
      l   l                      k     k     a     k
Ui H , E + Gi , 1, 0, 0 ≥ Ui H , E + Gi E , 1, 0, 0 because utility is weakly decreasing in
hours worked for given (C, D, Z, R) by assumption. Together with (133), this means that
                                                      
                            Ui H l , E l + Gi , 1, 0, 0 ≥ Ui (0, 0, 0, 0, 0) .                    (134)

If inequality (134) holds strictly, a contradiction ensures because this shows that no alternative
compatible with state 0n can be optimal under regime j (it is dominated by an alternative compat-
ible with state 1r). If inequality (134) holds as an equality, woman i is indifferent between earning
(and truthfully reporting) E k and not working off assistance under regime a. By Assumption 4, if
the woman resolved an indifference situation against not working off assistance under regime a, she
will also resolve an indifference situation against not working off assistance under regime j. This
contradicts her selecting not to work off assistance over earning (and truthfully reporting) E l on
assistance under j.

Remark 6 (Flows out of the Labor Force: Figure A1). Corollary 5 shows that labor market
constraints on job offers are essential to the emergence of flows out of the labor force. Figure A1
bears out this point by showing a pairing of state 2r under AFDC with state 0n under JF which
may emerge only in the presence of labor market constraints. To ease the graphical representation,
we use the special form of the utility function in (2). Specifically, Figure A1 portrays a woman
who receives two job offers entailing earnings E 1 , E 2 that are both in range 2 and such that
E 1 ∈ F P Li , E i . Her welfare stigma is zero. For convenience, her fixed cost of work is also zero
and her cost of under-reporting is sufficiently large that under-reporting earnings to the welfare
agency is always a dominated choice. Under AFDC, the woman earns E 1 , is on assistance, and
truthfully reports her earnings (an allocation compatible with state 2r). Observe that she would
make the same choice even if earning constraints were absent. Under JF, the woman does not work
and is off assistance (an allocation compatible with state 0n). However, if earning constraints were
absent she would be better off by earning below the FPL on assistance and truthfully reporting her
earnings (an allocation compatible with state 1r).




                                                  35
                                                   
Proposition 5. Define πsa ,sj ≡ P Sij = sj |Sia = sa . Given Assumption 1 but for A.7, and
Assumptions 2-4, the system of equations describing the impact of the JF reform on observable
state probabilities is:

        pj0n − pa0n = −π0n,1r pa0n + π0r,0n pa0p + π2r,0n q2r
                                                            a
         j
        p1n − pa1n = −π1n,1r pa1n + π0r,1n pa0p + π2r,1n q2ra
         j       a                a             a           a
        p2n − p2n = −π2n,1r p2n + π0r,2n p0p + π2r,2n q2r                                                    .                         (135)
         j
        p0p − p0p = − (π0r,0n + π0r,2n + π0r,1r + π0r,1n + π0r,2u ) pa0p + π2r,0r q2r
                a                                                                    a

        pj2p − pa2p = π0r,2u pa0p − π2u,1r pa2p − (π2r,0n + π2r,1n + π2r,2n + π2r,0r + π2r,1r − π2u,1r ) q2r
                                                                                                          a

                                                  
Proof. By definition πsa ,sj ≡ P Sij = sj |Sia = sa , Table A3, and a simple application of the law
of total probability.
Remark 7. Given Assumption 1 but for A.7, and Assumptions 2-4, bounds on the response prob-
abilities
                                                                                                                                             0
π 0 ≡ [π0n,1r , π0r,0n , π2n,1r , π0r,2n , π0r,1r , π0r,1n , π1n,1r , π0r,2u , π2u,1r , π2r,0n , π2r,1n , π2r,0n , π2r,02n , π2r,0r , π2r,1r ] .
                                                                                                                                       (136)
                                                    a ≤        3                     3
are implied by system (135) and 0 ≤ q2r                     14,784 . Because 14,784 ≈ 0, the numerical bounds on
π ≡ [π0n,1r , π0r,0n , π2n,1r , π0r,2n , π0r,1r , π0r,1n , π1n,1r , π0r,2u , π2u,1r ]0 (Section VII equation (10) of the
paper) are indistinguishable from those obtained when A.7 is maintained.




                                                                     36
9     Extending the Baseline Model to Incorporate FS and Taxes
We begin with some additional notation and definitions that supersede those from Section 4 in
this Appendix. All lemmas, corollaries, and propositions supersede those from Section 4 in this
Appendix.

Notation, Definitions, and Assumptions
Notation 1 (Policy Regimes). Throughout, we use a to refer to the JF reform’s control welfare
and FS policy and j to refer to JF reform’s experimental welfare and FS policy. The policy regime
is denoted by t ∈ {a, j}. The assistance program mix is denoted by m ∈ {w, f, wf } where “w”
refers to welfare only, “f ” refers to FS only, and “wf ” refers to welfare joint with FS.
Definition 15 (Program Participation, Earnings and Reported Earnings). Let Df , Dw ,
and Dwf be indicators for a woman participating in, respectively, FS only, welfare only, and both
FS and welfare; Df , Dw , and Dwf take values in {0, 1}. These program participation  alternatives
are mutually exclusive: Df + Dw + Dwf ∈ {0, 1}. Let D ≡ Dw , Df , Dwf . Let E denote
                                                                                

a woman’s earnings. Earnings are the product of hours worked, H, and an hourly wage rate
W . Let E r denote earnings   reported to the relevant assistance agency. Let Z ≡ Z (D,E r ) =
    r        w     wf
                      
1 [E = 0] D + D
          r        r         w     wf      f
                                              reported earnings by a welfare recipient. Let R ≡
                        be an indicator for zero
R (E, D,E ) = 1 [E < E] D + D + D be an indicator for under-reporting by a recipient of
welfare and / or FS assistance.
Definition 16 (Transfer and Tax Functions). Throughout, we use Gt (.), F t (.), and T (.) to
refer to, respectively, the welfare transfer function, the FS transfer function, and the federal income
tax function (inclusive of the EITC). These functions are defined as follows.
    1. Welfare Transfer Functions. For any reported earning level E r , the regime-dependent
       welfare transfers are

                          Gai (E r ) = 1 E r ≤ Ēi Gi − 1 [E r > δi ] (E r − δi ) τi ,
                                                                                  
                                                                                       (137)
                         Gji (E r ) = 1 [E r ≤ F P Li ] Gi .                                        (138)

      The parameter δi ∈ {90, 120} gives woman i’s fixed disregards, the parameter τi ∈ {.49, .73}
      governs her proportional disregard, E i ≡ Gi /τi + δi is woman i’s break-even earnings level
      under regime a (i.e. the level at which welfare benefits are exhausted), and Gi is the welfare
      base grant amount. E i , Gi , and F P Li vary across women due to differences in AU size.

    2. Food Stamps (FS) Transfer Functions.
      For any reported earning level E r , the regime-dependent FS transfers are:

                                Fia (E r ) = Fi (E r , 0) ,                                         (139)
                                Fij      r              r
                                      (E ) = Fi (E , 0) ,                                           (140)
                             Fia,wf   (E r ) = Fi (E r , Gai (E r )) 1 [Gai (E r ) > 0] ,           (141)
                             Fij,wf   (E r ) = Fi 0, Gi 1 [E r ≤ F P Li ] ,
                                                          
                                                                                                    (142)

      where Fi (·, ·) is the standard FS formula, as described next. Let 1 [eligi ] denote the eligibility
      for FS. Then, for any pair of reported earnings and welfare transfer, denoted (E r , G), the FS
      transfer is:                               n                          o
                               Fi (E r , G) = max F i − τ1f χi (E r , G) , 0 1 [eligi ] ,           (143)

                                                       37
       with
                                 n                                                           o
               χi (E r , G) ≡ max E r + G − τ2f min {E r , F P Li } − β1i
                                                                       f     f
                                                                          − β2i (E r , G) , 0 ,                 (144)

       where F i is the maximum FS transfer; τ1f χi (E r , G) is a the net income deduction; τ2f is the
                                        f
       earned income deduction rate; β1i  is the sum of the per unit standard deduction, the medical
                                                                                          f
       deduction, the child support deduction, and the dependent care deduction; and β2i    (E r , G) is
       theexcess shelter
                        deduction as a function of earnings plus the welfare transfer. The variation
            f    f
       in β1i , β2i (.) across women with the same earnings and welfare transfer is due to differences
       in actual medical, shelter, and child care expenses. The variation in Fi(., .) across women
       is due to differences in AU size. To simplify notation let F i ≡ Fi 0, Gi . We remark that
       F i ≡ Fi (0, 0). The eligibility indicator 1 [eligi ] reflects categorical eligibility, when FS is
       taken up jointly with welfare, or the so called FS’s gross and net income tests, when FS is
       taken up alone, namely:
                                   (
                                     1h                                         if G > 0
                      1 [eligi ] =       r   f
                                                    i
                                                                r                           ,       (145)
                                     1 E ≤ τ3 F P Li 1 [χi (E , 0) ≤ F P Li ] if G = 0
                                                                      
       where τ3f is a multiplier factor. The parameters τ1f , τ2f , τ3f take values (0.30, 0.20, 1.3).5

   3. Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and Federal Income Tax Functions.
       For any earning level E, earnings inclusive of one-twelfth of the total annual EITC credit, net
       of federal (gross) income taxes (with head of household filing status) and net of payroll and
       medicare taxes are given by:
                                                                              
                              Ti (E) ≡ E − Ii (E) − EIT Ci (E) − τ l + τ m E.

       The parameters τ l , τ m = (0.062, 0.0145) give the payroll and medicare tax rates, Ii (E) is
                                 

       amount of (gross) federal income taxes, and EIT Ci (E) is the amount of the earned income
       tax credit. Specifically, the earned income tax function EIT Ci (·) is given by6
                                      e
                                                       e      e e
                                                                        e           e 
                   EIT Ci (E) = τ1i     E1 0 < E ≤ E 1i + τ1i    E 1i 1 E 1i < E ≤ E 2i +
                                                                                       e
                                                                                          
                                        e e       e        e       e           e   τ1i e
                                      τ1i E 1i − τ2i E − E 2i 1 E 2i < E ≤ E 2i + e E 1i .
                                                                                     τ2i
       The parameters        e , τ e ) give a woman i’s phase-in and phase-out rates. The parameters
                           (τ1i   2i
          e      e 
        E 1i , E 2i give a woman i’s earning thresholds defining the earnings region yielding maximum
       credit. Both sets of parameters vary across women due to differences in the number of children.
       The (gross) federal income tax function Ii (·) is given by7
                                         5
                                         X
                                               τkI max min YiI − yk−1
                                                                  I
                                                                      , ykI − yk−1
                                                                               I
                                                         
                              Ii (E) =                                             ,0 ,
                                         k=1
   5
      During the JF demonstration project, τf1 = 0.30, τf2 = 0.20 and τf3 = 1.3. The JF experimental policy effectively
sets τf2 = 1 when FS is taken up jointly with welfare. This explains why we write the FS transfer as in (142), that
is, as the standard transfer function evaluated at zero earnings. The eligibility formula shows that a woman with
earnings above F P Li may be eligible for FS and the transfer formula shows that the FS transfer for which she is
eligible may be positive. However, under the JF experimental policy, a woman with earnings above F P Li may not
receive both welfare and FS because such earnings disqualify her from welfare.
    6
      This function is time varying. We dispense with the time subscript for simplicity.
    7
      This function is time varying. We dispense with the time subscript for simplicity.


                                                          38
      where YiI is the woman’s taxable income which is given by her earnings net of the per-
      sonal exemption and of the standard deduction: YiI = E − D1i            I − D I . The personal exemp-
                                                                                     2
                 I
      tion D1i varies across           women  due to  differences in the number of children.     The parameters
       τ1I , τ2I , τ3I , τ4I , τ5I give the marginal tax rates and the parameters y0I , y1I , y2I , y3I , y4I , y5I give
                                                                                                                  

      the tax brackets with y0I ≡ 0 and y5I ≡ ∞.

Definition 17 (Consumption). Consider a tuple (E, D,E r ). Under regime t, woman i’s con-
sumption equivalent corresponding to (E, D,E r ) is
                                                          
      Cit (E, D,E r ) ≡ Ti (E) + Gti (E r ) + Fit,wf (E r ) Dwf + Fit (E r ) Df + Gti (E r ) Dw . (146)

We refer to Cit = Cit (E, D,E r ) as consumption. Below, when the consumption associated with
a triple (E, D,E r ) and calculated according to (146) does not vary across regimes we omit the
superscript t, and we omit the subscript i when it does not vary across women.

Definition 18 (State). Consider a tuple (E, D,E r ). The “state” corresponding to (E, D,E r ) is
defined by the function:
                                   
                                   
                                    0nn if E = 0, D = 0,
                                    1nn if E in range 1, D = 0,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     2nn if E in range 2, D = 0,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     0nr if E = 0, Df = 1,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     1nr if E in range 1, Df = 1, E r = E,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     2nr if E in range 2, Df = 1, E r = E,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     1nu if E in range 1, Df = 1, E r < E,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     2nu if E in range 2, Df = 1, E r < E,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     0rn if E = 0, Dw = 1,
                                   
                                   
                  s (E, D, E r ) =                                          .
                                   
                                    1rn if E in range 1, Dw = 1, E r = E,
                                     2rn if E in range 2, Dw = 1, E r = E,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     1un if E in range 1, Dw = 1, E r < E,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     2un if E in range 2, Dw = 1, E r < E,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     0rr if E = 0, Dwf = 1,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     1rr if E in range 1, Dwf = 1, E r = E,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     2rr if E in range 2, Dwf = 1, E r = E,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                    1uu if E in range 1, Dwf = 1, E r < E,
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     2uu if E in range 2, Dwf = 1, E r < E
                                   

Remark 8 (State: Excluded States). In Connecticut welfare and FS assistance programs are
managed by the same agency. Accordingly, we do not include states {1ur, 1ru, 2ur, 2ru} because it
is not possible to make different earning reports to the same agency. Also, we do not include states
{0un, 0nu, 0uu} because it is not possible to under-report zero earnings.

Definition 19 (Job Offers). As in Definition 6.

Definition 20 (Alternative). An alternative is a wage, hours of work, program participation
indicators, and earning report tuple (W, H, D, E r ).

Definition 21 (Sub-alternative). A sub-alternative is a wage, hours of work, and program
participation indicators tuple (W, H, D).



                                                          39
Definition 22 (Alternative Compatible with a State). We say that an alternative (W, H, D, E r )
is compatible with state s for woman i, if letting E ≡ W H, s = s (E, D, E r ).
Definition 23 (Alternative Compatible with a State and Available). We say that an
alternative (W, H, D, E r ) is compatible with state s and available for woman i if (W, H, D, E r ) is
compatible with state s and (W, H) ∈ Θi ∪ (0, 0).
Definition 24 (Utility Function). Define Uit (H, C, D, Z, R) as the utility woman i derives from
the tuple (H, C, D, Z, R) under regime t ∈ {a, j}. Below, when the utility of a tuple (H, C, D, Z, R)
does not vary across policy regimes we omit the superscript t.
Definition 25 (Attractiveness of States). We say that a state s is:
  1. no better under regime j than under regime a if, for any alternative (W, H, D, E r ) compatible
     with state s, and letting E ≡ W H, Cit ≡ Cit (E, D,E r ), Z ≡ Z (D,E r ), and R ≡ R (E, D,E r ),
                                                
                             Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R ≤ Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) all i.

  2. no worse under regime j than under regime a if, for any alternative (W, H, D, E r ) compatible
     with state s, and letting E ≡ W H, Cit ≡ Cit (E, D,E r ), Z ≡ Z (D,E r ), and R ≡ R (E, D,E r ),
                                                
                             Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R ≥ Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) all i.

  3. We say that a state s is equally attractive under regimes j and a if, for any alternative
     (W, H, D, E r ) compatible with state s, and letting E ≡ W H, Cit ≡ Cit (E, D,E r ), Z ≡
     Z (D,E r ), and R ≡ R (E, D,E r ),
                                              
                           Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R = Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) all i.

Definition 26 (Collections of States). Define

       S ≡ {0nn, 1nn, 2nn, 0nr, 1nr, 2nr, 1nu, 2nu, 0rr, 1rr, 0rn, 1rn, 1un, 2un, 1uu, 2uu} ,
      C0 ≡ {0nn, 1nn, 2nn, 0nr, 1nr, 2nr, 1nu, 2nu, 1uu, 2uu, 1un, 2un} ,
      C+ ≡ {1rr, 1rn} ,
      C− ≡ {0rr, 0rn} .

Definition 27 (Welfare Participation State). Let Sw ≡ {0n, 1n, 2n, 0r, 1r, 1u, 2u}. Sw is the
list of latent states that spell out welfare participation only. The states in Sw relate to the states
in S as follows:                           
                                            0n if s ∈ {0nn, 0nr}
                                           
                                           
                                           
                                           
                                             1n if s ∈ {1nn, 1nr, 1nu}
                                            2n if s ∈ {2nn, 2nr, 2nu}
                                           
                                           
                             sw = h (s) =     0r if s ∈ {0rn, 0rr}        ,
                                              1r if s ∈ {1rn, 1rr}
                                           
                                           
                                           
                                           
                                              1u if s ∈ {1un, 1uu}
                                           
                                           
                                           
                                           
                                              2u if s ∈ {2un, 2uu}
                                           

where the number of each state sw refers to the woman’s earnings range, the letter “n” refers to
welfare non-participation, the letter “r” refers to welfare participation with truthful reporting of
earnings, and the letter “u” refers to welfare participation with under-reporting of earnings.

                                                 40
Definition 28 (Primitives). Let woman i be described by
                                                                                                  
                 θi ≡ Uia (., ., ., ., .) , Uij (., ., ., ., .) , Θi , Gai (.) , Fi (., .) , Ti (.) .

Consider a sample of N women with children. The sample women have primitives {θi }N
                                                                                  i=1 , which
are i.i.d. draws from a joint distribution function Γθ (.).

Definition 29 (Response Probabilities). Let Sit denote woman i’s potential state under regime
t ∈ {a, j}. Define the proportion of women occupying state s ∈ S under regime t as qst ≡ P Sit = s
where P (.) is a probability measure induced by the distribution function Γθ (.). Let πsa ,sj denote
the proportion of women occupying
                                    state sj under                                          a
                                                 regime j among those who occupy state s under
                                 j
regime a, that is, πsa ,sj ≡ P Si = sj |Sia = sa where P (.) is also a probability measure induced
by the distribution function Γθ (.).

Definition 30 (Integrated Response Probabilities). Let Sw,i     t denote the welfare-only potential

state of a woman i whose potential state under regime t is Sit ; that is, Sw,it   = h Sit . Define
                                                                                         
                                                                                              
the proportion of women occupying state sw ∈ Sw under regime t as ptsw ≡ P Sw,i        t =s
                                                                                             w    =
                 t
P
   s∈S:sw =h(s) qs where P (.) is a probability measure induced by the distribution function Γθ (.).
With some abuse of notation (see Definition 29), let πsa ,sjw denote the proportion of women who
                                                                       w
occupy state sjw under regime j among those who occupy state saw under regime a; that is, πsa ,sjw ≡
                                                                                          w
     j
P Sw,i  = sjw |Sw,i
                 a = sa
                      w   where  P (.) is also a probability measure induced by  the distribution
function Γθ (.).

Assumption 5 (Preferences). Woman i’s utility functions Uia (.,.,.,.,.) and Uij (., ., ., ., .) satisfy
the restrictions:

A.1           utility is strictly increasing in C;

A.2           Uit (H, C, D, Z, 1) < Uit (H, C, D, Z, 0) for all (H, C, D, Z) such that Dw +Dwf +Df = 1;

A.3           Uit (H, C, D, 1, R) ≤ Uit (H, C, D, 0, R) for all (H, C, D, R) such that Dw + Dwf = 1 and
              all t ∈ {a, j}; and Uit (H, C, D, 1, R) = Uit (H, C, D, 0, R) for all (H, C, D, R) such that
              Df = 1 and all t ∈ {a, j};

A.4           Uij (H, C, D, 1, R) ≤ Uia (H, C, D, 1, R) for all (H, C, D, R) such that Dw + Dwf = 1;

A.5           Uia (H, C, D, 0, R) = Uij (H, C, D, 0, R) for all (H, C, D, 0, R) such that Dw +Df +Dwf =
              1;

A.6           Uia (H, C, D, 0, 0) = Uij (H, C, D, 0, 0) for all (H, C, D) such that Dw + Df + Dwf = 0
              and all t ∈ {a, j};

A.7           Uia (H, Cia (E, D,E)         0) < Uia (H, Cia (E, 0,E) , 0, 0, 0) for all (H, W ) such that E ≡
                                  , D, 0, w
              W H ∈ F P Li , E i and D + Dwf = 1 whenever E i > F P Li .

Remark 9 (Preferences: Verbalizing Assumption 5). A.2 states that under-reporting of earn-
ings to the welfare agency decreases utility; the disutility from under-reporting may vary with the
alternative and, in particular, with program mix. A.3 states that reporting zero earnings to the
welfare agency yields a hassle disutility, while reporting zero earnings to the FS agency yields no

                                                             41
hassle disutility; the welfare hassle disutility may vary with the alternative. A.4 states that regime
j’s welfare hassle disutility is no smaller than regime a’s welfare hassle disutility. A.5 states that
the utility value of alternatives entailing FS-only participation is independent of the regime, irre-
spective of whether earnings are under-reported or reported truthfully. It also states that utility
value of alternatives entailing hours and consumption (H, C) and welfare-only participation, or FS
and welfare participation, is independent of the regime whenever reported earnings are not zero,
irrespective of whether earnings are under-reported or reported truthfully. A.6 states that the
utility value of alternatives entailing no participation in assistance programs is independent of the
regime. A.7 implicitly defines a local lower bound on the disutility from stigma associated with     
welfare assistance (alone or in combination with FS). It says that at earning levels in F P Li , E i ,
the extra consumption due to the transfer income does not suffice to compensate the woman for
the welfare stigma disutility she incurs when on welfare assistance under regime a, irrespective of
program mix.

Assumption 6 (Welfare-Ineligible Earning Levels). No woman may be on welfare assistance
and truthfully report earnings above F P Li under regime j or above Ēi under regime a.

Assumption 7 (Utility Maximization). Under regime t woman i makes choices by solving the
optimization problem

                                                           Uit H, Cit (W H, D, E r ) , D, Z (D, E r ) , R (W H, D, E r )
                                                                                                                        
                           max
                           3
    (W,H)∈Θi ∪(0,0),D∈{0,1} ,Df +Dw +Dwf ≤1,E r ∈[0,W H]

Assumption 8 (Population Heterogeneity). The distribution Γθ (.) is unrestricted save for the
constraints implied by Assumptions 5 and the definition of wage offers (Definition 19).

Assumption 9 (Breaking Indifference). Women break indifference in favor of the same alter-
native irrespective of the regime.

Assumption 10 (Filing Taxes). A woman files (does not file) for federal income taxes and the
EITC irrespective of the regime.

Intermediate Lemmas
Lemma 6 (Combined Transfer). Under both regimes j and a, for every E r such that Gti (E r ) >
0, the combined welfare plus FS transfer is no smaller than the sole welfare transfer or the sole FS
transfer.

Proof. The proof that the combined welfare plus FS transfer is no smaller than the sole welfare
transfer is trivial: the FS program has no feed-backs on the welfare program (Definition 16, ex-
pressions (137)-(138)) and the FS transfer cannot be negative (Definition 16, expression (143)).
The proof that the combined welfare plus FS transfer is no smaller than the sole FS transfer is
less obvious because the FS transfer is decreasing in the welfare grant which is counted as income
(Definition 16, expressions (143)-(144)). Nevertheless, the FS formula in (143) shows that a $1
increase in the welfare grant (G) leads to a less than $1 decrease in the FS transfer because τ1f < 1
and welfare assistance yields categorical FS eligibility (expression (145)). Thus, a woman whose
earnings report makes her eligible for welfare can enjoy a higher transfer income by taking up both
welfare and FS as opposed to taking up only FS.

Lemma 7 (Combined Transfer as a Function of Reported Earnings). Under regime a, the
combined welfare plus FS transfer is weakly decreasing in reported earnings.

                                                     42
Proof. For any reported earning E r , the combined transfer accruing to woman i is a function B (.)
defined by B (E r ) ≡ Gai (E r ) + Fi (E r , Gai (E r )). Observe: 1) given E r , the function G + Fi (E r , G)
is weakly increasing in G because a $1 increase in the welfare grant (G) leads to a less than $1
decrease in the FS transfer due to τ1f < 1 (expression 143); 2) Gai (E r ) is weakly decreasing in
E r (expression (137)); 3) given G, Fi (E r , G) is weakly decreasing in E r (expressions (143)-(144)).
Together these facts imply that B (.) is a weakly decreasing function.8

Lemma 8 (States 2rr and 2rn). Given Assumptions 5, 6, and 7, no woman selects an allocation
compatible with states 2rr and 2rn.

Proof. Under regime j no alternative is compatible with states 2rn and 2rr by Assumption 6.
Consider now a woman with E i ≤ F P Li under regime a. By Assumption 6 she may not be on
assistance and truthfully report earnings above F P Li (range 2). Finally, consider a woman with
E i > F P Li under regime a. By Assumption 6 she may not be on assistance and truthfully report
earnings above E i . By A.7 in Assumption 5 she will not truthfully report earnings in F P Li , E i
because she can attain a higher utility level by being off welfare assistance (Assumption 7): the
extra consumption due to the transfer income does not suffice to compensate the woman for the
stigma disutility she incurs when being on welfare assistance.

Lemma 9 (Optimal Reporting). Write woman i’s optimization problem (Assumption 7) as a
nested maximization problem:
                                                                                         
                                       t      t           r            r              r
                                                                                        
               max             max Ui H, Ci (W H, D, E ) , D, Z (D, E ) , R (W H, D, E ) .
(W,H)∈Θi ∪(0,0),D∈{0,1}3 ,Df +Dw +Dwf ≤1 E r ∈[0,W H]
                                                                                            (147)
Focus on the inner maximization problem in (147) for given sub-alternative (W, H, D) with Dm = 1
for m ∈ {f, w, wf }. Let E ≡ W H and Eir,t,m = Eir,t,m (W, H) denote woman i’s utility maximizing
earning report conditional on sub-alternative (W, H, D) with Dm = 1. Given Assumptions 5-10,
optimal reporting while on assistance is as follows:

   1. Welfare Only

        (a) Eir,j,w entails either truthful reporting, that is, Eir,j,w = E, or under-reporting such that
            E > Eir,j,w ∈ [0, F P Li ]; in particular, state 1un is dominated;
        (b) Eir,a,w entails either truthful reporting, that is, Eir,a,w = E, or under-reporting such that
            E > Eir,a,w ∈ [0, δi ];

   2. FS Only
       For any t ∈ {a, j}, Eir,t,f entails eithern truthfulo reporting, that is, Eir,t,f = E, or under-
                                                          f
       reporting such that E > Eir,t,f ∈ [0, min E fi , E i ] where E fi is the highest level of reported
                                                                           f
       earnings such that the FS transfer is unreduced and E i is the highest level of reported earnings
       such the FS’s eligibility tests are satisfied;

   3. Welfare and FS
                                             r               r                     r       r                        r
   8
     If B (.) were differentiable then dB(E
                                         dE r
                                               )
                                                 = ∂(G+F∂G (E ,G)) dG
                                                                   dE r
                                                                        + ∂(G+F  (E ,G)) dE
                                                                                ∂E r     dE r
                                                                                              . To show that dB(EdE r
                                                                                                                      )
                                                                                                                         ≤ 0 it
                                  ∂(G+F (E r ,G)) dG           ∂(G+F (E r ,G))
would suffice to show that both        ∂G         dE r
                                                       ≤ 0 and       ∂E r
                                                                               ≤ 0.  The argument   in the proof does   exactly
this without using calculus because neither G (.) nor F (., .) are differentiable functions.




                                                              43
      (a) Eir,j,wf entails either truthful reporting, that is, Eir,j,wf = E, or under-reporting such
          that E > Eir,j,wf ∈ [0, F P Li ]; in particular, state 1uu is dominated;
      (b) Eir,a,wf entails either truthful reporting, that is, Eir,a,wf = E, or under-reporting such
          that E > Eir,a,wf = 1 cent, or under-reporting such that E > Eir,a,wf ∈ [0, E wf    i ] where
          E wf
            i    is the largest level of
                                        reported
                                                 earnings in  [0, δi ] such that the corresponding FS
          transfer is F i , that is χi E wf
                                         i , Gi   = 0 (Definition 144), or, if no such earning level
          exists in [0, δi ],   E wf
                                  i    = 0.

Proof. We prove each part of the Lemma in turn.

  1. Welfare Only
     The proofs of statements a.) and b.) mimic the proof of Lemma 2 with the appropriate
     adjustments in notation, namely, with D = (1, 0, 0) in place of D = 1, Eir,t,w in place of Eir,t
     for t ∈ {a, j}, net of tax earnings Ti (E) in place of gross of tax earnings E, and the references
     to A.3 in Assumption 5 in place of the references to A.3 in Assumption 1.

  2. FS Only
     The stand-alone FS program rules are invariant to the regime (Definition 16). The utility
     associated with any alternative compatible with stand-alone FS assistance is also regime
     invariant (A.5 in Assumption 5). Thus, the reported earning level that solves the inner
     maximization problem in (147) is the same for all t ∈ {a, j}. Also, it is either the true
     level of earnings or the amount - less than the true level of earnings - which maximizes
     consumption; this is because utility depends on whether a recipient is under-reporting but
     not the extend of the under-report (Definition 24). To find the reported earning level that
     maximizes consumption we make three preliminary observations. First, we observe that the
     threshold level E fi is strictly positive for all i. To see this consider a woman i who enjoys no
                                                                     f              f
     deductions other than the standard deduction, namely, β1i = $134 and β2i (0, 0) = 0. Then,
     χi (E r , 0) = E r 1 − τ2f − $134 (expression (144)), hence any report E r ≤ $134/ 1 − τ2f       =
     $167.5 yields her a FS transfer in the (maximal) amount F i . A woman with deductions other
     than the standard deduction enjoys an even higher threshold level E fi . Second, we observe
                                 f                                                                 f
     that the threshold level E i is also strictly positive for all i. To see this observe
                                                                                       n that E i is   o
                                                                              f
     the smallest level of earnings that engenders ineligibility, formally, E i = min τ3f F P Li , E 0
     where E 0 is such that χi (E 0 , 0) = F P Li . Third, we observe that the threshold level E fi for
                                                                      f
     a womann with o    very high deductions may be higher than E i . Given E, any report E r ∈
                      f
     [0, min E fi , E i ] yields the same (maximal) transfer F i hence woman i enjoys consumption
                                                           n        o
                                                                  f
     in the amount Ti (E) + F i . A report E r > min E fi , E i yields transfer Fi (E r , 0) hence
     woman i enjoys consumption                                 r                      r
                      n        o in the amount Ti (E) + Fi (E , 0). Because Fi (En , 0) < o    Fi
              r          f   f                                                            f  f
     for all E > min E i , E i , the consumption-maximizing reports are in [0, min E i , E i ].
     In conclusion, depending on the magnitude of woman i’s under-reporting
                                                                         n     disutility
                                                                                    o     (A.2 in
                                                          r,t,f             f     f
     Assumption 5) and earning level E, either reporting Ei     ∈ [0, min E i , E i ] or truthful
     reporting, i.e. Eir,t,f = E, solves the inner maximization problem in (147) for all t ∈ {a, j}.

  3. Welfare and FS

                                                  44
The proof of statement a.) mimics the proof of Lemma 2.I.) with the appropriate adjustments
in notation, namely, with D = (0, 0, 1) in place of D = 1, Eir,j,wf in place of Eir,j , the references
A.3 and A.5 in Assumption 5 in place of the references to A.3 and A.5 in Assumption 1, and
the expressions for consumption equal to Ti (E) + Gi + F i in place of E + Gi . In particular,
state 1uu is dominated in the extended model because under regime j earnings up to F P Li
are fully disregarded in the determination of the combined welfare plus FS transfer (Definition
16, expression 142). Next we prove statement b.).
Consider first a woman i who derives no disutility from hassle under regime a (A.3 in As-
sumption 5 holds as an equality). Thus, the utility associated with any alternative compatible
with welfare plus FS assistance is regime invariant hence the reported earning level that solves
the inner maximization problem in (147) is that which maximizes consumption. Reporting
E r ∈ [0, E wf
            i ] yields woman i the maximal combined transfer Gi + F i with implied con-
sumption Ti (E) + Gi + F i . A report E r > E wf     i   yields a lower transfer (Lemma 7) with
implied consumption Ti (E) + Gai (E r ) + Fi (E r , Gai (E r )). Thus, depending on the magnitude
of woman i’s under-reporting disutility and earning level E, either reporting Eir,a,wf ∈ [0, E wf
                                                                                               i ]
                             r,a,wf
or truthful reporting, i.e. Ei      = E, solves the inner maximization problem in (147).
Next, consider a woman i who derives some disutility from hassle under regime a (A.3
in Assumption 5 holds as a strict inequality) and such that E wf           i  ∈ (0, δi ]. Reporting
   r        wf
E ∈ (0, E i ] yields her the maximal combined transfer Gi + F i while higher reports yield
a lower transfer (Lemma 7). Depending on the magnitude of woman i’s under-reporting
disutility and earning level E, either reporting Eir,a,wf ∈ (0, E wf     i ] or truthful reporting,
i.e. Eir,a,wf = E, solves the inner maximization problem in equation (147). To show
this we next consider D = (0, 0, 1) and five mutually exclusive pairs (W, H) spanning the
range of value for E ≡ W H. For convenience, we let Uit serve as shortcut notation for
Uit H, Cit (E, D, E r ) , D, Z (D, E r ) , R (E, D, E r ) . Let (W, H) be:

 (a) such that E = 0.
     Woman i’s cannot over-report her earnings (Assumption 147). Thus, Eir,a,wf = E.
(b) (W, H) such that E ∈ (0, E wf
                               i ].
    Woman i’s utility while on welfare and FS depends on reported earnings as follows:
                                                                    
                            [1] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 1, 1 if E r = 0
                     Uia =   [2] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 0, 1 if E r ∈ (0, E) .
                             [3] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 0, 0 if E r = E
                           

     By the characterization of woman i’s preferences we have [1] < [2]. By A.2 in Assump-
     tion 5 we have [2] < [3]. Thus, truthful reporting solves the inner maximization problem
     (147), that is, Eir,a,wf = E.
 (c) (W, H) such that E ∈ (E wf
                              i , δi ].
     Woman i’s utility while on welfare and FS depends on reported earnings as follows:
                                                                 
                       [1] : Uia                                                    Er
                     
                                  H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 1, 1              if        =0
                                                                                         ∈ (0, E wf
                                                                
                       [2] : Uia   H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 0, 1              if   Er           i ]
                     
               Uia =                                                                        wf     .
                      [3] : Uia
                                  H, Ti (E) + Gi + Fi E r , Gi  , D, 0, 1   if   Er   ∈ (E i , E)
                       [4] : Uia   H, Ti (E) + Gi + Fi E r , Gi , D, 0, 0           Er
                     
                                                                               if        =E

     By the characterization  of woman i’s preferences we have [1] < [2]. Because the FS
     transfer Fi E , Gi is strictly decreasing in E r , Fi E r , Gi < F i , hence [3] < [2]. Thus,
                  r
                       


                                                 45
     depending on woman i’s utility function, under-reporting disutility (A.2 in Assumption
     5), and earnings E, the inner maximization problem in (147) is solved by Eir,a,wf ∈
     (0, E wf                                              r,a,wf
           i ] (when [4] ≤ [2]) or by truthful reporting, Ei      = E (when [4] ≥ [2]).
(d) (W, H) such that E ∈ (δi , F P Li ].
    Woman i’s utility while on welfare and FS depends on reported earnings as follows:
                                                           
                  [1] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 1, 1                                    Er
                
                                                                                        if        =0
                                                                                                   ∈ (0, E wf
                                                          
                 [2] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 0, 1                              if   Er            i ]
                
                
          Uia =                                                                                          wf
                                                                       
                  [3] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + Fi E r , Gi , D, 0, 1                       if   Er   ∈ (E i , δi ] .
                  [4] : Uia (H, Ti (E) + Gai (E r ) + Fi (E r , Gai (E r )) , D, 0, 1)        Er   ∈ (δi , E)
                
                
                
                                                                                        if
                  [5] : Uia (H, Ti (E) + Gai (E r ) + Fi (E r , Gai (E r )) , D, 0, 0)        Er
                
                                                                                         if        =E

     By the characterization of woman i’s preferences we have [1] < [2]. The combined
     transfer Gai (E r ) + Fi (E r , Gai (E r )) is strictly decreasing in E r which implies that [4] <
     [3] < [2] (Lemma 7). Thus, depending on woman i’s utility function, under-reporting
     disutility (A.2 in Assumption 5), and earnings E, the inner maximization problem in
     (147) is solved by Eir,a,wf ∈ (0, E wf  i ] (when [5] ≤ [2]) or by truthful reporting, Ei
                                                                                               r,a,wf
                                                                                                      =
     E (when [5] ≥ [2]).
 (e) (W, H) such that E > F P Li .
     Woman i must be under-reporting (Lemma 8). Her utility while on welfare and FS
     depends on reported earnings as follows:
                                                          
                 [1] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 1, 1                                     Er
               
                                                                                        if        =0
                                                                                                   ∈ (0, E wf
                                                         
                 [2] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 0, 1                                if   Er            i ]
               
           a
          Ui =                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                   ∈ (E wf
                                                                     
               
                [3] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + Fi E r , Gi , D, 0, 1                        if   Er         i , δi ]
                 [4] : Uia (H, Ti (E) + Gai (E r ) + Fi (E r , Gai (E r )) , D, 0, 1)         Er   ∈ (δi , E)
               
                                                                                         if

     By the characterization of woman i’s preferences we have [1] < [2]. The combined
     transfer Gai (E r ) + Fi (E r , Gai (E r )) is strictly decreasing in E r which implies that [4] <
     [3] < [2] (Lemma 7). Thus, the inner maximization problem in (147) is solved by
     Eir,a,wf ∈ (0, E wf
                      i ].

Finally, consider a woman i who derives some disutility from hassle under regime a (A.3 in
Assumption 5 holds as a strict inequality) and such that E wf    i  = 0. Depending on women i’s
utility function (in particular her hassle disutility), under-reporting disutility, and earnings
E, the inner maximization problem in (147) is solved by Eir,a,wf = 1 cent or by truthful
reporting, Eir,a,wf = E. Too show this we next consider D = (0, 0, 1) and four mutually
exclusive pairs (W, H) spanning the range of value for E ≡ W H. Again, for convenience,          we
let Uit serve as shortcut notation for Uit H, Cit (E, D, E r ) , D, Z (D, E r ) , R (E, D, E r ) . Let
(W, H) be:

 (a) (W, H) such that E = 0.
     Woman i’s cannot over-report her earnings (Assumption 147). Thus, Eir,a,wf = E.
(b) (W, H) such that E ∈ (0, δi ].
    Woman i’s utility while on welfare and FS depends on reported earnings as follows:
                                                               
                       [1] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 1, 1              r
                                                                         if E r = 0
                  a             a                         r
                 Ui =   [2] : Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi + Fi E , Gi  , D, 0, 1 if E ∈ (0, E) .
                        [3] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + Fi E r , Gi , D, 0, 0 if E r = E
                      



                                                    46
          The FS transfer Fi E r , Gi is strictly decreasing in E r which implies that Fi E r , Gi ≤
                                                                                                 

          F i for all E r ∈ (0, E) and among these reports that which yields the highest utility
          is E r = 1 (the smallest possible
                                            denomination). Due to rounding of the FS transfer,
          Fi 1, Gi = F i ≡ Fi 0, Gi hence [1] < [2]. Thus, whether the inner maximization
          problem (147) has solution Eir,a,wf = 1 cent or Eir,a,wf = E depends on whether the
          increase in utility derived from the higher consumption (F i > Fi E, Gi and A.1 in
          Assumption 5) more than offsets the decrease in utility derived from under-reporting
          (A.2 in Assumption 5) i.e. [3] < [2] or viceversa.
      (c) (W, H) such that E ∈ (δi , F P Li ].
          Woman i’s utility while on welfare and FS depends on reported earnings as follows:
                                                               
                      
                       [1] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 1, 1                      if   Er   =0
                        [2] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + Fi E r , Gi , D, 0, 1                if   Er   ∈ (0, δi ]
                      
                Uia =           a              a   r             r a    r                                    .
                       [3] : Ui (H, Ti (E) + Gi (E ) + Fi (E , Gi (E )) , D, 0, 1)
                                                                                       if   Er   ∈ (δi , E)
                                a                         r
                        [4] : Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi + Fi E , Gi , D, 0, 0                   if   Er   =E
                      

          The combined transfer Gai (E r ) + Fi (E r , Gai (E r )) is strictly decreasing in E r which
          implies that [3] < [2] (Lemma 7). The FS transfer Fi (E r , Gai (E r )) is also strictly
          decreasing in E r which implies that among reports in (0, δi ] that which yields the highest
          utility is E r = 1 cent (the smallest possible
                                                           denomination). Due to rounding of the
          FS transfer, Fi 1, Gi = F i ≡ Fi 0, Gi hence [1] < [2]. Thus, whether the inner
          maximization problem (147) has solution Eir,a,wf = 1 cent or Eir,a,wf = E depends on
          whether the increase in utility derived from the higher consumption (F i > Fi E, Gi
          and A.1 in Assumption 5) more than offsets the decrease in utility derived from under-
          reporting (A.2 in Assumption 5) i.e. [4] < [2] or viceversa.
      (d) (W, H) such that E > F P Li .
          Woman i must be under-reporting (Lemma 8). Her utility while on welfare and FS
          depends on reported earnings as follows:
                                                            
                    [1] : Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , D, 1, 1                   if E r = 0
               a             a                         r
                                                                  
              Ui =   [2] : Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi + Fi E , Gi , D, 0, 1               if E r ∈ (0, δi ]       .
                     [3] : Ui (H, Ti (E) + Gi (E ) + Fi (E , Gi (E )) , D, 0, 1) if E r ∈ (δi , F P Li )
                             a              a   r             r a r
                   

          The combined transfer Gai (E r ) + Fi (E r , Gai (E r )) is strictly decreasing in E r which
          implies that [3] < [2] (Lemma 7). The FS transfer Fi E r , Gi is also strictly decreasing
                                                                            

          in E r which implies that among reports in (0, δi ] that which yields the highest utility is
          E r = 1 cent
                      (the smallest possible denomination). Due to rounding of the FS transfer,
          Fi 1, Gi = F i ≡ Fi 0, Gi hence [1] < [2]. Thus, the inner maximization problem (147)
          has solution Eir,a,wf = 1 cent.



Corollary 6 (Optimal Reporting and Policy Invariance). Given Assumptions 5-10, the utility
function associated with any alternative compatible with states {1un, 2un, 1uu, 2uu} and entailing
optimal reporting is regime invariant.

Proof. We examine each state in turn.

  1. State 1un



                                                     47
                                                                    letting E ≡ W H, E is
   (a) Consider a woman i and any sub-alternative (W, H, D) such that                      
                                r,j,w
                    w
       in range 1, D = 1, and Ei      (W, H) < E. Thus alternative W, H, D, Eir,j,w (W, H)
        is compatible
                        with state 1unand entails optimal
                                                                   reporting underregime j. Let Cij ≡
        Cij E, (1, 0, 0) , Eir,j,w (W, H) and Zij ≡ Z (1, 0, 0) , Eir,j,w (W, H) . We next show that
                                                                       
        Uij H, Cij , (1, 0, 0) , Zij , 1 = Ui H, Cij , (1, 0, 0) , Zij , 1 . By Lemma 9, Eir,j,w (W, H) ∈
        (0, F P Li ] or Eir,j,w (W, H) ∈ [0, F P Li ] depending on the woman’s preferences. In the
        first case, the utility woman i enjoys is Uij H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 which equals
                                                                                         

        Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 by A.5 in Assumption 5. In the second case, the utility
        woman i enjoys is Uij H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 which also equals
                                                                 

        Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 by A.5 in Assumption 5 and because she is indifferent
        between (under-) reports in (0, F     P Li ] and reporting zero earnings, that is,
        Uij H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 1, 1 = Uij H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 .
   (b) Consider a woman i and any sub-alternative (W, H, D) such that letting E ≡ W H, E is
       in range 1, Dw = 1, and Eir,a,w (W, H) < E. Thus alternative (W, H, D, Eir,a,w (W, H))
       is compatible with state 1un and entails optimal reporting under regime a. Let Cia ≡
       Cia (E, (1, 0, 0) , Eir,a,w (W, H)) and Zia ≡ Z ((1, 0, 0) , Eir,a,w (W, H)). We next show that
       Uia (H, Cia , (1, 0, 0) , Zia , 1) = Ui (H, Cia , (1, 0, 0) , Zia , 1). By Lemma 9, Eir,a,w (W, H) ∈
       (0, δi ] or Eir,a,w (W, H) ∈ [0, δi ] depending on the woman’s preferences.              In the first case,
                                              a
                                                                                  
       the utility woman i enjoys is Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 which equals
       Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 by A.5 in Assumption 5. In the second case, the utility
       woman i enjoys is also
       Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 = Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 by A.5 in Assump-
                                                                                        

       tion 5 and because she is indifferent between (under-)          reports   in (0, δi ] and reporting zero
                                a                                             a
                                                                                                               
       earnings, that is, Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 1, 1 = Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 .
   (c) In 1.(a) and 1.(b) we have shown that any alternative compatible with state 1un and
       entailing optimal reporting yields regime-invariant consumption
                                                                      Ti (E) + Gi and regime-
       invariant utility level Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 0, 1 .

2. State 2un.
  The proof that the utility associated with any alternative compatible with state 2un and
  entailing optimal reporting is regime invariant is the same as that for state 1un once we let
  the pair (H, W ) be such that E ≡ W H is in range 2 (Lemma 9).

3. State 1uu

                                                                   letting E ≡ W H, E is
   (a) Consider a woman i and any sub-alternative (W, H, D) such that
                               r,j,wf
                    wf
       in range 1, D = 1, and Ei      (W, H) < E. Thus alternative W, H, D, Eir,j,wf (W, H)
        is compatible
                       with state 1uu and     entails optimal
                                                                   reporting under regime
                                                                                             j. Let Cij ≡
        Cij E, (0, 0, 1) , Eir,j,wf (W, H) and Zij ≡ Z (0, 0, 1) , Eir,j,wf (W, H) . We next show
                                                                            
        that Uij H, Cij , (0, 0, 1) , Zij , 1 = Ui H, Cij , (0, 0, 1) , Zij , 1 . By Lemma 9, Eir,j,wf (W, H) ∈
        (0, F P Li ] or Eir,j,wf (W, H) ∈ [0, F P Li ] depending on the woman’s preferences. In the
        first case, the utility woman i enjoys is Uij H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 which
                                                                                              

        equals Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 by A.5 in Assumption 5. In the second
        case, the utility woman i enjoys is Uij H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 which also
                                                                                       


                                                     48
                                                              
           equals Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 by A.5 in Assumption 5 and because she
           is indifferent between (under-) reports     in (0, F P Li ] and reporting zero earnings, that is,
           Uij H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 1, 1 = Uij H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 .
                                                                        letting E ≡ W H, E is
      (b) Consider a woman i and any sub-alternative (W, H, D) such that
                                    r,a,wf
                       wf
          in range 1, D = 1, and Ei        (W, H) < E. Thus alternative W, H, D, Eir,a,wf (W, H)
                                                                                             a
          is compatible
                       with state 1uu and
                                          entails optimal
                                                                              a. Let Ci ≡
                                                           reporting under regime
           Cia E, (0, 0, 1) , Eir,a,wf (W, H) and Zia ≡ Z (0, 0, 1) , Eir,a,wf (W, H) . We next show
           that Uia (H, Cia , (0, 0, 1) , Zia , 1) = Ui (H, Cia , (0, 0, 1) , Zia , 1). By Lemma 9, Eir,a,wf (W, H) ∈
           (0, E wf
                 i ] or Ei
                           r,a,wf
                                   (W, H) ∈ [0, E wf   i ] or Ei
                                                                   r,a,wf
                                                                          (W, H) = 1 cent depending on the
                                              wf
           woman’s preferences and E i . In the first case, the utility woman i enjoys is
           Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 which equals Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1
                                                                                                                    

           by A.7 in Assumption 5 (policy invariance). In the second case, the utility woman i
           enjoys is also
           Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 = Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 by A.5
                                                                                                         

           in Assumption 5 and because she is indifferent between (under-) reports in (0, E wf              i ] and
           reporting zero earnings, that is,
           Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 1, 1 = Uia H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 . In the
                                                                                                         

           third case, the utility woman i enjoys is also Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 be-
           cause of the rounding of the FS transfer.
       (c) In 3.(a) and 3.(b) we have shown that any alternative compatible with state 1uu and
           entailing optimal reporting yields regime-invariant consumption Ti (E) + Gi + F i and
           regime-invariant utility level Ui H, Ti (E) + Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 0, 1 .

  4. State 2uu
     The proof that the utility associated with any alternative compatible with state 2uu and
     entailing optimal reporting is regime-invariant is the same as that for state 1uu once we let
     the pair (H, W ) be such that E ≡ W H is in range 2 (Lemma 9).



Remark 10 (Optimal under-Reporting and Alternatives Considered). In what follows, when
considering alternatives compatible with states {1un, 1uu, 2un, 2uu}, it is without loss of generality
that we only focus on alternatives entailing optimal (under-) reporting. No woman would select
an alternative compatible with states {1un, 1uu, 2un, 2uu} not entailing optimal (under-) reporting
(Assumption 7). Additionally, it is without loss of generality that we disregard alternatives com-
patible with states {1un, 1uu} under regime j. No woman would select an alternative compatible
with states {1un, 1uu} under regime j because they are dominated (Lemma 9, parts I and III).

Lemma 10 (Revealed Preferences). Consider any pair of states sa , sj obeying: I) sa 6= sj ;
                                                                                

II) state sa is no worse under regime j than under regime a; III) state sj is no better under regime
j than under regime a. Then, if Assumptions 7 and 9 hold, no woman will pair states sa and sj .

Proof. The proof is by contradiction. Consider any pair of states sa , sj satisfying properties I)-
                                                                             

III) and suppose that there exists a woman i who pairs states sa and sj . By Assumption 7, this
means that there exists an alternative(H, W, D,E r ) that is compatible with state sa and utility
maximizing under regime a; and an alternative (H 0 , W 0 , D0 ,E r0 ) that is compatible with state sj
and utility maximizing under regime j. Define E ≡ W H and E 0 ≡ W 0 H 0 . Let Cit = Cit (E, D,E r )

                                                      49
and Cit0 = Cit (E 0 , D0 ,E r0 ) for all t ∈ {a, j}, Z = Z (D,E r ) and Z 0 = Z (D0 ,E r0 ), R = R (E, D,E r )
and R0 = R (E 0 , D0 ,E r0 ). Thus, the woman choices under regime a and, respectively, j reveal

                                 Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) ≥ Uia H 0 , Cia0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 ,
                                                                                        

and                                                                              
                               Uij H 0 , Cij0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 ≥ Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R .
By property II)                                     
                                 Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R ≥ Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) .
Combining the above three inequalities we have

                                                    
  Uij H 0 , Cij0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 ≥ Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R ≥ Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) ≥ Uia H 0 , Cia0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 .
                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                               (148)
If any of the inequalities in (148) is strict, property III) is violated therefore we have a contradiction.
If no inequality is strict, (148) rewrites as
                                                    
  Uij H 0 , Cij0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 = Uij H, Cij , D, Z, R = Uia (H, Cia , D, Z, R) = Uia H 0 , Cia0 , D0 , Z 0 , R0 .
                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                               (149)
The first equality in (149) means that woman i is indifferent between allocation (H, W, D,E r ) and
(H 0 , W 0 , D0 ,E r0 ) under regime j. The last equality in (149) means that woman i is indifferent
between allocation (H, W, D,E r ) and (H 0 , W 0 , D0 ,E r0 ) under regime a. She breaks the indifference
in favor of allocation (H, W, D,E r ) under regime a and in favor of allocation (H 0 , W 0 , D0 ,E r0 ) under
regime j. By Assumption 9 this means that (H, W, D,E r ) = (H 0 , W 0 , D0 ,E r0 ) which implies that
sa = sj which violates property I) therefore we have a contradiction.

Lemma 11 (Policy Impact on Attractiveness of States). Given Assumptions 5-10:
   1. the states in C+ are no worse under regime j than under regime a,
   2. the states in C− are no better under regime j than under regime a,
   3. the states in C0 are equally attractive under regimes j and a.
Proof. We prove each statement in turn.
   1. The states in C+ are no worse under j than under regime a.
       The only two states in C+ are 1rn and 1rr. The alternatives compatible               with these states
                                                         w    r                  wf
       entail E in range 1, and, respectively, (D , E ) = (1, E) or D , E = (1, E). Thus,r

       the utility function associated with each of these alternatives is invariant to the treatment
       (A.5 in Assumption 5). Accordingly, it suffices to show that the consumption associated
       with any one of these alternatives is not lower under regime j than under regime a, that is,
       Cij (E, D, E r ) ≥ Cia (E, D, E r ) for all (E, D, E r ) such that s (E, D, E r ) ∈ C+ . Consider first
       state 1rr ∈ C+ so that (E, D, E r ) = (E, (0, 0, 1) , E). By Lemma 7 part 1), Gi + Fi E, Gi ≥
                                                                                                          

       Gai (E) + Fi (E, Gai (E)) for all E in range 1,9 thus

       Cij (E, (0, 0, 1) , E) = Ti (E)+Gi +Fi E, Gi ≥ Ti (E)+Gai (E)+Fi E, Gi = Cia (E, (0, 0, 1) , E) ,
                                                                                        

   9
    There are earning levels in range 1 such that a woman is ineligible for the combined FS plus welfare assistance
under JF’s control policy. This comparison is meaningful only for earnings that are below the more stringent eligibility
threshold; above such threshold state 1rr is ruled out under JF’s control policy.


                                                          50
  which verifies the desired inequality. Consider next state 1rn ∈ C+ so that (E, D, E r ) =
  (E, (1, 0, 0) , E). Because Gi ≥ Gai (E) for all E in range 1,

            Cij (E, (1, 0, 0) , E) = Ti (E) + Gi ≥ Ti (E) + Gai (E) = Cia (E, (1, 0, 0) , E) ,

  which verifies the desired inequality.

2. The states in C− are no better under j than under regime a.
  The only two states in C− are 0rn and 0rr. It suffices to show that the utility associated with
  any alternative compatible with states 0rn and 0rr is at least as high under regime a than
  under regime j. Consider a tuple obeying s (E, D, E r ) ∈ C− . The alternatives compatible
  with state 0rn are such that (E, D, E r ) = (0, (1, 0, 0) , 0) hence Cit (E, D, E r ) = Gi all t,
  Z (D, E r ) = 1, and R (E, D, E r ) = 0. The alternatives compatible with state 0rr are such
  that (E, D, E r ) = (0, (0, 0, 1) , 0) hence Cit (E, D, E r ) = Gi + F i all t, Z (D, E r ) = 1, and
  R (E, D, E r ) = 0. Thus, it suffices to show that

                        Uia 0, Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 1, 0 ≥ Uij 0, Gi , (1, 0, 0) , 1, 0 ,
                                                                                  


  and
                   Uia 0, Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 1, 0 ≥ Uij 0, Gi + F i , (0, 0, 1) , 1, 0 .
                                                                                         

  Both inequalities hold by A.4 in Assumption 5 (hassle disutility is no lower under j than
  under a).

3. The states in C0 are equally attractive under regimes j and a.
  Write C0 as the union of two disjoint collections:

                                 {0nn, 1nn, 2nn, 0nr, 1nr, 2nr, 1nu, 2nu} ,                      (150)
                                 {1un, 2un, 1uu, 2uu} .                                          (151)

  The alternatives compatible with states in collection (150) entail no assistance or FS-only
  assistance. Thus the utility associated with each of these alternatives is invariant to the
  policy regime (A.5 and A.6 in Assumption 5). Accordingly, it suffices to show that the
  consumption associated with any of these alternatives is the same under regimes j and a.
  Consider first the alternatives compatible with an off-assistance state si ∈ {0nn, 1nn, 2nn}
  in collection (150). If si ∈ {0nn}, consumption is zero. If si ∈ {1nn, 2nn} consumption
  equals E. Thus, consumption is the same under either regime. Consider next the alternatives
  compatible with a FS-only state si ∈ {0nr, 1nr, 2nr, 1nu, 2nu} in collection (150). If si ∈
  {0nr}, consumption equals F i . If si ∈ {1nr, 2nr}, consumption equals E + Fi (E, 0). If si ∈
  {1nu, 2nu} consumption equals E + F i by optimal reporting (Lemma 9). Thus, consumption
  is the same under either regime. Finally consider the alternatives compatible with states
  in collection (151). Given optimal reporting, the utility function associated with all the
  alternatives compatible with states {1un, 2un, 1uu, 2uu} is invariant to the policy regime
  (Corollary 6). Accordingly, it suffices to show that the consumption associated with any one
  of these alternatives is the same under regimes j and a. If si ∈ {1un, 2un}, consumption
  is E + Gi under both regimes. If si ∈ {1uu, 2uu}, consumption is E + Gi + F i under both
  regimes. Thus, consumption is the same under either regime.




                                                  51
Main Propositions
Proposition 6 (Restricted Pairings). Given Assumptions 5-10, the pairings of states corre-
sponding to the “-” entries in Table A4 are disallowed.
Proof. States 1un and 1uu are dominated under regime j (Lemma 9). Therefore no woman pairs
state sa with state sj ∈ {1un, 1uu} for any  a
                                           s ∈ S. Next, by Lemmas 5 and 11, no pairing of state
 a             j                    a   j
s with state s can occur for all s , s in the collection
                            a j a
                             s , s : s ∈ C0 ∪ C+ , sj ∈ C0 ∪ C− , sa 6= sj .               (152)

It suffices to show that the properties I)-III) of Lemma 10 are met. Property I) holds trivially
and properties II) and III) hold by Lemma 11. Therefore no woman selects any of the pairings in
(152).

Proposition 7 (Unrestricted Pairings). Given Assumptions 5-10, the pairings of states corre-
sponding to the non “-” entries in Table A4 are allowed.
Remark 11 (Omitted Proof of Proposition 7). The proof of Proposition 7 would mimic the proof
of Proposition 2 in that it would present examples of women who select the pairings corresponding
to the non “-” entries in Table A4. We omit the proof of Proposition 7 for two reasons. First, there
are 63 allowed pairings in Table A4, which makes the proof exceedingly long. Second, our interest
lies in showing that the integrated response matrix of the extended model contains at least as many
restrictions as the response matrix of the baseline model (Proposition 9 and Remark 12 below).
The proof of Proposition 7 would only serve to confirm the additional result that the integrated
response matrix of the extended model contains at most as many restrictions as the response matrix
of the baseline model.
Proposition 8 (Response Matrix). Let Π denote the matrix of response probabilities πsa ,sj : sa , sj ∈ S .
                                                                                        

Given Table A4, Π is a 16 × 16 matrix with the following zero (0) and non-zero (X) entries:


                        JF’s Experimental Policy: Earnings / Program Participation State
 Control   0nn   1nn   2nn   0nr   1nr   2nr   1nu    2nu   0rn   1rn   1un   2un   0rr   1rr   1uu   2uu
  0nn       X     0     0     0     0     0     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  1nn       0     X     0     0     0     0     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  2nn       0     0     X     0     0     0     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  0nr       0     0     0     X     0     0     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  1nr       0     0     0     0     X     0     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  2nr       0     0     0     0     0     X     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  1nu       0     0     0     0     0     0     X      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
                                                                                                          .
  2nu       0     0     0     0     0     0     0      X     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  0rn       X     X     X     X     X     X     X      X     X     X     0     X     X     X     0     X
  1rn       0     0     0     0     0     0     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  1un       0     0     0     0     0     0     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  2un       0     0     0     0     0     0     0      0     0     X     0     X     0     X     0     0
   0rr      X     X     X     X     X     X     X      X     X     X     0     X     X     X     0     X
   1rr      0     0     0     0     0     0     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  1uu       0     0     0     0     0     0     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     0
  2uu       0     0     0     0     0     0     0      0     0     X     0     0     0     X     0     X

                                                 52
                                                       
Proof. By Definition 29, πsa ,sj ≡ P Sij = sj |Sia = sa . By Proposition 6, the pairings of states
corresponding to the “-” entries in Table A4 are disallowed. Thus, πsa ,sj = 0 for any pairing sa , sj
                                                                                                       

corresponding to a “-” entry in Table A4 because no woman occupies state sa under regime a and
state sj under regime j. By Proposition 7, the pairings of states corresponding        to the non “-”
entries in Table A4 are allowed. Thus, πsa ,sj 6= 0 for any pairing sa , sj corresponding to a non
                                                                            

“-” entry in Table A4 because some women may occupy state sa under regime a and state sj under
regime j.

Proposition 9 (Integrated Response Matrix). The matrix of response probabilities over the
states in S, Π, reduces to the following matrix Πw of response probabilities over the states in Sw :

                           JF’s Experimental Policy: Earnings / Program Participation State
 Control        0n            1n             2n                        0r                       1r       1u        2u
   0n        1 − π0n,1r        0              0                        0                      π0n,1r      0         0
   1n            0         1 − π1n,1r         0                        0                      π1n,1r      0         0
   2n            0             0          1 − π2n,1r                   0                      π2n,1r      0         0       .
   0r          π0r,0n        π0r,1n         π0r,2n        1 − π0r,0n − π0r,1n − π0r,2n        π0r,1r      0      π0r,2u
                                                               −π0r,1r − π0r,2u
    1r           0              0              0                       0                         1       0         0
    1u           0              0              0                       0                         1       0         0
    2u           0              0              0                       0                      π2u,1r     0     1 − π2u,1r

    where
                                      a
                                    q0nn                              pa0n − q0nna
π0n,1r   ≡ (π0nn,1rn + π0nn,1rr )         +  (π 0nr,1rn + π 0nr,1rr )                 ,
                                     pa0n                                  pa0n
                                    qa                                  a
                                                                      q1nr                                pa1n − q1nn
                                                                                                                  a       a
                                                                                                                       − q1nr
π1n,1r   ≡   (π1nn,1rn + π1nn,1rr ) 1nn   +  (π 1nr,1rn + π 1nr,1rr )        +   (π 1nu,1rn + π 1nu,1rr )                     ,
                                     pa1n                              pa1n                                       pa1n
                                    qa                                qa                                  pa − q2nn
                                                                                                                  a       a
                                                                                                                       − q2nr
π2n,1r   ≡   (π2nn,1rn + π2nn,1rr ) 2nna  + (π2nr,1rn + π2nr,1rr ) 2nr   a   + (π2nu,1rn + π2nu,1rr ) 2n            a         ,
                                     p2n                               p2n                                        p2n
                                    qa                                pa − q a
π0r,0n   ≡   (π0rn,0nn + π0rn,0nr ) 0rna  + (π0rr,0nn + π0rr,0nr ) 0r a 0rn ,
                                     p0r                                   p0r
                                                   a
                                                 q0rn                                            pa − q a
π0r,1n   ≡   (π0rn,1nn + π0rn,1nr + π0rn,1nu ) a + (π0rr,1nn + π0rr,1nr + π0rr,1nu ) 0r a 0rn ,
                                                  p0r                                                 p0r
                                                   a
                                                 q0rn                                            pa0r − q0rn
                                                                                                          a
π0r,2n   ≡   (π0rn,2nn + π0rn,2nr + π0rn,2nu ) a + (π0rr,2nn + π0rr,2nr + π0rr,2nu )                   a      ,
                                                  p0r                                                 p0r
                                   qa                               pa − q a
π0r,1r   ≡   (π0rn,1rn + π0rn,1rr ) 0rn
                                      a   + (π0rr,1rn + π0rr,1rr ) 0r a 0rn ,
                                    p0r                                   p0r
                                      a
                                    q0rn                              pa0r − q0rn
                                                                                a
π0r,2u   ≡   (π0rn,2un + π0rn,2uu ) a + (π0rr,2un + π0rr,2uu )                       ,
                                     p0r                                   pa0r
                                    qa                                pa2u − q2una
π2u,1r   ≡   (π2un,1rn + π2un,1rr ) 2un   +  (π 2uu,1rn + π 2uu,1rr )                  ,
                                    pa2u                                    pa2u
π1r,1r   =   1,
π1u,1r   =   1.

Proof. The response probabilities over the states in Sw are of the form:
                                                                                               
                                                                                       q aa
                  j
                                                                    Pr Sij = sj |Sia = sa as  .
                                             X             X
   πsa ,sjw ≡ Pr Sw,i = sjw |Sw,i
                              a
                                  = saw =            
     w
                                              j        a    a    a
                                                                                           psaw
                                                   sj ∈S:sw =h(sj )   s ∈S:sw =h(s )


                                                             53
Remark 12 (Relationship between the Restrictions in the Baseline and in the Extended
Model). The response matrix implied by the baseline model has the same zero and unitary entries
as the response matrix Πw implied by the extended model.




                                              54
10     Finer Earning Ranges
In this section we consider a finer coarsening of earnings than that adopted in the paper (see Section
V equation (7) of the paper). Specifically, we partition earnings above the federal poverty level into
two sub-ranges. We begin with some definitions that supersede those in Section 4 of this Appendix.
We conclude with the analytical bounds for two “opt-in” response probabilities. Proofs are omitted
because they closely mimic those accompanying the baseline coarsening approach.

Definition 31 (Earning Ranges). Earnings range 0 refers to zero earnings. Earnings range 1
refers to the interval (0, F P Li ] where F P Li is woman i’s federal poverty line. Earnings range 20
refers to the interval (F P Li , 1.2 × F P Li ]. Earning range 200 refers to the interval (1.2 × F P Li , ∞).

Definition 32 (State). Consider the triple (E, D, E r ). The state corresponding to (E, D, E r ) is
defined by the function:
                                     
                                     
                                      0n if E = 0, D = 0
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                      1n if E in range 1, D = 0
                                       0                   0
                                      2 n if E in range 2 , D = 0
                                     
                                     
                                       200 n if E in range 200 , D = 0
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                      0r    if E = 0, D = 1
                                     
                                     
                    s (E, D, E r ) =   1r    if E in range 1, D = 1, E r = E .
                                       1u if E in range 1, D = 1, E r < E
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                       20 u if E in range 20 , D = 1, E r < E
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                       200 u if E in range 200 , D = 1, E r < E
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                       20 r if E in range 20 , D = 1, E r = E
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                      200 r if E in range 200 , D = 1, E r = E
                                     


Definition 33 (Latent and Observed States). Define S ∗ ≡ {0n, 1n, 20 n, 200 n, 0r, 1r, 1u, 20 u, 200 u}
and Se∗ ≡ {0n, 1n, 20 n, 200 n, 0p, 1p, 20 p, 200 p} where the mapping between the latent states in S ∗ and
the observed states in S̃ ∗ is:
                                                      if s ∈ {0n, 1n, 20 n, 200 n}
                                           
                                           
                                               s
                                            0p if s = 0r
                                           
                                           
                                 g (s) =        1p if s ∈ {1u, 1r}                 .
                                           
                                                 0
                                                2 p if s = 2 u0
                                           
                                           
                                            00
                                                2 p if s = 200 u




                                                     55
Proposition 10 (Response Matrix). The matrix of response probabilities over the states in S ∗
is:


                                                    JF: Earnings / Program Participation State

 AFDC          0n          1n            20 n            200 n                 0r                1r        1u       20 u             200 u
  0n       1 − π0n,1r       0             0               0                    0               π0n,1r      0         0                0
  1n           0        1 − π1n,1r        0               0                    0               π1n,1r      0         0                0
  20 n         0            0        1 − π20 n,1r         0                    0              π20 n,1r     0         0                0
  200 n        0            0             0          1 − π200 n,1r             0              π2000 n,1r   0         0                0
   0r        π0r,0n       π0r,1n       π0r,2n                            1 − π0r,0n            π0r,1r      0      π0r,20 u       π0r,200 u     .
                                                                       −π0r,1n − π0r,1r
                                                                      −π0r,20 n − π0r,200 n
                                                                      −π0r,20 u − π0r,200 u
   1r          0            0             0                                    0                  1        0         0                0
  1u           0            0             0                                    0                  1        0         0                0
  20 u         0            0             0                                    0              π20 u,1r     0    1 − π20 u,1r          0
  200 u        0            0             0                                    0              π200 u,1r    0         0         1 − π200 u,1r


Proof. Omitted. See proof of Propositions 1 and 2.

Corollary 7. The matrix of response probabilities in Proposition 10 implies the following system
of equations describing the impact of the JF reform on observable state probabilities:

          pj0n − pa0n = −π0n,1r pa0n + π0r,0n pa0p
          pj1n − pa1n = −π1n,1r pa1n + π0r,1n pa0p
          pj20 n − pa20 n = −π20 n,1r pa20 n + π0r,20 n pa0p
          pj200 n − pa200 n = −π200 n,1r pa200n + π0r,200 n pa0p                                     .                       (153)
          pj0p − pa0p = − π0r,0n + π0r,20n + π0r,200 n + π0r,1r + π0r,1n + π0r,20 u + π0r,200 u pa0p
                                                                                               

          pj20 p − pa20 p = π0r,20 u pa0p − π20 u,1r pa20 p
          pj200 p − pa200 p = π0r,200 u pa0p − π200 u,1r pa200 p

Proof. By an application of the law of total probability given Definition 33.
Corollary 8. The analytical lower bounds of the response probabilities π20 n,1r and π200 n,1r are
                                                                 (            )
                                                              pa20 n − pj20 n
                                        π20 n,1r     ≥ max 0,                    ,
                                                                    pa20 n
                                                          (                     )
                                                              pa200 n − pj200 n
                                        π200 n,1r    ≥ max 0,                      .
                                                                    pa200 n

Proof. Omitted. See Section 6 in this Appendix.




                                                                 56
References
 1. Andrews, Donald and Panle Jia Barwick. 2012. “Inference for Parameters Defined by Moment
    Inequalities: A Recommended Moment Selection Procedure.” Econometrica 80(6): 2805-2826.

 2. Barrett, Garry F. and Stephen G. Donald. 2003. “Consistent Tests for Stochastic Domi-
    nance.” Econometrica 71(1):71-104.

 3. Chernozhukov, Victor, Sokbae Lee, and Adam Rosen. 2013. “Intersection bounds: estimation
    and inference.” Econometrica, 81(2), 667-737.

 4. Giné, Evarist and Joel Zinn. 1990. “Bootstrapping General Empirical Measures.” Annals of
    Probability 18(2): 851-869.

 5. Kosorok, Michael. 2008. Introduction to Empirical Processes and Semiparametric Inference
    Springer: New York.

 6. Murty, Katta. 1983. Linear Programming New York: John Wiley & Sons.




                                            57
                 Table A1: Cross Tabulation of grant‐inferred Assistance Unit size and kidcount
                                                                             kidcount
                                         0                           1                           2                        3            Total
      Inferred AU Size
              1                        0.20                        0.08                        0.04                      0.02             0.06
              2                        0.62                        0.84                        0.19                      0.06             0.46
              3                        0.14                        0.07                        0.71                      0.17             0.27
              4                        0.04                        0.01                        0.06                      0.54             0.15
              5                        0.00                        0.00                        0.00                      0.14             0.04
              6                        0.01                        0.00                        0.00                      0.05             0.01
              7                        0.00                        0.00                        0.00                      0.02             0.00
              8                        0.00                        0.00                        0.00                      0.01             0.00
# of monthly observations              3,843                      18,228                      11,466                    10,479           44,016
Notes: Analysis conducted on Jobs First sample over quarters 1‐7 post‐random assignment. Kidcount variable, which gives the number of children
reported in baseline survey, is tabulated conditional on non‐missing. The Assistance Unit size is inferred from (rounded) monthly grant amounts.
Starting with size 5, the unique correspondence between Assistance Unit size and rounded grant amount obtains only for units which do not receive
housing subsidies. The size inferred during months on assistance is imputed forward to months off assistance and to months that otherwise lack an
inferred size.
                                             Table A2: Mean Outcomes Post‐Random Assignment
                                                            Overall                      Zero Earnings Q7 pre‐RA               Positive Earnings Q7 pre‐RA

                                                                  Adjusted                                Adjusted                               Adjusted
                                                 Jobs First AFDC Difference            Jobs First   AFDC Difference           Jobs First   AFDC Difference
Average Earnings                                   1,191    1,086    105                 930         751     179                1766       1831      ‐65
                                                    (29)     (30)    (36)                (32)        (30)    (42)               (65)       (65)     (84)

Fraction of quarters                               0.520   0.440       0.080             0.445       0.349     0.096            0.686       0.647     0.039
with positive earnings                            (0.008) (0.007)     (0.010)           (0.009)     (0.009)   (0.012)          (0.013)     (0.013)   (0.017)

Fraction of quarters with earnings below           0.906   0.897       0.009             0.938       0.940     ‐0.002           0.837       0.803     0.034
3FPL (AU size implied by kidcount+1)              (0.004) (0.005)     (0.006)           (0.004)     (0.004)   (0.006)          (0.011)     (0.011)   (0.014)

Fraction of quarters on welfare                    0.748   0.674       0.074             0.771       0.718     0.053            0.699       0.577     0.122
                                                  (0.007) (0.007)     (0.010)           (0.008)     (0.008)   (0.011)          (0.014)     (0.015)   (0.019)

Average earnings in quarters                        929      526       403               762         404       359              1316        869       448
with any month on welfare                           (24)     (19)      (28)              (25)        (18)      (30)             (53)        (43)      (64)

Fraction of quarters with no earnings and          0.363   0.437       ‐0.074            0.426       0.508     ‐0.082           0.227       0.272     ‐0.045
at least one month on welfare                     (0.007) (0.007)     (0.010)           (0.009)     (0.009)   (0.012)          (0.011)     (0.012)   (0.016)

# of cases                                         2,318    2,324                        1,630      1,574                       688         750


Notes: Sample covers quarters 1‐7 post‐random assignment. Sample cases with kidcount missing are excluded. Adjusted differences are computed via propensity
score reweighting. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors calculated via 1,000 block bootstrap replications (resampling at case level).
                                               Table A3: Allowed and Disallowed Responses when Truthful Reporting of Earnings above FPL is Possible under AFDC


                                                                                                     State under Jobs First
 State
 under                 0n                            1n                            2n                            0r                             1r                           1u                            2u                            2r
 AFDC

                                                                                                                                         Extensive LS (+)
   0n              No Response                       —                             —                             —                      Take Up Welfare                      —                            —                             —
                                                                                                                                       Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
   1n                  —                         No Response                       —                             —                      Take Up Welfare                      —                            —                             —
                                                                                                                                         Intensive LS (‐)
   2n                  —                             —                         No Response                       —                      Take Up Welfare                      —                            —                             —
                 No LS Response                Extensive LS (+)              Extensive LS (+)                                                                                                       Extensive LS (+)
   0r             Exit Welfare                  Exit Welfare                  Exit Welfare
                                                                                                             No Response                 Extensive LS (+)                    —                      Under‐reporting                     —

   1r                  —                             —                             —                             —                     Intensive LS (+/0/‐)                  —                            —                             —
                                                                                                                                       Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
   1u                  —                             —                             —                             —                     Truthful Reporting                    —                            —                             —
                                                                                                                                          Intensive LS (‐)
   2u                  —                             —                             —                             —                      Truthful Reporting                   —                        No Response                       —
                  Extensive LS (‐)
                                                Intensive LS (‐)           Intensive LS (+/0/‐)                                                                                                    Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
   2r              Exit Welfare
                    (Figure A1)
                                                 Exit Welfare                  Exit Welfare
                                                                                                           Extensive LS (‐)               Intensive LS (‐)                   —                       Under‐reporting                    —

Notes: This table catalogues the theoretically allowed response margins given the states that a woman may occupy under AFDC and Jobs First when truthful reporting of earnings above the FPL is possible under AFDC, that is, when assumption
A.8 is not maintained. A state is a pair of coarsened earnings (0 stands for zero earnings, 1 for positive earnings at or below the FPL, and 2 for earnings strictly above the FPL), and participation in the welfare assistance program along with an
earnings reporting decision (n stands for “not on assistance”, r for “on assistance and truthfully reporting earnings”, and u for “on assistance and under‐reporting earnings”). The cells termed “no response” entail the same behavior under the
two policy regimes. The cells containing a “—” represent responses that are either incompatible with the policy rules or not allowed based on revealed preference arguments derived from the nonparametric model of Section 4. Specifically, (a)
state 1u is unpopulated under JF (“—” in cells with a horizontally striped background fill), (b) state 2r is not defined under JF (“—” in cells with gridded background fill), and (c) a woman will not leave a state at least as attractive under JF as
under AFDC for a state that is no more attractive under JF than under AFDC (“—” in cells with a solid greyed‐out background fill). The remaining cells represent responses that are allowed by the model. Their content summarizes the three
possible margins of responses: (a) the labor supply “LS” response (intensive versus extensive and its sign: “+” for increase, “0” for no change, and “‐” for decrease), (b) the program participation response (take up of versus exit from welfare
assistance), and (c) the reporting of earnings to the welfare agency margin (to truthfully report versus to under‐report). See Online Appendix for proof.
                                                                                           Table A4: Allowed and Disallowed Responses when Incorporating FS and Taxes


                                                                                                                                          State under Jobs First
State
under        0nn              1nn                2nn                0nr               1nr                2nr               1nu                  2nu                0rn                 1rn             1un       2un                0rr                  1rr             1uu       2uu
AFDC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Extensive LS (+)
                                                                                                                                                                                  Extensive LS (+)
 0nn      No Response          —                  —                 —                 —                  —                  —                    —                 —             Take Up Welfare       —          —                 —            Take Up Welfare and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
                                                                                                                                                                                Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
 1nn          —            No Response            —                 —                 —                  —                  —                    —                 —             Take Up Welfare       —          —                 —            Take Up Welfare and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Intensive LS (‐)
                                                                                                                                                                                  Intensive LS (‐)
 2nn          —                —              No Response           —                 —                  —                  —                    —                 —             Take Up Welfare       —          —                 —            Take Up Welfare and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                 Extensive LS (+)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Extensive LS (+)
 0nr          —                —                  —              No Response          —                  —                  —                    —                 —             Exit FS, Take Up
                                                                                                                                                                                      Welfare
                                                                                                                                                                                                       —          —                 —              Take Up Welfare       —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
 1nr          —                —                  —                 —             No Response            —                  —                    —                 —              Exit FS, Take Up
                                                                                                                                                                                       Welfare
                                                                                                                                                                                                       —          —                 —              Take Up Welfare       —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                  Intensive LS (‐)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Intensive LS (‐)
 2nr          —                —                  —                 —                 —              No Response            —                    —                 —             Exit FS, Take Up
                                                                                                                                                                                      Welfare
                                                                                                                                                                                                       —          —                 —              Take Up Welfare       —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                Intensive LS (+/0/‐)                                              Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
 1nu          —                —                  —                 —                 —                  —              No Response              —                 —              Exit FS, Take Up
                                                                                                                                                                                       Welfare
                                                                                                                                                                                                       —          —                 —               Exit FS, Take Up
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Welfare
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                  Intensive LS (‐)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Intensive LS (‐)
 2nu          —                —                  —                 —                 —                  —                  —                No Response           —             Exit FS, Take Up
                                                                                                                                                                                      Welfare
                                                                                                                                                                                                       —          —                 —              Take Up Welfare       —          —
                                                                                                                       Extensive LS (+)     Extensive LS (+)                                                                                                                   Extensive LS (+)
                                                                No LS Response   Extensive LS (+)   Extensive LS (+)                                           No LS Response
         No LS Response   Extensive LS (+)   Extensive LS (+)                                                           Exit Welfare         Exit Welfare                                                    Extensive LS (+)   No LS Response     Extensive LS (+)              Take Up FS
 0rn      Exit Welfare     Exit Welfare       Exit Welfare
                                                                 Exit Welfare,
                                                                  Take Up FS
                                                                                  Exit Welfare,
                                                                                   Take Up FS
                                                                                                     Exit Welfare,
                                                                                                      Take Up FS
                                                                                                                         Take Up FS           Take Up FS
                                                                                                                                                                Exit Welfare,
                                                                                                                                                                 Take Up FS
                                                                                                                                                                                 Extensive LS (+)      —      Under‐report        Take Up FS         Take Up FS          —      Under‐report
                                                                                                                        Under‐report         Under‐report


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
 1rn          —                —                  —                 —                 —                  —                  —                    —                 —            Intensive LS (+/0/‐)   —          —                 —                 Take Up FS         —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
                                                                                                                                                                                Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
 1un          —                —                  —                 —                 —                  —                  —                    —                 —              Truthful Report      —          —                 —                 Take Up FS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Truthful Report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Intensive LS (‐)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Intensive LS (‐)
 2un          —                —                  —                 —                 —                  —                  —                    —                 —             Truthful Report       —      No Response           —                Take Up FS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Truthful Report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         —          —
                          Extensive LS (+) Extensive LS (+)                                                            Extensive LS (+)     Extensive LS (+)                                                 Extensive LS (+)
         No LS Response                                         No LS Response   Extensive LS (+)   Extensive LS (+)                                           No LS Response    Extensive LS (+)                                                                              Extensive LS (+)
 0rr      Exit Welfare
                          Exit Welfare and Exit Welfare and
                                 FS               FS
                                                                 Exit Welfare     Exit Welfare       Exit Welfare
                                                                                                                        Exit Welfare
                                                                                                                       Under‐report FS
                                                                                                                                             Exit Welfare
                                                                                                                                             Under‐report
                                                                                                                                                                   Exit FS           Exit FS           —         Exit FS
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Under‐report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 No Response       Extensive LS (+)      —      Under‐report


                                                                                                                                                                                Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
 1rr          —                —                  —                 —                 —                  —                  —                    —                 —                  Exit FS          —          —                 —             Intensive LS (+/0/‐)   —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Intensive LS (+/0/‐)
 1uu          —                —                  —                 —                 —                  —                  —                    —                 —                  Exit FS
                                                                                                                                                                                  Truthful report
                                                                                                                                                                                                       —          —                 —               Truthful Report      —          —
                                                                                                                                                                                  Intensive LS (‐)                                                 Intensive LS (‐)
 2uu          —                —                  —                 —                 —                  —                  —                    —                 —                  Exit FS
                                                                                                                                                                                  Truthful report
                                                                                                                                                                                                       —          —                 —              Truthful Report       —      No Response




Notes: This table catalogues the theoretically allowed response margins given the states that a woman may occupy under AFDC and Jobs First in the extended model, that is, when FS and taxes (federal income tax, EITC, payroll and Medicaid taxes)
are incorporated. A state is a triplet of coarsened earnings (0 stands for zero earnings, 1 for positive earnings at or below the FPL, and 2 for earnings strictly above the FPL), participation in the welfare assistance program along with an earnings
reporting decision (n stands for “not on assistance”, r for “on assistance and truthfully reporting earnings”, and u for “on assistance and under‐reporting earnings”), and participation in the FS assistance program along with an earnings reporting
decision (n, r, and u). When both on welfare and FS assistance, a woman makes only one earning report to the welfare agency, hence states such as e.g. 1ru are ruled out and not included in the table. The assumption of lower bounds on the stigma
disutilities rules out states {2rn, 2rr} hence these states are not included in the table. The cells termed “no response” entail the same behavior under the two policy regimes. The cells containing a “—” represent responses that are either
incompatible with the policy rules or not allowed based on revealed preference arguments derived from the extended model. Specifically, (a) states 1uu and 1un are unpopulated under JF (“—” in cells with a horizontally striped background fill); and
(b) a woman will not leave a state at least as attractive under JF as under AFDC for a state that is no more attractive under JF than under AFDC (“—” in cells with a solid greyed‐out background fill). The remaining cells represent responses that are
allowed by the model. Their content summarizes the three possible margins of responses: (a) the labor supply “LS” response (intensive versus extensive and its sign: “+” for increase, “0” for no change, and “‐” for decrease), (b) the program
participation response (take up of versus exit from welfare assistance and/or FS assistance), and (c) the reporting of earnings to the welfare agency margin (to truthfully report versus to under‐report). See Online Appendix for proof.
                Table A5: Probability of Earnings / Participation States in AFDC Sample
                  (Conditional on State=0p in Quarter Prior to Random Assignment)
       Quarter post‐RA:               1             2             3            4            5             6             7
Pr(State=0n)                       0.022          0.062         0.086        0.093       0.114         0.136          0.136
Pr(State=1n)                       0.021          0.045         0.058        0.079       0.084         0.101          0.112
Pr(State=2n)                       0.006          0.021         0.024        0.033       0.048         0.044          0.074
Pr(State=0p)                       0.786          0.723         0.675        0.631       0.584         0.563          0.539
Pr(State=1p)                       0.160          0.160         0.145        0.160       0.157         0.150          0.143
Pr(State=2p)                       0.002          0.001         0.004        0.004       0.004         0.002          0.005
Notes: Sample consists of 902 AFDC cases that were not working in the quarter prior to random assignment and were on
welfare. Sample units with kidcount missing are excluded. Numbers give the reweighted fraction of sample in specified
quarter after random assignment occupying each earnings / welfare paticipation state. Number of state refers to earnings
level, with 0 indicating no earnings, 1 indicating earnings below 3 times the monthly FPL, and 2 indicating earnings above
3FPL. The letter n indicates welfare nonparticipation throughout the quarter while the letter p indicates welfare
participation throughout the quarter. Poverty line computed under assumption Assistance Unit size is one greater than
amount implied by baseline kidcount variable. Probabilities are adjusted via propensity score reweighting algorithm.
                                                   Table A6: Probability of Earnings / Participation States
                                                         (Alternate Coding of Assistance Unit Size)
                                                          Exact Size                                                                 Two Sizes Up
                                          Overall                      Overall ‐ Adjusted                              Overall                      Overall ‐ Adjusted
                               Jobs First AFDC Difference       Jobs First AFDC Difference                  Jobs First AFDC Difference       Jobs First AFDC Difference
Pr(State=0n)                     0.127    0.136   ‐0.009          0.128    0.135        ‐0.007                0.127    0.136   ‐0.009          0.128    0.135        ‐0.007
                                                                 (0.005) (0.006)       (0.008)                                                (0.005) (0.006)       (0.008)
Pr(State=1n)                     0.059     0.101     ‐0.042       0.061    0.098        ‐0.038                0.095     0.160     ‐0.065       0.098    0.155        ‐0.057
                                                                 (0.003) (0.004)       (0.005)                                                (0.004) (0.006)       (0.007)
Pr(State=2n)                     0.084     0.129     ‐0.044       0.087    0.124        ‐0.038                0.048     0.069     ‐0.021       0.049    0.068        ‐0.019
                                                                 (0.005) (0.006)       (0.006)                                                (0.004) (0.004)       (0.005)
Pr(State=0p)                     0.366     0.440     ‐0.074       0.359    0.449        ‐0.090                0.366     0.440     ‐0.074       0.359    0.449        ‐0.090
                                                                 (0.008) (0.008)       (0.010)                                                (0.008) (0.008)       (0.010)
Pr(State=1p)                     0.325     0.179      0.146       0.326    0.178         0.147                0.351     0.188     0.163        0.353    0.187         0.166
                                                                 (0.007) (0.005)       (0.008)                                                (0.007) (0.005)       (0.009)
Pr(State=2p)                     0.039     0.015      0.024       0.040    0.015         0.026                0.013     0.006     0.007        0.013    0.006         0.007
                                                                 (0.003) (0.002)       (0.003)                                                (0.002) (0.001)       (0.002)

# of quarterly observations      16,226 16,268                    16,226 16,268                                16,226 16,268                   16,226 16,268
Notes: "Exact Size" codes the Assistance Unit size as 1+kidcount (except when kidcount=0 in which case it is coded as 2). "Two Sizes Up" codes the Assistance Unit size as 2
+ value under Exact Size. Sample covers quarters 1‐7 post‐random assignment during which individual is either always on or always off welfare. Sample cases with kidcount
missing are excluded. Number of state refers to earnings level, with 0 indicating no earnings, 1 indicating earnings below 3 times the monthly FPL, and 2 indicating earnings
above 3FPL. The letter "n" indicates welfare nonparticipation throughout the quarter while the letter "p" indicates welfare participation throughout the quarter. Poverty
line computed under assumption AU size is one greater than amount implied by baseline kidcount variable. Adjusted probabilities are computed via propensity score
reweighting. Standard errors computed using 1,000 block bootstrap replications (resampling at case level).
                                                                       Table A7: Point and Set‐identified Response Probabilities
                                                                              (Alternate Codings of Assistant Unit Size)
                                                                                                                    Exact Size                                                        Two Sizes up
                                                                                                    (a) General Specification of Preferences                             (a) General Specification of Preferences
                                State Occupied under

Response                                                                                                  Standard        95% CI          95% CI                               Standard       95% CI           95% CI
                                AFDC                     JF           Symbol              Estimate                                                             Estimate
  Type                                                                                                      Error         (naive)      (conservative)                            Error        (naive)       (conservative)


                                  0n                     1r           π0n,1r           {0.055, 0.533}                 [0.000, 0.651] [0.000, 0.689]         {0.055, 0.669}                [0.000, 0.789] [0.000, 0.824]
                                  1n                     1r           π1n,1r           {0.383, 1.000}                 [0.311, 1.000] [0.311, 1.000]         {0.365, 0.901}                [0.305, 1.000] [0.305, 1.110]
                                  2n                     1r           π2n,1r           {0.303, 0.822}                 [0.232, 1.000] [0.232, 1.000]         {0.276, 1.000}                [0.176, 1.000] [0.176, 1.000]
                                  0r                     0n           π0r,0n           {0.000, 0.144}                 [0.000, 0.179] [0.000, 0.191]         {0.000, 0.185}                [0.000, 0.219] [0.000, 0.230]
 Detailed                          "                     1n           π0r,1n           {0.000, 0.135}                 [0.000, 0.179] [0.000, 0.191]         {0.000, 0.185}                [0.000, 0.219] [0.000, 0.229]
                                   "                     2n           π0r,2n           {0.000, 0.144}                 [0.000, 0.212] [0.000, 0.264]         {0.000, 0.109}                [0.000, 0.123] [0.000, 0.178]
                                   "                     1r           π0r,1r           {0.000, 0.144}                 [0.000, 0.179] [0.000, 0.194]         {0.000, 0.185}                [0.000, 0.219] [0.000, 0.234]
                                   "                     2u           π0r,2u           {0.057, 0.090}                 [0.046, 0.099] [0.046, 0.138]         {0.016, 0.029}                [0.009, 0.035] [0.009, 0.077]
                                  2u                     1r           π2u,1r           {0.000, 1.000}                 [0.000, 1.000] [0.000, 1.000]         {0.000, 1.000}                [0.000, 1.000] [0.000, 1.000]


                             Not working              Working         π0,1+                 0.167           0.016     [0.136, 0.198] [0.136, 0.198]              0.167           0.016    [0.136, 0.198] [0.136, 0.198]
                             Off welfare            On welfare        πn,p             {0.231,0.412}                   [0.189,0.450]   [0.189,0.453]        {0.231,0.463}                  [0.189,0.503]    [0.189,0.503]
Composite
                             On welfare             Off welfare       πp,n             {0.000,0.101}                   [0.000,0.126]   [0.000,0.130]        {0.000,0.129}                  [0.000,0.154]    [0.000,0.158]
                      On welfare, not working        Off welfare      π0r,n            {0.000,0.144}                   [0.000,0.179]   [0.000,0.186]        {0.000,0.185}                  [0.000,0.219]    [0.000,0.226]

                                                                                                  (b) Restricted Specification of Preferences                          (b) Restricted Specification of Preferences


                                  0r                     1n           π0r,1n                  0                                                                    0
 Detailed
                                  1n                     1r           π1n,1r                0.383           0.044     [0.297, 0.469] [0.297, 0.469]              0.365           0.036    [0.294, 0.437] [0.294, 0.437]


Notes: "Exact Size" codes the Assistance Unit size as 1+kidcount (except when kidcount=0 in which case it is coded as 2). "Two Sizes Up" codes the Assistance Unit size as 2 + value under Exact Size. Number of state
refers to earnings level, with 0 indicating no earnings, 1 indicating earnings below 3 times the monthly FPL, 2 indicating earnings above 3FPL, and 1+ indicating positive earnings. The letter "n" indicates welfare
nonparticipation, the letter "r" indicates welfare participation with truthful reporting of earnings, the letter "u" indicates welfare participation with under‐reporting of earnings, the letter "p" indicates welfare
participation (irrespective of reporting). Composite response probabilities are linear combination of the detailed response probabilities (see Section 6 for the exact expressions). Estimates inferred from probabilities
in Table 5, see text for formulas. Numbers in braces are estimated upper and lower bounds, numbers in brackets are 95% confidence intervals. "Naive" 95% confidence interval ignores uncertainty in which moment
inequalities bind. "Conservative" 95% confidence interval assumes all constraints bind. See Online Appendix for details. Panel a refers to the general specification of preferences (expression (3) in the paper). Panel b
refers to the restricted specification (expression (4) in the paper). Panel b omits all response probabilities whose estimates are the same as in Panel a.
                                                 Table A8: Probability of Earnings / Participation States
                                                                (Finer Earning Ranges)
                                                            Overall                                                        Overall ‐ Adjusted
                                    Jobs First               AFDC                Difference              Jobs First             AFDC                  Difference
Pr(State=0n)                          0.127                 0.136                  ‐0.009                  0.128                0.135                   ‐0.007
                                                                                                          (0.005)              (0.005)                 (0.008)
Pr(State=1n)                          0.076                  0.130                 ‐0.055                  0.078                0.126                   ‐0.048
                                                                                                          (0.004)              (0.005)                 (0.006)
Pr(State=2'n)                         0.021                  0.032                 ‐0.011                  0.022                0.031                   ‐0.010
                                                                                                          (0.002)              (0.002)                 (0.003)
Pr(State=2''n)                        0.047                  0.067                 ‐0.020                  0.048                0.065                   ‐0.017
                                                                                                          (0.003)              (0.004)                 (0.005)
Pr(State=0p)                          0.366                  0.440                 ‐0.074                  0.359                0.449                   ‐0.090
                                                                                                          (0.008)              (0.008)                 (0.010)
Pr(State=1p)                          0.342                  0.185                  0.157                  0.343                0.184                   0.159
                                                                                                          (0.007)              (0.005)                 (0.009)
Pr(State=2'p)                         0.010                  0.003                  0.006                  0.010                0.003                   0.007
                                                                                                          (0.001)              (0.001)                 (0.001)
Pr(State=2''p)                        0.012                  0.006                  0.006                  0.013                0.006                   0.007
                                                                                                          (0.002)              (0.001)                 (0.002)

# of quarterly observations            16,226                 16,268                                        16,226                16,268
Notes: Sample covers quarters 1‐7 post‐random assignment during which individual is either always on or always off welfare. Sample cases with kidcount missing are
excluded. Number of state refers to earnings level, with 0 indicating no earnings, 1 indicating earnings below 3 times the monthly FPL, 2’ indicating earnings between
3FPL and 1.2 x 3FPL, and 2’’ indicating earnings above 1.2 x FPL. The letter n indicates welfare nonparticipation throughout the quarter while the letter p indicates
welfare participation throughout the quarter. Poverty line computed under assumption AU size is one greater than amount implied by baseline kidcount variable.
Adjusted probabilities are adjusted via propensity score reweighting. Standard errors computed using 1,000 block bootstrap replications (resampling at case level).
Table A9: Fraction of Months on Welfare by Experimental
    Status and Age of Youngest Child (Alternate Age
                 Categories Comparison).
  Age of Youngest Child at Baseline:      16 or 17             14 or 15
                                           0.279                0.463
                AFDC
                                          (0.207)              (0.196)
                                           0.395                0.508
                  JF
                                          (0.116)              (0.199)
                                           0.116                0.045
             Difference
                                          (0.116)              (0.051)
                                                      0.071
      Difference in Differences
                                                     (0.077)


Notes: Sample consists of 7,098 case‐months: 21 months of data on each of
338 cases with age of youngest child between the ages of 14 and 17. Table
gives regression‐adjusted fraction of case‐months that women participated
in welfare by experimental status and age of youngest child at baseline.
Robust standard errors computed using clustering at case level.
                Figure A1: Earnings and Participation Choices with Earning Constraints and no Stigma




Notes: Panels a and b are drawn in the earnings (horizontal axis) and consumption equivalent (vertical axis) plane. The consumption equivalent
equals earnings plus transfer income from welfare (if any) net of monetized hassle, stigma, work, and under‐reporting costs. The welfare stigma
and fixed cost of work are set to zero. The cost of under‐reporting is set large enough so that under‐reporting is a dominated choice. Labor market
constraints are imposed in the form of two earnings offers ( Ei1 and Ei2 ), both in range 2 (above the FPL). The wage rate is assumed fixed. Because
of the labor market constraints, and the fact that a woman may always choose not to work, the only alternatives available are those identified by a
solid circular symbol. Vertical lines represent the same earnings levels depicted in Figure 1 but for a situation in which the earnings level at which
welfare assistance is exhausted under AFDC ( E ) is above the FPL, that is, for a woman who has access to the unreduced fixed ($120) and
proportional disregards. It also displays the two earnings offers. Panel a depicts a scenario where under AFDC the woman opts to be on assistance
earning Ei1 and reports truthfully to the welfare agency (point A). She would make the same choice even in the absence of earnings constraints.
Under JF, earning Ei1 on assistance (and reporting truthfully) is no longer feasible because welfare eligibility ends at FPL. Panel b depicts a scenario
where, given the earning constraints, the JF reform induces the woman to exit both welfare and the labor force (point B). However, in the absence
of earning constraints, she would choose to lower her earnings below the FPL and remain on assistance as evidenced by the fact that the
indifference curve through point A lies below the (dashed) JF segment in range 1 (earning levels below FPL).
