NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EVOLUTION OF THE FINANCIAL STABILITY MANDATE:
FROM ITS ORIGINS TO THE PRESENT DAY
Gianni Toniolo
Eugene N. White
Working Paper 20844
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20844

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015

Presented originally at the Norges Bank Conference: Of the Use of Central Banks: Lessons from History,
June 5-6, 2014. We particularly want to thank Michael Bordo, Øyvind Eitreim, Rui Pedro Esteves,
Stefan Gerlach, Eric Monnet and the conference participants for their helpful comments. We are
also grateful for suggestions made by participants at the Financial Stability Conference held at the
European Banking Center at Tilburg University. The views expressed here are our own and are not
necessarily those of LUISS (Roma), Duke University, the Center for Economic Policy Research, Rutgers
University, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Support from the Norges Bank for this
project is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Gianni Toniolo and Eugene N. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Evolution of the Financial Stability Mandate: From Its Origins to the Present Day
Gianni Toniolo and Eugene N. White
NBER Working Paper No. 20844
January 2015
JEL No. E58,G21,N1,N2
ABSTRACT
We investigate the origins and growth of the Financial Stability Mandate (FSM) to examine why bank
supervisors, inside and outside of central banks succeeded or failed to meet their FSM. Three issues
inform this study: (1) what drives changes in the FSM, (2) whether supervision should be conducted
within the central bank or in independent agencies and (3) whether supervision should be rules- or
discretion/principles-based. As histories of bank supervision are few, we focus on the history of six
countries where there is sufficient information, three in Europe (England, France, and Italy) and three
in the New World (U.S., Canada, and Colombia) to highlight the essential developments in the FSM.
While there was a common evolutionary path, the development of FSM in each individual country
was determined by how quickly each adapted to changes in the technology of the means of payment
and their political economy, including their disposition towards competitive markets and openness
to the world economy.

Gianni Toniolo
LUISS School of
European Political Economy
Via di Villa Emiliani 14
00197 Roma Italy
toniolo@economia.uniroma2.it
Eugene N. White
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
white@economics.rutgers.edu

1. Introduction
“Financial stability remained a goal, of course.”
-----Ben Bernanke (2013)
In his somewhat wistful discussion of the Great Moderation of 1984-2007 for the
centennial of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke (2013) conceded that “financial stability did not
figure prominently in monetary policy discussions during these years” as many economists and
central bankers had concluded that “the details of the structure of the financial system could be
largely ignored when analyzing the behavior of the broader economy.” The Federal Reserve's
and most other central banks' financial stability mandate was often a secondary consideration for
much of this period when control of inflation was of foremost importance. Since the Crisis of
2008, central banks have been given broad, new or renewed, mandates to guarantee financial
stability. The objective behind these mandates is to prevent another financial meltdown, but
there is little agreement about how to select and implement the appropriate policy instruments.
While there is a vast historical literature on the issue of price stability that has informed the
development of policies to carry out the price stability mandate, there are large gaps in our
knowledge of financial stability policies in the past. In this paper, we provide a historical
overview of the evolution of the “financial stability mandate” or FSM. Surveying its
development from the emergence of modern central banks through the Great Moderation, we
offer some general lessons.
As the behavior of policy makers during the Great Moderation demonstrated, price
stability and financial stability are often treated as separable in “ordinary times,” with regulation
and supervision of financial institutions and markets frequently conducted outside of central
banks. A commonly shared view, similar to that prevailing a century earlier, was that the best
guarantee of financial stability that a central bank could provide was long-term price stability
(Bordo and Schwartz, 1995; Bordo and Wheelock, 1998).
If a financial crisis—an
“extraordinary” event---erupted, the central bank should step in, as Bagehot (1873)
recommended and act as a lender-of-last-resort (LOLR), providing liquidity to the market.
Central bank responses to the 1987 stock market and the dot.com crashes are near textbook
examples of this approach, with its emphasis on containment though liquidity provision that
enables solvent firms to withstand a panic and preserves the payments and settlement systems
(Mishkin and White, 2014). What is missing from this approach and what the Crisis of 2008
highlighted, is that regulation and supervision create financial systems that may moderate or
amplify panic-inducing shocks. For the most part, we will leave questions of LOLR, which
treats financial stability in “extraordinary” times to others in this conference volume and focus
on financial stability policies---regulation and supervision---deployed during “ordinary” times
with the aim of reducing the frequency and magnitude of crises.
In this paper, we investigate the origins and growth of the FSM with an eye to improving
policy makers’ understanding of why central banks and policy regimes in the past succeeded or
failed to meet their FSM. Two issues inform this chapter (1) whether supervision should be
conducted within the central bank or in independent agencies and (2) whether supervision should
be rules- or discretion/principles-based? We focus on the history of six countries, three in Europe
(England, France, and Italy) and three in the New World (U.S., Canada, and Colombia) to
highlight the essential developments in the FSM. While there was a common evolutionary path,
the development of FSM in each individual country was determined by how quickly each
3

adapted to changes in the technology of the means of payment and their political economy,
including their disposition towards competitive markets and openness to the world economy
Our historical approach permits us to provide an important perspective on the newly
relevant FSM. Mandates for price stability and full employment have been broad, perhaps even
vague, leaving central banks considerable discretion to define precise measures of their
performance. The same is certainly true for the FSM.1 For financial stability to be a separate
goal from price stability and full employment, Ricardo Reis (2013) points out that there must be
a measurable definition of financial stability and the trade-offs with these other goals must be
recognized so that a policy action may be contemplated when prices are stable and the economy
has met its growth objective but financial instability is a threat.2
In the next part, Section 2, we provide a definition of the FSM and the issues that arise
from this definition. Our survey begins in Section 3 with the nineteenth century when FSM
concerned itself with the convertibility of banknotes into coin. The challenge of deposit banking
to the FSM is examined in Section 4. Section 5 covers the transitional years from World War I
to the Great Depression when the problem of disentangling the payments mechanism from large
systematically important banks---SIFIs---to use an anachronistic term led some countries to
rescue insolvent institutions. Section 6 examines financial repression from the 1930s to the
1970s, when the shock the depression and the echoes of World War I induced countries to
provide an explicit or implicit guarantee to all banks while they imposed heavy regulation either
to fund wars or channel resources to favored industries. In Section 7, we cover the era of
globalization and deregulation beginning in the 1970s through the 1990s, when driven by
international capital flows and growing crises, financial repression collapsed. Although much of
the regulatory structure of the previous period was abandoned, the explicit and implicit
guarantees remained in place, leaving us with today’s unresolved dilemma. We end our survey
in Section 7 by examining the issues surrounding the internationalization of bank supervision.
We touch briefly on the renewal of the FSM after the 2008 crisis.
Although the term FSM is of recent coinage, its purpose has remained basically the same
over time: a protection of the payments and settlements system. Problems arise when attempts
are made to use the supervisory regime for other purposes—serving macroeconomic policy or
special interests. Several basic findings emerge from our selective historical survey: (1)
Supervision can only be as effective as the regulatory structure it is mandated to enforce. It is
necessary to support regulation but it has only limited scope in substituting for a flawed structure
that requires reform to keep pace with financial innovation of the payments and settlement
system (2) Given that financial innovation moves ahead of regulatory updating, it is challenging
1

The Swiss National Bank ‘s (2014) task is to “contribute to the stability of the financial system,” where “a stable
financial system can be defined as a system whose individual components---financial intermediaries and the
financial market infrastructure—fulfil their respective functions and prove resistant to potential shocks.” The
European Central Bank (2014) seeks financial stability, defined as: “a condition in which the financial system
comprising of [sic] financial intermediaries, markets and market infrastructures—is capable of withstanding shocks,
thereby reducing the likelihood of disruptions in the financial intermediation process which are severe enough to
significantly impair the allocation of savings to profitable investment opportunities.” The Norges Bank (2014) is
charged to promote “financial stability and contribute to robust and efficient financial infrastructures and payment
systems. The Financial Services Act of 2012 gave the Bank of England a statutory objective of protecting and
enhancing the stability of the financial system of the United Kingdom. Under the Bank’s “Core Purposes,” the bank
is committed to sustain financial stability whose purpose is to maintain three vital functions of the financial system
(1) the payments mechanism (2) financial intermediation (3) insuring against and dispersing risk.”
2
Borio (2011 ) argues that it may not be possible to attain all of these objectives simultaneously, presenting the
central bank with a dilemma.

4

for an exclusively rules-based supervision system to effectively monitor financial institutions,
especially large systemically important ones. However, excessive reliance on supervisory
discretion cannot replace a poor regulatory regime and often leads to inappropriate forbearance.
(3) Initially, when competition in the payment’s system was strong, as in the USA, independent
supervisory agencies pursuing rules-based supervision were established; but when there was
limited competition in the provision of the payments and settlements system, supervision was
implicitly or explicitly was given to the central bank. When regulation became a tool for
monetary policy, notably in times of financial repression, central banks gained increased
supervisory authority. This shift often accompanies increased discretion and reduced
transparency. (4) Most supervisory regimes successfully managed financial systems, except
when they were hit by macro-systemic shocks, which they were not designed to manage. These
types of shocks overwhelmed the supervisors’ capacity to achieve their FSM and often produced
a regime shift, as a response to the macro-systemic shock that tried to address the
regulatory/supervisory deficiencies.
2. The FSM in Ordinary and Exceptional times
In our historical overview, we argue that the financial stability sought by various
monetary and financial regimes is best described, in its narrowest and most precise definition, as
protection of the “means of payment,” or the “settlements systems.” This definition broadly fits
both a FSM in ordinary times and the LOLR function of the central bank in crises, thus
harmonizing these two policy activities. In a spirited, critical survey of central bank
intervention, Anna Schwartz (1987) argued that crises that merited LOLR operations were
liquidity crises that threatened the payments mechanism. Other interventions were inappropriate
because they essentially rescued insolvent rather than illiquid institutions, wastefully transferring
resources and creating moral hazard. Her conclusions followed the classical Thornton-Bagehot
school that the LOLR should discount freely to anyone having good collateral at a high rate to
channel funds to illiquid financial institutions in order to halt a panic. An even stronger position
has been taken by Marvin Goodfriend and Robert King (1988) who argue that discounting to
selected banks is inherently distortionary and open market operations is the only instrument
required to halt a liquidity crisis. At the other end of the spectrum is the position of Charles
Goodhart (1985, 2011) who has argued that the LOLR should provide funds to illiquid and
insolvent banks because it is impossible to distinguish between them in a crisis and bank failures
sever valuable customer relationships, impeding recovery. Many central banks have adhered to
this position, particularly in the last crisis, leading to legislative reactions, like the Dodd-Frank
Act of 2010. These arguments about what is the appropriate role for a LOLR are, of course,
arguments about how narrowly or how broadly the FSM should be in ordinary times and will
inform how we trace the development of the FSM through history.
In reviewing the history of the agencies that have carried out the FSM, we have in mind
the question whether the authority for regulation and supervision should be independent of or
located in the central bank. Factors that have bearing on this question are the importance of
information acquired through supervision for a central bank’s success as LOLR, how
redistributive trade-offs should be decided, transparency and political oversight, and whether
supervision policies should be rules-based or discretion-based. While we will see how these
questions were answered over time, it is worthwhile to note here that there is little contemporary
consensus about who the regulator should be. Martin Feldstein (2010) has recently argued that a
5

central bank should control the supervision of all large bank holding companies. Casting a wider
but still limited net, favored by some central banks, Alan Blinder (2010) has recommended that
the central bank supervise “all systemically important institutions.”3 Implicit in this design for
the FSM is the granting of broad discretionary powers to the central bank. These approaches
alarm Luigi Zingales (2009) who is concerned they would concentrate too much authority.
Instead, he recommends that there be three agencies, each with its own goals---a central bank for
monetary policy, a regulatory agency for supervisory policy, and a consumer protection agency--to induce transparency and allow for the evaluation of trade-offs in the political arena.
Furthermore, in today’s debates about the FSM, the potential trade-offs between financial
stability, price stability and full employment/growth receive scant attention. Yet, it is precisely
the difficulty of addressing how to handle these trade-offs that weakened the effectiveness of
financial stability policy over time, creating conditions that increase the threats that the FSM
seeks to avoid. In its simplest form, this may be seen by considering the basic functions of
money as defined by any standard textbook: money serves as a unit of account, a means of
payment and a store of wealth. Problems that arise when money is difficult to use as a unit of
account are rare in the modern world, arising mostly when hyperinflations create obstacles to
determine the relative price of goods over even the shortest of time spans. The core difficulty in
the search for financial stability is the fact that by guaranteeing the safety of the means of
payment, there is a danger that a monetary authority will (be pressured to) guarantee certain
stores of wealth. If one could restrict guaranteeing the means of payment simply to ensuring the
safe and accurate crediting and debiting of accounts, then these two functions of money might be
completely separable and the execution of the mandate might be straightforward. Instead,
because stores of wealth are defined as money---currency and deposits, for example---both the
public’s perception of the goal of financial stability and the ability of the monetary authorities to
clearly define the goal can be muddled and conducive to crises.4
In pursuit of financial stability, the monetary authorities may begin by very narrowly
defining the means of payment and tightly regulating its issue, as was the case when banknotes
began to supplement coin as a means of payment in the nineteenth century. By setting
regulations and incentives for stakeholders, the government influences the risk-return choices
made by financial institutions, economic growth and the vulnerability of the regime to financial
crises. Supervision is deemed necessary as there is an asymmetry in banking management and
other insiders vis-à-vis those funding the bank with deposits and borrowed funds. Consequently,
some agency may be delegated the responsibility for forcing increased disclosure, examining
banks for compliance with the rules, and disciplining them.
If the rules for such a system are carefully drawn and the system well-monitored, a
regime may credibly guarantee the means of payment; but there are two inherent problems.
First, those holding the protected means of payment, for example banknotes, would tend to
regard it as a means to insure their wealth in this form. Secondly, if the supply of the means of
payment is sufficiently constrained, it will fail to satisfy the demand for a low cost means of
payment by a growing economy. The result will be financial innovation to provide an alternative
Defining “systemically important institutions, Blinder (2010) states “the definition is clearly subjective and not
numerical. Thus, a handful are the systemically important financial institutions that are too big to be allowed to fail
messily.”
4
The temptation to broadly define financial stability is exemplified in the calls to guarantee almost all classes of
financial assets. For example, the argument to treat investment funds with more than $100 billion as systemically
important and potential candidates for bailouts, Morgenson, ( 2014).
3

6

means of payment. The public will hold wealth in new and old forms of means of payment, but
shocks will induce them to shift to the guaranteed form of wealth holding, creating runs and
perhaps panics, with the regime losing its credibility, as the public is aggrieved to have lost some
wealth. Consequently, there will be a demand for a new regime that guarantees the expanded
means of payment. If the guarantee of the means of payment is not carefully circumscribed in
the new regime, more wealth will be guaranteed. This mission creep poses a threat to the task of
securing financial stability, as it will induce moral hazard and create a potential for politically
divisive future wealth transfers to make good on its guarantee.
3. The Protection of Banknotes and the Origins of the FSM
England
The Bank of England was founded in 1694 as a privileged bank of issue with expressed
purpose of providing a loan of £1.2 million to the Crown in wartime. Oversight or supervision
was provided by Parliament which imposed regulations on its total note issue. Collateral
requirements protected the value of the currency and high minimum denominations kept notes
out of the hands of the less financially literate public to protect against counterfeiting. The
weekly task of verifying the accounts of the Bank---its notes issued, reserves, securities, and
capital---fell to the Commissioners of Stamps and Taxes. Other banks, usually partnerships,
operating without the privilege of note issue, were not the subject of regulation or supervision.
After the banking crisis of 1825, Parliament passed the Act of 1826 that ended the Bank
of England’s monopoly of joint-stock banking, permitting the establishment of banks with more
than six partners, outside of London (Grossman, 2010). These partnerships—note-issuing joint
stock unlimited liability banks---were not subject to any balance sheet regulations or
requirements to file or publish financial data. Their only obligation was to submit an annual
return, including the name of the bank, place of business and names of all partners and two
officers in whose name the firm could be sued. Competition increased when the Bank Charter
Act of 1833 permitted the formation of joint stock banks in London where they were not allowed
to issue banknotes and were notably exempt from the reporting requirements.
The Bank Charter Act of 1844 began the centralization of note issue in England and
Wales by forbidding new banks of issue (The Bank Charter Act of 1844). Although the Stock
Banking Act (1844) established a banking code for England, it was repealed by, a series of acts
between 1855 and 1857 that allowed banks to be formed with limited liability under company
law. This arrangement with no explicit supervision became the basic legal framework that
would govern English banking into the early twentieth century. One key feature was added by
the Companies Act of 1879, which created “reserved liability,” requiring half of banks’ uncalled
capital be available in the event of bankruptcy (Grossman, 2010, pp. 182-183).
Given that note issue had been de facto centralized in the Bank of England and the FSM
focused on the convertibility of banknotes, there was relatively little concern for the supervision
of other financial institutions. The Joint Stock Banking Companies Act of 1857, Section XIV
specified that “No appointment of inspectors to examine into the affairs of any banking company
shall be made by the Board of Trade, in pursuance of the Joint Stock Companies Act, 1856,
except upon the application of one-third at least in number and value of the shareholders in such
a company” (Wordsworth, 1859). No supervision was legally specified for the Bank of England

7

though Bignon, Flandreau and Ugolini (2012) have shown the Bank of England maintained
extensive files that enabled it to distinguish the quality of paper presented by discount houses.5
France
Although the Banque de France was founded in 1800, we begin our examination of
France in the middle of the nineteenth century with two defining events: the de facto
monopolization of note issue by the Banque de France in 1848 and the establishment of free and
largely unregulated entry into the non-issuing banking business with the passage of the
Commercial Code in 1867. The first made the Banque de France the guarantor of banknotes as a
means of payment, while the second allowed a rapid development of the banking industry.
Until 1848, the Banque de France was the dominant but not the only bank of issue in
6
France. The crisis of that year led the government to concentrate the privilege of issue with the
Banque. Coin continued to be the dominant means of payment; as late as 1880, coin constituted
65 percent of the means of payment, with banknotes and deposits dividing the remainder.
Convertibility of banknotes into coin was ensured by the Banque’s large gold reserves; and
circulation was limited by high minimum denominations, similar to the Bank of England.
Until 1867, any firm, including banks that wished to form a limited liability corporation
(société anonyme, SA) was subject to the Commercial Code of 1807 and had to follow a
tortuously long review process, ending with a decision of the Conseil d’Etat. The new code in
1867 removed the discretionary power of the government and opened the doors to free entry. A
wave of incorporation ensued and by 1898, there were 1,169 banks and insurance companies that
had incorporated as SAs (Freedeman, 1993). There were modest minimum capital requirements
and periodic reporting for all firms but few other limitations. The result was a competitive and
diverse financial industry.
In 1877, the Banque de France began to report a quarterly review of its outstanding
discounts and advances, providing the managers of the Banque with some surveillance of the
industry, though it was primarily used to protect the Banque from bad loans. The absence of a
supervisory authority, inside or outside of the central bank, to obtain information or examine
banks well into the twentieth century is captured by a 1929 survey of French banking:
It is difficult to define the precise limits of the activity of the big deposit
banks…No law determines these, and sources of information are few and
insufficient….Those things which it would be most interesting to know and which
must influence the future of the company….remain the secret of the board of
directors and of the management.” The balance sheets are obscure, as each bank
prepares them on a different plan, which it modifies at will. In the balance sheet
the most dissimilar items are united. (Beckhart and Willis, 1929, p. 574).
Like the Bank of England, the Banque de France was seen as fulfilling its FSM by
guaranteeing the convertibility of its notes into coin.

5
6

Other nineteenth century banks maintained similar filing systems for the same purpose.
See Leclercq ( 2010 ) for a recent description of the structure and operations of the Banque de France.

8

Italy
Prior to the Italian political unification (1861) banks of issue were found in the Kingdom
of Sardinia, the Grand Duchy of Tuscany, the Duchy of Parma and Bologna, with the Kingdom
of the Two Sicilies having two banks. As in other European countries, the establishment of
banks of issue, with powers of discount and deposit, was seen as a financial innovation aimed at
modernizing a backward financial system and useful subscribers to government bonds. After
unification, the Sardinian (Piedmontese) bank, denominated Banca Nazionale nel Regno, became
the dominant bank of issue with about 65 per cent of the outstanding circulation.
Similar to the pattern established elsewhere in Europe, the banks of issue were privatepublic companies, regulated and supervised by governments that issued charters, set minimum
capital requirements, prescribed reserve ratio, and dictated the rules for the convertibility under a
bimetallic system (which soon however became a de facto gold standard) . Supervision was
entrusted to a government commissioner who sat on the banks’ boards and whose approval was
needed for major decisions, including changes in the discount rate and the creation of new
branches. For Prime Minister Cavour, founder of the basic institutions of the Kingdom of Italy,
the FSM mandate dictated that banks of issue “must be governed with the strictest prudence as
their most stringent obligation is to be always solvent, with assets much higher than liabilities, in
order to be always in such condition as to be able to honor their convertibility pledge in the case
of notes and deposits” (Rossi and Nitti, 1968, p. 2074). Cavour believed that the government
should exercise discretionary oversight of the central bank because of the potential disruptive
threat of crises that made “useless the most stringent [legal] precautions"
Although Cavour included the guarantee of deposits in his view of the FSM, the
dominant component of means of payment in Italy at mid-century were coins. Coins accounted
for 80 percent of the means of payments with notes taking a little less than 10 percent and
deposits a little more than 10 percent in 1861. This structure of the means of payment began to
change very rapidly with the advent of easy incorporation for commercial banks---they remained
virtually free from regulation and supervision. The Civil Code of 1865 did not treat banks
differently from other “commercial” companies, and the Commercial Code of 1882 defined bank
operations as “acts of commerce”, subject only to a monthly delivery of certified statement of
their accounts to local Courts.7
Unlike Britain and France, the development of banking in Italy occurred largely under a
suspension of convertibility that lasted from 1866 to 1883 inducing more regulations and
supervision to restrain the issue of inconvertible banknotes.8 In the wake of the banking crisis of
1873, the Banking Act of 20 April 1874 imposed new regulations on the issue of banknotes and
on investments by the banks of issue. The six banks of issue became subject to supervision by
the Minister of Finance whose representatives participated in the board meetings and enjoyed
inspection powers (Galanti, D’Ambrosio, Guccione 2012). Following a long-simmering banking
crisis of the early 1890s the Banking Act of 1893 merged four banks of issue into the Banca
d’Italia, which became the dominant bank of issue and discount. The 1893 Act (Toniolo 1990,
7

The exception to this very liberal regulatory regime were land banks, specializing in securitized credit to
agriculture, first regulated in 1866 and more systematically in 1869. The first comprehensive banking legislation
was approved by Parliament in 1888, covering savings banks. These institutions were placed under the supervision
of the Minister of Industry and Agriculture who could fine directors and dissolve the board.
8
Banknote denominations were smaller in Italy than in England or France, which may have been the result of the
suspension of convertibility, leading to an absence of coin. This phenomenon also occurred in Britain during the
suspension of convertibility from 1797 to 1821.

9

Polsi, 2001, Toniolo 2013) set a maximum limit to outstanding circulation, tightened regulation
of the discount business, forbade banks of issue from real estate mortgage operations and
controlled deposits and interest payments. Already supervising the savings banks, the Ministry of
Agriculture, Industry and Commerce was given supervisory authority over the banks of issue, in
consultation with the Treasury. The general manager of the Banca d’Italia was to be approved
by the government, no bank official could be also a member of parliament, and the state
supervised the printing of banknotes (Negri 1989, 81-84). The fact that the Banca d’Italia was
created as the response to a severe banking crisis impressed upon policy makers and the
management of the new bank the idea that financial stability should be one of its main missions.
As the banking crisis of 1907 would show, the Banca d’Italia had become aware that it had a de
facto FSM. It therefore sought to acquire information about the operations of individual
commercial banks, availing itself of its branch network and of the opportunities coming from its
own lending and discount operations.
To sum up, in the nineteenth century, in Great Britain, France and Italy as in most other
European countries, there was no institution formally or informally endowed with a FSM. The
government directly regulated and inspected the monopolistic or dominant banks of issue
primarily because of their role in the payments system; but with the exception of savings banks,
other credit institutions were not perceived by legislators as different from any other commercial
company or having a potential to destabilize the financial system. Although Britain had a limited
banking code, a general commercial code sufficed for France and Italy, leading to development
of universal banking, with mergers and branching forming very large banks by the end of the
nineteenth century.
The United States
New World banking stood in contrast to Old World banking in that multiple banks of
issue were the norm, leading to the formation of specific agencies for supervision. In the United
States, federalism paved the way for the creation of competitive banks of issue. Although many
of the newly independent states began by chartering a single bank (Schwartz, 1947), it became
common for legislatures to offer numerous new charters, supplying the U.S. with substantial
banking capital, which by some measures exceeded that provided in Europe (Sylla, 1998).
Price stability was anchored by the Coinage Act of 1792 that established a bimetallic
system and banks were legally obliged to ensure the convertibility of their banknotes into coin.
Empowered by their size and extensive branching networks, both the First and Second Banks of
the United States (1791-1811 and 1816-1836) accepted a FSM, where they returned the
banknotes of state-chartered banks promptly for collection, with the intention of increasing their
liquidity and limiting loan expansion, and they provided loans to banks with liquidity problems.
Supervision was conducted by the Secretary of the Treasury who could demand weekly
statements, which were not available to the public or Congress. (Robertson, 1968). Whether the
First and Second Banks interventions with state banks had a measureable effect on the financial
system has been a subject of debate (Fenstermaker and File, 1986; Perkins, 1994), but the failure
to renew both banks’ charters put an end to this early American experiment in central banking.
After 1836, the FSM devolved completely to the states, which led to the establishment of
the first explicit, agencies for bank supervision. While Congress or a state legislature might
directly supervise a single or even a few banks, the competitive nature of the banking system and
public concerns about potential corruption led to the creation of independent, specialist agencies
10

to monitor compliance with regulations. Financial stability could thus be viewed as a separate
issue from price stability. The years from 1836-1864 were period of experimentation by the
states to protect the means of payment. Two experiments were the Safety-Funds and Free
Banking (Rolnick, Smith and Weber, 2000). Supervision in the modern sense of delegating
oversight responsibility to a public agency first appeared in the United States with the SafetyFund System devised by New York in 1829 and copied by other states. These systems provided
mutual guarantee funds aimed at protecting banknote holders and depositors from loss.
Supervisors monitored banks but failed to control risk taking, leading to the demise of some
systems and the restriction of others to the protection of note holders (Golembe and Warburton,
1958, Golembe, 1960, Calomiris, 1990). More successful and widespread were the free banking
systems first implemented by Michigan (1837) and New York (1838). These laws permitted free
entry with banknote issue, backed by state bonds, held in segregated accounts that were sold to
compensate banknote holders in the event of failure. These provided a high degree of protection
for banknote holders (Rockoff, 1975, Rolnick and Weber, 1983). To limit the financially
illiterates’ use of banknotes, the First Bank set a high minimum denomination of $5. While the
state systems tended to follow this example, the democratizing impulse in the U.S. sometimes
led to lower denominations (Bodenhorn, 1993).
The shock of the Civil War disrupted the banking systems of several states, giving the
federal government an opportunity to intervene. The success of the New York version of free
banking informed the writing of the National Bank Act of 1864, establishing a banking regime
that would endure until 1913. The 1864 Act provided for free entry, a uniformly-designed and
uniformly bond-backed currency issued by the individual national banks, plus regulations
governing minimum capital, reserve requirements, and loans and double liability for
shareholders. The act also created the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), whose
name reflects the initial overwhelming concern for ensuring that the national banknotes issued by
each individual bank had the proper bonds set aside to protect them in the event of a bank failure.
The Comptroller was empowered to obtain frequent reports from national banks and dispatch
examiners to ensure compliance with regulations (White, 1983). Supervision was largely rulesbased; and while it became more formalized over time, it represented a continuity with the
earlier, smaller state efforts. Examiners and the Comptroller could privately reprimand banks for
what they viewed as excessive risks, but the only true sanction was to close a bank down.
Canada
While influenced by both British and particularly Scottish banking with widespread
branching, Canada followed the American pattern of detailed statutory regulation of banks that
had the right to issue banknotes. Beginning with the passage of the Dominion Act in 1871,
commercial banks were given ten year charters subject to renewal, thereby forcing a regular reexamination of supervision.
Although Canada may be considered to have a generally competitive commercial
banking system, entry was tightly controlled and a special act of Parliament was required for a
bank charter, with a high minimum paid-in capital. Like American national banks, their
shareholders were subject to double liability. In 1871, there were 28 banks, declining primarily
due to mergers to 10 banks in 1935. These ten banks had extensive national branching
networks, making them large geographically diversified institutions, another contrast with the

11

United States (Allen, et.al., 1938). Canadian chartered banks had broad commercial and
investment banking and brokerage powers, but mortgage lending was prohibited.
In this period, the FSM aimed at the protection of the means of payment, limited to
currency, which came in two forms: Dominion notes and banknotes of the chartered banks, with
the latter constituting the largest share. The issue of Dominion notes was tightly controlled, with
a ceiling on the issues that could be created with a fractional reserve of gold and securities and
above that a 100 percent reserve was required. This well-protected currency was issued in
denominations over $10,000 for interbank transactions and under $5 for hand-to-hand
transactions. Similar to U.S. and European countries, the minimum denomination for banknotes
was set in relatively high in 1881 at $5. Banks were required to redeem their notes in gold coin
or Dominion notes. In the event of insolvency, banknotes had first lien on a bank’s assets, a
strong protection given that a bank’s issue was limited to be a maximum of its paid-in capital.
When the Bank Act was revised in 1891 a Bank Circulation Redemption Fund was
established and endowed with funds equal to five percent of the average circulation of banks.
The fund was not intended to guarantee banknotes, for which there were other protections,
including double liability, but to ensure that notes of failed banks could be redeemed at par
without delay, while liquidation was completed (Allen, et.al. 1938). To protect this redemption
fund, the Canadian Bankers Association (privately organized in 1891) began regular supervision
of banks. The Bank Act of 1900 then gave the Association,which was then incorporated by a
special act of Parliament, oversight of the issue and destruction of bank notes. In the event of a
bank suspension, the Association was given the authority to appoint a curator for the suspended
bank. Commenting on this supervision, Willis and Beckhart (1929) wrote:
All the banks are contributories to this fund and in case of the failure of a bank
and subsequent depletion of the fund the remaining banks are obliged to restore
the fund. Thus every bank has an interest in the regularity of the note issues of
every other bank, and it is important that there should be some control by a
properly authorized body of the printing and distribution of notes to the banks and
their destruction.
Colombia
Although considered an economic laggard, compared to the U.S. or Canada, the history
of regulation and supervision of banking reveals some common New World attributes. Free
banking arrived in Colombia in 1865 after the Civil War that brought to power a new liberal
government that produced a federalist constitution in 1863 for the United States of Columbia.
Under the Banking Law of 1865, the Colombian states were granted the authority to set bank
regulations. Typically, banks were simply subject to the commercial code that applied to all
firms and there was free entry, plus some minimal regulations. By 1880, there were
approximately 40 chartered banks of issue in Colombia. Political volatility and the fluctuating
prices of tobacco and coffee, led these banks to concentrate on short-term credits, so that they
could quickly wind down their operations and withdraw notes from circulation in response to a
shock. Nevertheless, banks had to suspend payment twice in response to crises (White, 1998).
The Civil War in 1885 ended the experiment in free banking, when the new government
in Bogotá suspended convertibility of the note issue of the Banco Nacional, its fiscal agent and
made its notes legal tender, eliminating the privilege of note issue for all other banks. Continued
12

political instability and the financial needs of the government led to an expansion of the Banco
Nacional’s note issue, its liquidation, and a direct issue of currency by the government. Inflation
soared during the War of a Thousand Days (1898-1903), and the remaining banks shrank. Peace
brought the establishment of a new monopoly bank of issue, the Banco Central and put the peso
on the gold standard in 1907. With note issue tied to the gold reserves of the Banco Central,
other banks were left largely unregulated and unsupervised. In 1918, a new banking law
reaffirmed the wide powers of banks, enumerating them at length; these included the authority to
serve as investment banks, hold stocks and bonds, develop and organize railroads, canals and
industry, and handle contracts for public service (White, 1998). Thus, while Colombia had
started with a system similar to the United States and Canada, it transited to one more familiar in
Europe.
4. The Challenge of Deposit Banking to Financial Stability
The financial stability of both European banking regimes, where there was a monopoly
bank of issue, and American banking regimes were there were competitive banks of issue were
gradually undermined by the growth of deposits Deposit banking had a long history, but as
Dunbar pointed out, it had long been restricted to the large and well-informed customers of
banks.9 Given the limited quantity of coin and the restrictions on the volume and denomination
of banknotes, it is not surprising that deposits began to emerge as a substitute means of payment
in the late nineteenth century with economic expansion and rising incomes. The public began to
lay “claim upon the sympathy and guardianship of the legislature” (Dunbar, 1893) to expand the
FSM. How this evolution played out in different countries depended heavily on their banking
structure. Moving beyond Bagehot’s policy recommendations, the failure of major financial
institutions were managed with lifeboats in Europe, with a growth of supervision in Italy. .
The United Kingdom
The Act of 1844 protected the means of payment but at a price. Curzio Giannini (2011)
has described the system, as showing “excessive zeal”:
The combination of ceilings on issue, reserve requirements, separation between
issue and rediscount operations, as well as financial reporting obligations (the
Bank of England was required to publish a fortnightly statement of account)
created a framework of draconian restrictions, the purpose of which, as we have
seen, was to reduce banknotes to a mere surrogate of precious metal, with no
identity of their own.” (p. 86).
Limiting the creation of the means of payment led to an expansion of the financial system
through deposit banking, as non-issuing banks were subject to few restrictions. Banking crises
then took the form of panics to convert deposits into notes and coin—presenting a direct
challenge to the FSM in extraordinary times. In 1847, the failure of a number of provincial
Cavour held a different view and believed that deposits had a higher risk of creating instability as they were on
average large and in hands of few people. The contrast with Dunbar is similar to the division between those who see
panics arising from the withdrawals of the uninformed versus the informed. For the stability of the system, Cavour
deemed supervision of banks of issue necessary for the protection of both notes and deposits (Rossi and Nitti,
p.1848)
9

13

banks provoked a liquidity crisis. Discounting liberally, the Bank of England saw its reserves
drop. Rather than see the Bank cut off credit to the market the Chancellor of the Exchequer sent
the Governor of the Bank a letter inviting him to continue to discounting at 8 percent, promising
that the government would send a bill of indemnity to Parliament if the currency in circulation
exceeded the legal limits. Issuance of this “Treasury letter” calmed the panic and did so again in
1857 and 1866. Recent research (Bignon, Flandreau and Ugolini, 2012) has confirmed that the
Bank of England did not take full advantage of Treasury letters until after 1866 and rationed
credit during crises, exacerbating them. At this point, the Bank of England became, in the view
of most writers, a true LOLR, placing the interests of the banking system ahead of those of its
shareholders.
In addition to the growth of deposit banking, the wave of mergers concentrated the
banking industry in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, creating large institutions that
posed a new problem. When Overend Gurney failed in 1866, it was a very large bank with
wide-ranging activities. Its insolvency occasioned a liquidity crisis and the Bank followed what
became Bagehot’s recommended policy. Yet, when Baring Brothers failed in 1890, liquidity
was supplied to the market by the Bank; but a lifeboat rescue was also constructed, in
cooperation with the central banks of France and Russia, to prevent the collapse of Barings from
creating a greater shock. In modern terms, Barings was regarded as a “systemically important
financial institution,” a “SIFI.” At the outset, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Goschen
thought that the crisis of 1866 would appear to be a “trifle” if Barings collapsed in run; and he
offered a Treasury letter to the Bank. The letter was declined on the grounds that it signaled
weakness. When the demand for liquidity surged, the Bank reached an agreement with the
government to absorb half of any losses from the Bank’s holdings of Barings bills, while the
Governor assembled banks to provide a £17 million lifeboat rescue for Barings The panic ended,
but the process of liquidating Barings was drawn out until the mid-1890s. While the Bank was
praised for its prompt action, it was also attacked in the Economist, setting out the moral hazard
peril for the whole of the banking system (Clapham, 1945). Nevertheless, there was no effort by
the Bank of England to develop a policy of supervision in response to this crisis and there was no
legislation forthcoming from Parliament.
France
As in the U.K., in France, there was no policy or institutional change in the FSM in
response to the trends in the banking industry arising from the expansion of deposit-funded
commercial banks. The collapse of the large Union Générale and other smaller banks in 1882
presented the Banque with the question of how to intervene. Although it may have been
influenced by political considerations, the Banque and the government decided to let these banks
fail, while providing liquidity to the general market (White, 2007). But, the imminent collapse
of the Paris Bourse---the Lyon Bourse was allowed to go under---was halted by the formation of
a lifeboat operation, where the big banks intermediated a loan from the Banque to the Bourse. A
shutdown of the Bourse threatened the means of settlement for the securities market---thus the
Banque expanded its implicit FSM mandate to prevent a broader crisis (White, 2011).10
However, the fallout from the bank insolvencies contributed to the sharp recession of the next
several years.
The Bourse was primarily a forward market with twice monthly clearing and settlement periods that created high
temporary demands for liquidity.
10

14

The next time a large and a more highly connected bank was on the brink of failure, the
Banque intervened. In 1889, a run on the Comptoir d’Escompte was feared would lead to a
banking panic. At the prompting of the Minister of Finance, the Banque organized a lifeboat
operation to rescue the Comptoir. The Banque supported the market by providing additional
liquidity based on sound collateral, even as it took over all of the assets of the insolvent
Comptoir as collateral for a loan (Hautcoeur, Riva and White, 2014). The depositors of the
Comptoir were promised payment in full and an orderly liquidation was allowed to proceed, and
shareholders were given a deal to recapitalize the bank, with the directors suffering significant
losses. In modern terms, a resolution mechanism was devised to guide the process. When a
bank, the Société de Dépôts et Comptes Courants, failed in 1891 it was provided a similar
rescue. While there was no other large bank failure before World War I, the Banque had shifted
its policy and appeared ready to protect the deposits of “SIFIs”, though perhaps not smaller
banks. However, there was no change in the supervisory regime for the next forty years. As seen
in Beckhart and Willis report in 1929 above, there was no movement to impose new regulations
on the banking industry or efforts to set up a supervisory authority to monitor and discipline
these banks. When the Governor of the Banque was interviewed for the American National
Monetary Commission in 1910, he forcefully told his audience that in crises abundant credit had
been and would only be provided for the highest quality collateral, omitting any reference to the
lifeboat operations that had been deployed in 1882, 1889 and 1891 (Aldrich, 1910).
Italy
In Italy, the shift to deposit banking occurred much more rapidly than in France. Notes
rapidly replaced coins but deposits grew even faster, accounting for approximately 45 percent of
the means of payment in 1893, contributing to the instability of the Italian banking system that
experienced five major banking crises, coinciding with international crises, 1866, 1873, the
early 1890s, the early 1920s and 1931.
In the early 1890s, seeing a danger of contagion from the real estate sector to the
financial sector, the government insisted with the banks of issue to act as LOLRs to both large
construction companies and banks. Concerned about profitability, the largest bank of issue, the
Banca Nazionale nel Regno argued that these banks had already stepped in to provide liquidity to
the real estate sector that had previously relied on now departing foreign capital and that the
extraordinary note issue requested by the government should not be subject to a supplementary
tax of two percent instead of the normal one percent. Prime Minister Crispi refused to rescind the
tax and therefore the banks of issue did not provide liquidity. This episode reflects the fact that
policy makers already viewed banks of issue as having the power to halt financial crises, though
they still behaved as private institutions, and the government felt that it could only apply moral
suasion to induce the banks to act. Ultimately, the government-mandated merger of three banks
of issue into the Banca d’Italia (which also took over the liquidation of a fourth bank of issue) in
1893 tackled these problems; although by 'inheriting' the bad assets of the previous banks, the
new central bank was saddled with illiquid assets that it took almost a decade to liquidate.
The Banca d’Italia’s first crisis management took place in 1907 with the collapse of the
Società Bancaria Italiana (SBI), the country’s third largest bank. The Banca organized a rescue
of SBI, inducing the two largest commercial banks to share in its liquidation. As in the case of
France, a resolution mechanism for insolvent banks was in place before the advent of a formal
15

regulation-supervision system. No contagion ensued and fallout to the real economy was
minimal, with the Banca d’Italia providing liquidity and engineering a loan from the Treasury.
Throughout the crisis the lira remained within the gold points. This episode parallels the Bank of
England’s 1890 intervention in the Barings Crisis and the Banque de France’s actions in 1889.
As in these cases, there was no change in the Italian FSM for ordinary times, although the
mandate for extraordinary times had expanded to rescue SIFIs.
The United States
Until the 1860s, banknotes and capital were the primary sources of funding for banks.
However in the second half of the century, the share of banknotes plummeted and banks became
more leveraged. Deposits had become the dominant source of funding for banks and the bankgenerated means of payment. Two factors played key roles. First, while the 10 percent tax on
state banknotes imposed in 1865 induced many banks to join the National Banking System, the
revision of state banking codes in the 1880s encouraged new banks to take out state charters,
funding their operations by issuing deposits (White, 1983, 2013). Secondly, the 1864 Act had
imposed various regulations limiting the issue of national banknotes, most importantly tying
them to the dwindling supply of U.S. government bonds. Consequently, national banks as well
as state-chartered banks turned to deposit creation to grow, expanding the means of payment,
outside of the “safety net.”
Conditioned by regulation, the evolving American banking had a greater potential for
financial instability. The almost universal prohibition on branch banking created thousands of
small relatively undiversified single office banks that were very sensitive to local economic
shocks. Coupled with reserve requirements that induced country banks to hold deposits in city
banks, the need to clear check, collect payments and make investments produced huge interbank
deposits liable to be withdrawn in the event of a liquidity shock. “Competition in laxity”
between federal and state governments served to further reduce reserve, capital and loan
regulations, with some bank engaging in “regulatory arbitrage,” switching charters to gain
regulatory advantage, with states creating their own supervisory authorities (White, 1983).
These weaknesses appear to have been mitigated by the imposition of double liability on
the shareholders of national banks and many state banks, inducing them to more closely monitor
management and shut down several unprofitable banks before they became insolvent. Losses to
depositors from failed banks were relatively modest. For national banks, they totaled $44
million for the period 1865-1913, a fraction of one percent of a year’s GDP (White, 2013).
Nevertheless, regulatory choices reflected trade-offs with growth. Grossman (2001, 2007) has
documented that states that favored growth over stability were more likely to choose double or
triple liability than single liability for the shareholders of state-chartered banks.
To many contemporaries, the most lamentable characteristic of the American banking
were its banking crises, more frequent than those experienced by other industrializing nations. In
the absence of a central bank, the LOLR was partially filled by the clearing houses in large cities,
issuing clearing house loans certificates; ultimately panics could be stopped by a costly
suspension of payments by the banks (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963). These crises were
primarily liquidity events—generated by a panic-driven search for a safe means of payment
rather than widespread insolvencies of financial institutions. The panics of the early 1890s and
1907, appearing ever larger and more costly, were followed by three responses---changes in bank

16

supervision, state deposit insurance schemes, and calls for a central bank. All of these implicitly
or explicitly recognized that protecting the means of payment had to include deposits.
At the federal level, the OCC intensified its efforts at supervision. Instead of yearly
surprise examinations for each bank, two examinations per year became the norm. These
examinations became more thorough and the Comptroller issued new instructions to examiners
to challenge boards of directors. At the state level, bank superintendents were appointed in states
that had lacked them and examinations increased in number and vigor (Barnett, 1911; Jaremski
and Michener, 2014). The focus of these examinations was no longer the relatively limited role
initially envisioned to ensure that banknotes were protected but a broader one, more concerned
with the general solvency of a bank to protect its depositors.
In spite of its very mixed experience, the antebellum idea of deposit insurance reemerged; it became a favored remedy of bankers in rural states dominated by small single office
banks that found it hard to assure their customers of the safety of their deposits. Between 1886
and 1933, bills were introduced to Congress to establish a system of deposit insurance. Given
their narrow constituency at the federal level, these failed (Calomiris and White, 1994).
However, at the state level, the Panic of 1907 induced seven states to establish mutual guarantee
systems for state-chartered banks (White, 1983, Calomiris 1990). Nevertheless, difficulties with
moral hazard and adverse selection plagued these state funds, which wound down over the next
two decades. The key innovation was the passage of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913.
Canada
In Canada, the stability provided by the diversified nationwide branching banks helped to
prevent any major banking crisis before 1914, even as deposits became an increasingly important
component of the means of payment. Nevertheless, there was increased concern because
deposits were outside of this safety net, though double liability added some protection. Between
1900 and 1935, eight banks failed with a capital of about C$9 million. Shareholders were
assessed and paid C$3.6 million, which was sufficient to cover depositors’ claims in all but three
banks. In those three banks, depositors lost slightly over $2 million, with losses to other
creditors totaling $15 million (Allen, et.al., 1938).11
As, in the other cases, Canada’s FSM in this era focused on protection of currency.
Supervision was conducted through the Canadian Bankers Association rather than an explicit
agency as in the U.S. The small number of banks perceived an interest in mutual supervision,
much as in the clearing houses in the American cities. While Parliament showed increased
concern for depositors, no attempt was made to give them the same guarantee as banknote
holders. Depositors had to rely on the market incentives, amplified by the imposition of double
liability of shareholders to protect them.
Colombia
The political upheavals in Colombia in the twenty years prior to the First World War
hindered economic growth. After the inflationary issues of paper money, a new regime for price
stability was legislated in 1907. Yet, although the peso had been tied to gold, a monopoly of
note issue was conceded to a single bank, and broad powers given to the banking industry,
11

By comparison, losses to depositors and other creditors in the larger U.S. national banking system totaled $44
million from 1865 to 1913 (White, 1913).

17

Colombia did not fully enjoy the prosperity of this period. Banking remained limited, and the
questions about how the growth of deposit banking threatened bank stability were not raised.
Only with the boom of First World War and Colombia’s radical reforms in 1923 did the country
begin to rapidly develop a modern banking sector.
5. Central Banks and the Shock of the First World War
The First World War had two effects on the evolution of the FSM. First, to cope with the
huge initial shock and financial crises, there were innovative responses. Their success gave a
green light to the use of increased discretion to supervisors. The second effect arose from the
need to transfer resources from the public to the state. The magnitude of this transfer and the
degree to which banks facilitated it entangled state finance and the balance sheets of the banks,
intertwining the solvency of the state with that of the banking system. While the leading central
banks had previously balanced their public purposes with private profitability, the war
emphasized the pre-eminence of the former, shifting them towards completely public
institutions.
While military plans were well-developed at the outbreak of the war, relatively little
attention had been given to financial contingency plans (Horn 2002). As payments and
settlements systems were threatened by banking and stock market panics and the international
finance system edged towards collapse, policy makers recognized that financial stability was
essential to the war economy. Finance Ministers coopted their central banks to manage the
shocks and direct the war economy, entrusting them with new tasks and discretionary authority.
Besides an accommodative monetary policy, central banks managed moratoria on payments and
exchange rates, underwrote and led consortia for the issue of government bonds, served as
government paymasters, and dealt with requisitioned assets.
The United Kingdom
During the Great War, the Bank of England became a close collaborator of the Treasury.
The Bank of England briefly tried to manage the crisis at the outbreak of the war by traditional
means, raising the discount rate briefly to 10 percent, but the convertibility of banknotes was
quickly suspended, as were the Bank Acts that set limits to the outstanding circulation (Horn
2002). The liquidity crisis that hit the London remittance houses threatened to spread to money
market, prompting the introduction of a bank holiday from August 3 to 7 (Sayers 1976).
According to Brown (1940), the main aim of the moratorium was to safeguard “the strength of
Great Britain as a creditor nation (which would have not been) possible without suspending
temporarily the basic operations of international finance.”
Controls during World War I were relatively minimal and fiscal policy was governed by
the “McKenna Rule,” where the objective was to raise enough tax revenue to pay for ordinary
peacetime expenditures plus interest on war loans. However, bond finance with low interest
rates maintained by the Bank of England led to rapid inflation, as the pound was allowed to float
(Broadberry and Howlett, 2005). In the 1920s the deflationary policy for the return to gold hit
the banks not because they were directly financing the government finance but because they
were imperiled but by their credits to industry. The old industries of the First Industrial
Revolution—textiles, iron, steel and coal---had expanded during the war and now had excess
capacity. The Bank of England intervened, departing from its narrowly defined pre-war role.
Sayers (1976) explained this change as “partly to help the cotton industry, partly to keep the
18

question away from politics, but more especially to relieve certain of the banks from a dangerous
position.”
Resistance to radical downsizing in textiles and shipbuilding took the form of collusion to
raise prices, which surprisingly found support among Liberal, Conservative and Labor politicians
alike who emphasized the destructive side of competition. Aid did not come directly from the
government but the Bank of England and the Bankers Industrial Development Corporation
(BIDC) established in 1929, which Hannah (1983) has argued was an attempt to prevent direct
government intervention. The BDIC’s most prominent venture was the formation of the
Lancashire Cotton Corporation in 1929 to reorganize the industry and scrap inefficient mills.
The Bank of England also supported the formation of the National Shipbuilders Security Ltd. for
similar purposes (Bowden and Higgins, 2004) World War I had pushed the Bank of England to
become a guarantor of the financial system and by extension industrial stability. Yet, while the
Bank provided credits to support an industrial policy, there was no change in its supervision of
financial institutions and its formal FSM.
France
World War I forced the government to use discretionary authority to confront the
unexpected crisis at the outset of the war and find the means to fund its extraordinary costs.
French wartime finance did not co-opt the banking system, which appears to have insulated them
from the postwar shocks that created banking crises in other countries.
Increasing geopolitical uncertainty rattled markets and during the late Spring of 1914,
rumors circulated that Société Générale was in a precarious state, leading to substantial
withdrawals of deposits (Horn, 2002). In response, the Ministry of Finance issued a
communiqué on June 7, reassuring the public about the state of the bank---an innovation in
communication. Accommodating liquidity demands, the Banque of France expanded discounts,
while quickly raising its discount rate from 3.5 to 6 percent. After Austria's declaration of war on
Serbia and fearful of a run on the franc, the Banque suspended convertibility of its notes on July
31 and began to issue small denomination, 5 and 20 francs notes. To halt a banking panic, a
partial moratorium of withdrawals from deposit and current accounts was announced on August
2nd, lasting until January 1, 1915.12 As the threat of a panic was ended, the Banque cut the
discount rate to 5 percent on August 20 where it would remain until 1920.
Chastened by the suspension, deposits did not recover and the public shifted to buying
short-term government debt. The share of deposits in the means of payment shrank between
1910 and 1920, and coin disappeared. The banks’ role in finance declined, as government
financing accessed the bond market directly, assisted by the Banque de France, which kept the
interest rate on the bons de la Defense Nationale pegged at 5 percent. Meanwhile French
enterprise heavily relied on self-financing (Feinstein, Temin and Toniolo, p. 21). Banks did not
regain their 1914 level of deposits in real terms until 1928 and total loans fell from 33.4 percent
of national income in 1913 to 18.6 percent in 1926. As loans shrank, banks increased liquidity,
by buying the bons; their very short maturities ensured that banks’ balance sheets were not
imperiled as they might have been if they had been buying long-term bonds in an inflationary
Société Générale asked for line of credit from the Banque of 80 million francs in September 1914 but it was
refused then and again in February 1915 on the grounds that it had a weak balance sheet. What is unclear is
whether the bank was insolvent and if so, was there forbearance in closing the bank. Some critics believed that the
general provision of more liquidity probably saved Société Générale and other weak institutions (Blancheton, 2014).
12

19

environment. The banks were thus not tied to government finance and their solvency was not
dependent on the government’s solvency. Combined with their wartime downsizing, there was
no banking crisis immediately after World War I---and hence no need to reconsider the FSM.
After the war, the government’s optimistic plans for reconstruction were supported by
bond-financed deficit spending, where if the public failed to buy the bonds, there was recourse to
the Banque, leading to inflation. Although the Banque de France provided credits to the banks
so that they would buy government debt, banks did not over-expand in the perilous early postwar
years (Bouvier, 1998). Banks role in reconstruction was also limited by the establishment in
1919 of Crédit National, a semi-public institution that issued bonds to finance long-term
investment. Lescure (1995) concludes that the banking sector did not keep pace with the growth
of the economy in the postwar inflation year from 1917 to 1926, although the largest banks
expanded their branching networks. The end result was that the underlying regulatory and
supervisory regime remained unchanged.
Italy
With the outbreak of World War I, novel discretionary power was used by the Italian
authorities, and the role of the Banca d’Italia, which had accepted de facto responsibility for
financial stability in 1907, expanded. Even though Italy had remained neutral, in August 1914, a
run on deposits prompted the Banca d’Italia to act to prevent financial panic. A law providing for
a moratorium on the withdrawal of deposits was drafted by the Banca and rushed through
Parliament by the government.
At the same time the Banca d'Italia increased the provision of liquidity to the financial
system, and acquired, through its branch system, more information about the solvency of
individual banks. Yet, there were no legal grounds for the Banca d'Italia to demand that the
banks disclose private information. It was gathered informally and by moral suasion, to which
smaller banks more readily agreed. Behind the scenes, Prime Minister Salandra wrote Bonaldo
Stringher, the Banca d'Italia's general manager, "If information cannot be privately gathered, do
not hesitate to use any other means, even by ordering an inspection [our italics], which the
banks, though private, cannot refuse given the advantages they draw from the present
moratorium" (Toniolo 1989: 21). Salandra thus articulated a clear justification for supervision,
based on the special advantages extended by the state to the banks that gave the authorities the
right to request disclosure of private information and supervise the banks.
The efforts to supply the Italian army were assisted by the Banca d’Italia. When the
First National Loan was issued in 1915 and the public failed to take the whole issue, the Banca
stepped in to purchase the remainder. Afterwards the Banca continued to support bond prices and
offered liberal discounting, enabling banks to extend credits to war industries. The central bank
soon became directly involved in industrial finance. In 1914, the Consortium for Industrial
Finance was created to lend on easy terms to industry, continuing its assistance in the immediate
postwar period. Although it was funded by private capital, it was governed and financed by the
Banca d’Italia. In general, the war increased the close collaboration between the government and
the bank, which continued in the years after the armistice.
The postwar slump hit Italian industry and its banks hard. The heart of Italy’s problem
was excess capacity in heavy engineering sectors, such as shipbuilding. Not only did banks
provide credits and invest in this industry’s securities, they had interlocking shareholdings and
directorship with large industrial companies. The crisis erupted when one of the largest
20

conglomerates, Ansaldo, had its parent bank, the Banca di Sconto, commission the construction
of ships at a time when demand for tonnage was sharply declining. The government executed a
de facto take over Ansaldo, while the Banca d’Italia was given the task of liquidating the Banca
di Sconto. It was kept on life-support by liquidity provided by the Banca d’Italia, with a
guarantee from the newly-formed Mussolini government, until it was merged with another bank
(Gigliobianco, Giordano, Toniolo 2009: 54-55, Guarino and Toniolo 1993).
In response to the postwar financial crisis, a new banking act was prepared with the
assistance of the Banca d’Italia. Although opposed by many economists and the Association of
Limited Liability Companies who claimed that it would increase moral hazard and infringe upon
the basic freedoms of individuals and firms, the Bank Act was passed in 1926, giving the Banca
d’Italia a monopoly of note issue, sanctioning the de facto situation. In addition, there were new
rules for the authorization of new banks and new branches by existing banks. The law also
prescribed a minimum capital/deposit ratios, credit ceilings to individual clients and disclosure
rules. Supervision was handed to the Banca d’Italia rather than to the Ministry of Finance.
(Toniolo and Guarino, Gigliobiano, Santonocito 1993).
The short time between the Bank Act of 1926 and the banking crisis of 1931 did not
allow the Bank of Italy to gain much experience and set up a supervisory structure. It was,
however, able to prevent the mismanagement of a large number of "Catholic banks" from
developing into panic. Inspections were carried out, capital requirements were imposed, and
mergers were ordered. In spite of this success, the Bank Law of 1926’s design reflected the
regulatory needs of the pre-1913 banking system and did not take into account the changes in the
universal banks portfolios that had taken place during and after the war, leaving them with large
industrial holdings (Toniolo1995).
The United States
As in all countries, World War I presented two challenges. The first, at the war’s outset
was the banking panic and stock market crash. Although the Federal Reserve was not yet
operational, the Aldrich-Vreeland Act of 1908 had established a procedure to inject additional
currency that mimicked the clearing houses methods of issuing loan certificates but reached a
greater number of banks (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963). A stock market collapse, precipitated
by Europeans dumping their holdings of American securities, heightened the demand for gold,
threatening the dollar. A crisis was averted by the Secretary of the Treasury shutting down the
New York Stock Exchange, thus blocking these transactions, until the European demand for war
materiel turned the balance of payments in favor of the U.S (Silber, 2008). Thus, both the means
of payment and settlement were threatened, with the latter resolved by unprecedented action of
discretion by the Treasury that would foreshadow the management of 1930s crisis. The granting
of discretionary authority to the president was codified in the 1917 Trading with the Enemy Act.
The second challenge to the stability of the banking system arising out of World War I
was the use of the banks as vehicles for the sale and absorption of government war debt. Banks
were induced by a public campaign and the availability of credit at the new Federal Reserve
banks to lend to their customers to buy war bonds. Although they added U.S. bonds to their
portfolios, this indirect method of finance was more important. Fortunately, U.S. involvement in
World War I was not as great as the European belligerents and the nation was able to quickly
wind down its military operations and produce budget surpluses that ensured that banks’ link to
21

government revenue requirements was eliminated. However, many banks in rural areas failed
after the collapse of the postwar international commodity boom.
Although the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 gave the Fed the power to provide additional
liquidity to the banking system, Fed officials realized that there was a new challenge for the FSM
because it was not so simple to draw a line between protecting currency and deposits. In
describing the function of examination for the Federal Reserve banks, Burgess (1927)
emphasized that its purpose was to “prevent too constant or too large use of borrowing facilities”
by a member bank, recognizing a moral hazard problem that had led hundreds of banks to
become dependent on discount loans by the mid-1920s. He offered a pointed example: rural
banks loaded with doubtful farm paper which brought their good collateral to the discount
window. If they failed the good assets would have been discounted at a Federal Reserve Bank,
leading depositors with little for their claims. Burgess concluded that “The Reserve Bank must
consider not only the safety of its loan, but the interests of the depositors” (Burgess 1927).
This soul-searching indicated an inclination towards discretion-based supervision. During
the post-World War I downturn, some regional Reserve Banks, notably Atlanta began to roll
over discounts whose repayment might have caused banks to fail. The hope was that by granting
extensions, banks would recover their solvency as the economy improved (White, 2014). Other
than showing more discretion in examinations, implementing a change in the FSM was another
matter. Apart from jawboning, the central bank had no formal policy instruments to reduce the
riskiness of a bank. Complicating matters further were the presence of multiple regulatory
agencies—the Fed, the OCC and the state superintendents---that engaged in competition in
laxity, inducing regulatory arbitrage (White, 1983).
Canada
In the absence of a central bank, Parliament responded to the crisis at the outbreak of the
war by passing the Finance Act of 1914 that enabled the Minister of Finance to provide
Dominion notes against approved securities to both chartered banks and savings banks and
permitted the Government in Council to permit the banks to suspend redemption of Dominion
notes in gold and establish a general moratorium (Royal Commission, 1933). These actions
augmented the discretionary authority of the government, although they did not immediately
alter the FSM that focused on the protection of banknotes.
Modest measures were undertaken to increase oversight; and in 1923, chartered banks
were required to provide monthly reports to the Minister of Finance and to conduct annual audits
with two approved auditors, selected by a bank’s shareholders, plus a special annual report
provided to the Minister of Finance and the directors of the banks. Ironically, shortly after this
new legislation was passed, the Home Bank failed in 1923, leaving initial losses of $11 million,
far exceeding any previous single bank failure. Concerned about this large failure, the Canadian
Bankers Association advanced a “dividend” of 25 percent to depositors before liquidation of the
Home Bank was complete. While this was an extraordinary action, it basically represented an
extension of the Redemption Fund. However, the Government of Quebec used a $15 million
off-balance sheet line of credit to assist the merger of the Banque Hochelaga with the Banque
Nationale by taking over the former’s questionable assets and slowly liquidating them to prevent
a failure and a fire sale.

22

Kryzanowski and Roberts (1993, 1999) have argued that beginning in 1923, there was an
implicit guarantee from the Canadian government of all deposits, largely by the Canadian
Bankers Association or the government arranging for mergers of failing institutions. In contrast,
Carr, Mathewson and Quigly (1995) claim that only solvent banks were merged and depositors
still suffered losses in failed banks. While this debate focuses on how to value bank assets
during an economic decline and how to interpret stock premia paid in mergers, there was a clear
shift in public expectations as reflected in the testimony of a former Minister of Finance to the
commission investigating the Home Bank’s failure: “Under no circumstances would I have
allowed a bank to fail during the period in question…If it had appeared to me that the bank was
not able to meet its public obligations, I should have taken steps to have it taken over by some
other bank or banks, or failing that, would have given it necessary assistance under the Finance
Act, 1914” (quoted in Kryzanowski and Roberts, 1993, p. 366).
The legislative response to the Home Bank, which did not wait for the decennial cycle of
Bank Act revision, was the 1924 Bank Act Amendment that created the office of Inspector
General, which the Select Standing Committee described as having the aim to “better protect the
interests of depositors and prevent similar occurrences in the future.” While depositors were
given no explicit guarantee, the inspector-general, an officer of the Ministry of Finance, was
empowered to carry out yearly examinations and could request the Canadian Bankers
Association appoint a curator if the bank appeared to be insolvent.
Colombia
During World War I, Colombia experienced a boom in its exports of coffee and bananas.
Hit by a temporary postwar slump, the boom revived in the years 1919-1920, with exports
doubling but imports increasing five-fold. The collapse in 1920-1921 caused a fiscal crisis for
the government and threatened many banks with failure.
As part of a general plan of economic reform to stabilize the economy and attract foreign
capital, The Colombia Congress invited an American mission, headed by Edwin Kemmerer,
professor at Princeton University, to visit the country and provide advice on how to reform the
banking and monetary system. Conducting missions in several Latin American countries,
Kemmerer advised the adoption of an improved system of American regulation and supervision.
Eight of Kemmerer’s ten recommendations were adopted, with Ley 45 of 1923 creating a single
supervisory authority, the Superintendencia Bancaria
In this new regime, entry was in principle free but subject to oversight by the
Superintendencia; and branching was permitted. Concerned about leverage, Kemmerer added a
capital ratio of 15 percent of liabilities. Banks had to submit five yearly call reports to the
Superintendencia and they were subject to twice yearly examinations The superintendent had
the authority to levy fines on banks that violated regulations, sue bank directors, and take
possession of an insolvent banks, deciding whether it should be rehabilitated or liquidated.
Kemmerer also set up a new central bank the Banco de la República, modelled on the
Federal Reserve System but where all banks were members. However, the agricultural elite was
disappointed by Kemmerer’s mandated limits on long-term lending. To meet their demands, an
agricultural mortgage bank, the Banco Agrícola Hipotecario was created in 1924. Half the
capital was provided by the central government and half by the public and local and state
governments. Subject to the Superintendencia’s oversight, this bank offered mortgage loans with
23

maturities of up to 20 years. In 1927, private shareholders were bought out and the bank was
nationalized, becoming an instrument for indirectly channeling credit to a special sector.
`
Having reformed its fiscal and financial systems, Colombia gained access to world
capital markets and experienced an extraordinary boom in the 1920s. Foreign capital flowed in
funding public and private ventures, and the banking system rapidly expanded. The reports of
the Superintendencia reveal a deep concern about risky loans that soon turned bad and were not
written off. By the late 1920s, the independent superintendent found himself in conflict with the
Banco de la República, whose swelling gold reserves had led it to expand its discounting to
member banks so that they could expand and the Banco Agrario Hipotecario (White, 1998).
Behind these events, there appears to have developed an implicit guarantee for depositors
that had not been manifest before 1923. With a central bank and supervisory agency working in
close cooperation, failing banks were rescued. With only 13 national and 5 foreign banks in
1929, the loss of even a single bank was perceived as a potential threat to stability. One notable
example was the failure in 1924 of the Banco Dugand of Barranquilla. When began losing
deposits, the Banco and Superintendencia engineered an assisted takeover by the Banco de
Colombia. This approach to closing an insolvent bank in a concentrated industry resembled the
late nineteenth century interventions of the Bank of England and the Banque de France and the
Banca d’Italia in 1907.
6. The Great Depression and After: Supervision under Financial Repression
By 1930, only two of the three central banks in this study---in the United States and Italy--had been given formal supervisory authority. The Great Depression and the Second World War
changed this picture: not only did the other central banks become bank regulators but controls on
international capital movements, introduced in the thirties and strengthened in the wartime,
resulted in the a “nationalization” of financial markets, enabling the state to intervene more
deeply in managing credit flows, resulting in a system characterized by financial repression.
Bank regulation was turned into tool for the management of credit flows, interest rates, and
international capital mobility.
The United Kingdom
The U.K.’s experience in World War I and the troubled interwar years paved the way for
greater intervention during World War II, when the government was anxious to contain inflation
and channel credit to war industries and imposed a broad program of controls and rationing that
continued after the war (Broadberry and Howlett, 2005). In addition to using controls to limit
inflation, the Bank of England became directly involved in industrial finance after World War II.
One vehicle was the Financial Corporation for Industry (FCI) and the Commercial Finance
Corporation (ICFC) whose objectives were to provide financing to companies that found it
difficult to raise external finance, with the Bank subscribing the largest share of their capital and
providing advances. (Capie, 2010).
After World War II, the Bank of England was tasked with enforcing the Treasury’s
interest rate targets and controls on bank loans. Taking office as the Chancellor of the
Exchequer in 1950, Hugh Gaitskell explained that the Bank of England should “give [banks]
direct instructions about the level of advances, with perhaps some guidance as to the particular
24

borrowers who should be cut,” subject to the stipulation “there should be no increase in the rate
at which the Government borrows short-term” (quoted in Wood, 2005).
Subordination of the Bank of England to the Treasury was formalized when it was
nationalized in 1946. Although the government intended to include details of bank regulation in
the nationalization bill this was successfully resisted by the Bank. Instead, of the “iron hand” of
the Treasury supervising the banks, the Bank used its “velvet glove,” relying on persuasion of
the small group of cartelized clearing banks that dominated British finance (Capie, 2010).
Consequently, the Bank felt no need to develop a supervisory organization within the bank itself
and eschewed economic and statistical analysis. Supervision depended more on the “Governor’s
eyebrows” than a set of formal rules or principles.
Furthermore, the 1946 Act did not give the Bank a mandate with specific objectives; its
tasks were implicitly understood. Basically the Treasury set policy and the Bank conducted the
day-to-day operation. Sayers (1958) summed this arrangement as “the fundamental business of a
central bank is to control the commercial banks in such a way as to support the monetary policy
directed by the state.” Capie (2010) describes banking supervision as “distinctly low key---to the
point of invisibility. There were no formal mechanisms of control, and neither was there any
statutory provision for oversight of the banking system.” The 1946 Act allowed the bank with
Treasury authorization, to give directions to banks but this power was not used and the bank
preferred to discuss problems and issue private warnings. In the Bank of England’s 1957
submission to the Radcliffe Committee, it stated that there was “no formal control over other
banks and no duty of inspection” (Capie, 2010).
Characterized as “stop-go,” British macroeconomic policy in the 1950s and 1960s
stimulated growth with budget stimuli and cheap money until an exchange rate crisis forced an
abrupt contraction. Key tools were credit controls, such as “hire-purchase” restrictions
introduced in 1952 whose terms were set by the Bank of England. By 1968, the Bank’s
authority may be seen in the complex of set of 10 interest rates and maturities that the clearing
banks agreed to for customers (Capie, 2010). These were largely eliminated in 1970 by the Act
for Competition and Credit Control (CCC), that aimed at promoting efficiency and competition.
Although there was no statutory obligation, Capie (2010) argues that the Bank took on
the responsibility for financial stability after the Second World War. The Bank closely
monitored the city, chiefly through the Principal of the Discount Office, but this became
increasingly difficult after CCC initiated a deregulation. The first postwar threat to financial
stability came from the secondary or “fringe” banking sector, which had grown up in the late
1950s and early 1960s by borrowing on wholesale money markets and lending primarily on real
estate . These banks were buoyed by the expansionary policies of 1971-1973 and the CCC’s
deregulation. When the economy slowed, the fringe banks found themselves facing large losses
and withdrawals. Responding to this collapse, the Bank of England provided temporary liquidity
with losses were shared out in successive lifeboats. Some banks went into liquidation, while
were reorganized. The total cost was estimated to be approximately £1.2 to £1.3 billion, with the
Bank of England absorbing 10 percent (Capie, 2010).
However, the informal discretion-based cum moral suasion approach to discipline
remained; and when there were proposals to bring the licensing and supervision of all deposittaking institutions under a comprehensive system, the Bank of England resisted. The Banking
Act 1979 bowed to the Bank and set up a two-tier structure of supervision for the recognized and
fringe institutions with prudential criteria that remained informal. This arrangement was soon
collapsed in the wake of the failure of another bank, Johnson Matthey, in 1984 (Capie, 2010).
25

France
Between October 1929 and September 1937, 670 banks failed, 276 were joint-stock
banks and the remainder partnerships. In these troubled years, there were banking crises in 1931
and 1934 when the Banque de France had to provide additional liquidity to the market. Most of
the failing institutions were small banks, though there were some important regional banks: the
Banque Adam in Boulogne, the Banque d’Alsance-Lorraine, the Banque Renauld in Nancy, and
the Banque Carpenay in Grenoble. One large bank, the Banque Nationale de Credit (BNC)
failed, but it was apparently the only bank that received assistance from the Banque de France
and the government (Lescure, 1995). Although details of this intervention are somewhat
obscure, it was provided with sufficient liquidity to survive and then was liquidated and
recapitalized as the Banque National pour le Commerce et l’Industrie. Thus, it resembled the
rescue of the Comptoir d’Escompte in 1889. The secondary literature indicates that mergers and
takeovers were often encouraged to prevent losses to depositors.
The depression in France, a period of sharp deflation, was a systemic shock to the
banking system, leading the government to implicitly become its guarantor, signified by the
state’s takeover of the Banque de France in 1936, effectively nationalizing it. Reflecting the
Popular Front’s philosophy of “republican corporatism” to ensure that decisions made were
representative of the nation’s economic and social interests, shareholders’ elected members on
the governing board were reduced to two in twenty, with the remainder appointed by either
various government agencies or professional associations. This approach to control was then
fully expanded under the Nazi-dominated Vichy regime (Monnet, 2012).
Formal supervision did not come from the creation of specific government institutions to
monitor, examine and discipline banks---an American-style model that had evolved from having
multiple banks of issue---but from a corporatist model, arising from the drive to reorganize the
banking industry and channel credit flows. Persisting until the last quarter of the twentieth
century, the state-directed banking system, allocating funds through financial repression, began
under the Vichy regime. Banks came under the supervision of the Comission Bancaire, created
by the Banking Act of 1941, to ensure that they complied with the rules imposed by the new
regime. To provide the occupying Germans with the means to buy war materiel, occupation
payments were imposed on France, paid for by money creation by the Banque de France.
Seeking to minimize the inflationary potential of this action, the government imposed wage,
price and interest rate controls and tried to absorb the monetary increase by massive bond sales.
To support this activity, banks’ bond portfolios swelled (Occhino, Oosterlinck and White, 2008).
Postwar French governments did not attempt to return to a market-based financial system
but took over and expanded the institutional architecture begun under Vichy. In 1945, the
Banque de France was formally nationalized and the Commission de Contrôle des Banques
(Commission Bancaire) was reorganized and expanded. Headed by the Governor of the Banque
and operating under its aegis, the Commission had four other members, the president of the
Financial Section of the Council of State, the head of the Treasury Department, a representative
of the Bankers’ Association, and a representative of the trade unions. To complete this system,
the largest commercial banks were nationalized in 1945.
For the nationalized banks the Comission Bancaire acted with the National Credit
Council, in place of shareholders, to set policy for the banks, wielding considerable discretionary
authority. Smaller banks were left in private hands but the state had authority over the allocation
of and terms of credit. State financial institutions were divided into five groups: the postal
26

savings system, savings banks (caisses d’épargnes), cooperative banks (caisses mutuelles), most
of them affiliated with the Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole, the banques populaires, and the
Banque française du commerce extérieur. These institutions had their collected funds allocated
almost exclusively by the state. The French State took the role of intermediary, with a complex
web of regulation governing commercial banks, insurance companies, finance companies and
brokerages to distribute loans to households and firms.
For the period 1945-1963, fiscal deficits were largely financed through the banking
system (Melitz, 1982). Issues of Treasury bonds were modest but state agencies dominated the
market and their issues were placed with financial institutions. The Treasury decided the level
and structure of interest rates, with the Caisse de Dépôts de Consignations ensuring that the rates
stay on target. As rates were kept low in real terms there was excess demand for new issues and
a queue for who will obtain funds beginning with the Treasury and ending with private firms.
State finance and banking were so intertwined that the solvency of the state and the
financial system were not separate questions. For at least three decades after 1945, the FSM in a
broad sense did not exist as it was assumed that capital controls and government direction would
guarantee stability. Financial repression in France left no clear lines of delegation of authority
over financial institutions and markets. Melitz’s 1982 description of the confused authority over
monetary policy is equally applicable to the complementary authority for financial stability:
Exactly who the monetary authorities are is somewhat of a question since there is
no tradition of central bank independence in the country, and the ministers of the
Economy and Finance…..clearly have a large hand in monetary policy. Yet the
weight of the Bank of France and the general power and prestige of the civil
service is such that the ministers do not rule monetary policy alone. Monetary
power may be said to be essentially divided between the Bank of France, these
ministers, and to some extent also, the Treasury and some of the high officials in
several of the satellite credit agencies in the sphere of the government.
The persistence of financial repression directing the flow of funds is striking. In 1960,
the Treasury-directed financial institutions collected 53.2 percent of funding and offered 45.6
percent of credits Although its funding sources fell to 38.0 percent by 1980, the state’s control
of credit reached 60.8 percent of all financing. By 1993, it still collected 27.5 percent of funds
and directed 48.1 percent of credits (Plihon, 1995). When inflation threatened, credit rationing
was reinforced by a program of encadrement du crédit that set individual ceilings on the growth
of credit for banks. First applied in 1958, it was repealed once inflation fell, then it was
reimposed in 1963-1965, 1968-1970, and finally in 1972-1987 (Monnet, 2014), The rigid
controls that had developed after 1945 began to slowly decline in response to three factors: the
fiscal difficulties of the state, the breakdown of the Bretton Woods System’s capital controls, and
European economic integration.
Italy
The slump in industrial output that began in 1930 and consequent sharp declines in
manufacturing and utility companies’ stock prices damaged the portfolios of the three largest
banks, leaving them illiquid and perhaps insolvent. When foreign deposits withdrawals
accelerated in 1931, swift and secret lending by the Banca d’Italia with the backing of the
27

government avoided a crisis like those of Germany and Austria, where universal bank-dominated
financial structures were similar to that of Italy. The government took de facto control of the
major banks and overhauled Italy’s banking system. Bailed-out banks were then supplied
liquidity deemed sufficient to operate as “ordinary” commercial banks (i.e limited to short term
borrowing and lending), and they were forbidden to hold equities of in non-financial companies.
The banks’ industrial interests were taken over by the state, which created special ad hoc
vehicles that led to the establishment in 1933 of the Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (IRI),
a state holding company that operated until the early 1990s.
As a result of the 1931 bailout, the three main banks fell under the indirect control of the
state, while the fourth largest bank (the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro) was directly controlled by
the government as were all long-term credit institutions. Government influence was exerted on
savings banks, whose boards were appointed by local authorities and heads by the central
government, which also owned the Cassa Depositi e Prestiti that received vast inflows of postal
savings to invest in public works and state bonds. Only a handful of small private banks and the
tightly regulated local cooperative banks were not under the central government’s influence.
Firmly in control, the fascist government revised the regulatory and supervisory system
in the Bank Act of 1936, which, amended in 1947, remained the defining bank law until 1993.
By minutely regulating and repressing the financial sector the law sought to obtain financial
stability. It ensured a strict separation between long and short-term credit and between
investment and credit institutions. Treasury was given broad regulatory and supervisory powers
over the financial system, which, in turn, delegated supervision to the Banca d’Italia. The Bank
Act of 1936 set up an Inspectorate for the Safeguarding of Savings and for Credit Activity,
reporting to a committee of ministers, headed by the Prime Minister. This inspectorate was
given regulatory and supervisory authority over the banking system. Given explicit tasks to
prevent crises and allocation credit, the Inspectorate was headed by the Governor of the Banca
d’Italia and it never operated separately from central bank. (Guarino, Toniolo, Gigliobianco and
Santonocito, 1993).
United States
During the Great Depression and its aftermath, the FSM changed dramatically in the
United States, primarily because the banking panics of 1930, early 1931, late 1931 and most
importantly 1933 eliminated the belief of most legislators and much of the public that the
banking system was inherently stable and the means of payment could be protected by a
combination of guarantees for currency and market incentives for deposits. The panics drove a
vast shrinkage of deposits that was only halted on March 5, 1933 by the President’s declaration
of a bank holiday. What followed was the implicit assumption of responsibility for the solvency
of all reopened banks by the government. Instead of guaranteeing a well-defined financial
instrument—all currency—the government guaranteed the banks.
This shift was accomplished by the means the government chose to reopen the banks. On
March 9, 1933, Congress passed the Emergency Banking Act of 1933, giving the Treasury, the
Fed and the OCC extraordinary discretionary authority to reopen or close banks. Silber (2009)
commented that this act, four days after the declaration of a bank holiday “combined with the
Federal Reserve’s commitment to supply unlimited amounts of currency to reopened banks,
created de facto 100 percent deposit insurance.” In a prelude to legislation that would follow
later, the act gave the president the power to regulate all banking functions and transactions in
28

foreign exchange, enabled the OCC to take control of any bank with impaired assets and appoint
a conservator, let the Secretary of the Treasury provide capital to any bank via the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation or make direct loans, and the Fed the power to issue
emergency currency not backed by gold. Supervision was expanded and with vast discretion
delegated to the regulators.
A sequential opening of banks began, with teams of examiners and auditors visiting
closed banks (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963). Those that were judged to be clearly solvent were
immediately re-opened, those whose position was unclear required further examination and those
determined to be insolvent were liquidated. In essence, this was first “stress test” conducted by
the government through all the supervisory agencies. Although we do not know, how the
examiners carried out this operation, they probably erred on the side of caution and only opened
banks considered clearly solvent. These actions appear to have sufficed to give the public an
implicit guarantee for their deposits, and leading to the re-depositing of much of the currency
that had fled the banks.
The New Deal in the Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935, as well as numerous policy
changes instituted by bank supervisors, ended an era of competition. Entry was now subject to
regulatory discretion, and branching barriers reaffirmed; protecting existing banks. Regulation Q
banned interest on demand deposits and put ceilings on savings and time deposits rates.
Commercial banks’ range of products was limited, most notably by the Glass-Steagall Act that
split commercial and investment banking. Senator Carter Glass, a true believer in the real bills
doctrine and head of the Senate banking committee, insisted that separation of commercial and
investment banking be included in the 1933 law and obtained it in exchange for establishing the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) that Representative Henry Steagall, chairman of
the House Banking and Currency Committee, had demanded at the behest of small bank lobby
(Calomiris and White, 1994).
Deposit insurance was initially conceived of as protecting only small accounts, but was
slowly expanded to cover most deposits in commercial banks over the next three decades, thanks
to lobbying within the banking industry (White, 1997). What had been offered as a mutual
guarantee system, paid for by bank premia; gradually came to look like universal deposit
insurance, with an implicit government guarantee. This shift enlarged the FSM, making the
regulatory agencies and ultimately the taxpayer guarantors of bank deposits. It appeared to be a
costless shift to the public, as the bank failures ceased. Yet, this development was deceptive
because the massive banking collapse of the early 1930s had eliminated all weak institutions.
Furthermore, the scramble for liquidity during the banking panics had led banks to replace loans
with cash and bonds. The 1930s collapse of the capital markets and wartime efforts led
regulators to encourage banks to make more long-term loans, increasing the maturity mismatch.
To meet the broadened FSM, the practice of bank supervision was transformed. Before
the collapse, bank examiners followed a general rules-based approach, where they priced a
bank’s marketable assets at market prices, and promptly closed banks that they deemed to be
insolvent. The deflation and volatility of assets prices placed would have led to even larger bank
closures if these practices were followed. Instead, market discipline was abandoned and
supervisory discretion replaced mark-to-market rules (White, 2013). Assets were valued at what
they would fetch in normal times, not the current crisis; forbearance to close a currently insolvent
institution became a supervisory option. These actions were further justified in the name of
protecting bank depositors---acknowledging the expansion of the FSM. The establishment of

29

the FDIC created a third federal supervisory agency. With its explicit mandate to insure banks,
the FDIC sought to restrain banks from taking risks that would draw on its guarantee fund.
During World War II, bank credit was diverted to purchase government bonds, and their
portfolios were transformed, with bonds’ share of total assets exceeding the share for loans
(White, 1992). During the war, the Federal Reserve kept yields under a very low ceiling to
ensure a cheap source of funds for the government, but this meant that after the war, interest
rates would have to rise when wartime controls were lift. Considering the size of banks’ U.S.
bond holdings, the losses could have been considerable, threatening bank solvency. Only in
1951, were interest rates permitted to rise after the negotiation of the Treasury-Fed Accord.
By the 1960s, the FSM had been transformed---in the mind of the public and of
Congress—from protecting a narrowly defined means of payment to the prevention of bank
failures. This change can be seen in the oversight of the federal agencies by Congress. Very few
banks had failed during the 1950s and this became the expected norm. In 1964, when a tiny
Texas bank with $3.7 million in assets failed, the Comptroller of the Currency was summoned to
Congress for questioning. When two more banks failed in 1965, the House Banking and
Currency Committee discussed whether the OCC ought to be dissolved, with the task of
supervising all federal insured banks being transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury (White,
1992). The FSM mandate had been expanded, with inflated expectations for supervision, and the
measurement of supervisory agencies’ success became “zero tolerance” for bank failures, which
was facilitated by financial repression.
Canada
Even though Canada suffered a monetary contraction approximately equal to that in the
United States in the 1930s (Bordo, 1986), economists south of the border (Friedman and
Schwartz, 1963; Bernanke, 1983) have argued that the absence of large bank failures and
banking panics in Canada during was due to the strength of the large diversified Canadian banks.
However, some research indicates that the solvency of the Canadian banking system was
compromised but government intervention prevented a U.S.-style disaster. Kryzanowski and
Roberts (1993) find that for the period 1929-1940, nine of the ten Canadian banks had several
insolvent years.13 None of these banks were closed, indicating forbearance. Notably, in October
1931, Orders-in-Council mandated that banks value securities at their book value or market value
as of August 31, in spite of GAAP accounting rules. If there was not implicit deposit insurance
in the 1920s, it was certainly adopted early in the Great Depression.
The 1933 Royal Commission began the overhaul of the banking system. In an
Addendum to the 1933 Royal Commission’s Report, Sir Thomas White recognized deposits as a
“medium of exchange,” attributing their fluctuation to decisions of banks to make loans and
“confidence or lack of confidence, in the financial stability of the nation.” Created in 1935, the
Bank of Canada (Bordo and Redish,1987) began to accumulate supervisory authority and
became ultimately the sole bank of issue. The Bank obtained some of the Minister of Finance’s
supervisory authority, gaining the power to require inspections of chartered banks first upon
demand, then on a regular basis in 1936. In addition, the Bank received the monthly reports that
were sent to the Minister who took over the power to appoint a curator for suspended banks from
the Canadian Bankers Association.
13

For the debate on this issue, see Carr, Mathewson, and Quigley (1995) and Kryzonowski and Roberts (1999).

30

Buying government debt, the Bank of Canada played an important role in financing
Canada's war effort during World War II. After the war, the Bank of Canada was conscripted to
channel the flow of credit. An Act of Parliament in 1944 established a subsidiary, the Industrial
Development Bank (IDB) to stimulate investment in Canadian businesses, with the Governor of
the Bank as its CEO. Its early mission was to assist small industrial enterprises to convert from
military production to peace-time operations. Its role was expanded in 1952 to offer financing
and advice to companies in the commercial airlines industry and eventually all industries across
Canada. In 1975, the IDB was renamed the Federal Business Development Bank, and began to
provide venture capital.
By the 1960s, the Bank of Canada was not viewed as an independent institution by the
government. After conflict with the prime minister over lowering interest rates, the Governor of
the Bank resigned, leading to a Royal Commission on Banking and Finance. Its report
recommended reduced the financial repression and greater regulation of the near-banks that had
been competing with the commercial banks. Although no commercial banks failed, there were
numerous failures of trust, mortgage and savings companies with losses to their customers.
Thus, when the Bank Act of 1967 created the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC), it
covered banks and these new institutions. Originally, insurance was limited to $20,000 per
account; this was raised to $60,000 in 1983 and then $100,000 for each eligible deposit account
to per depositor in 2005. The FSM was thus expanded to include financial institutions that had
slipped around the regulations that constrained commercial banks and cover most deposits.
Colombia
The collapse of export prices and the termination of foreign lending drove the Colombian
economy into a deep recession in 1929. To remain on the gold standard, the Banco de la
República kept interest rates high but did not restrict access to its lending facility. By providing
massive liquidity to the banks, the central bank prevented a banking collapse and the contraction
of financial intermediation was orderly, although like Canada, numerous branches were closed.
The support of the government and the central bank gave the public assurance that their deposits
were protected.
Following Britain, Colombia abandoned the gold standard in 1931, permitting the central
bank to cut interest rates and increase credits to the government. While the resulting reflation
eased conditions somewhat, banks found their shrunken portfolios filled with mortgages whose
payments were in arrears or in default. Although the exact condition of the banking industry has
not been accurately assessed, the Superintendencia may have exercise forbearance to prevent the
closure of troubled banks. To ease the condition of debtors, new legislation in 1932 allowed
them to repay their loans in cash or depreciated bonds. To offset the losses to the banks, the
government promised to buy up to 25 percent of the bonds that banks received, writing off the
rest of the bad loans.
Although the banking system had been cleansed of bad loans, it was weakened. When
the economy began to recover, the banks were unwilling to expand credit, leading to intense
criticism from the public and the government. The attempt by Kemmerer to keep banks limited
to lending on “real bills” and the shock of the depression ensured that banks shied away from
longer term credits. The Superintendencia that had been a bastion of the liberal regime shifted to
promote direct intervention in the financial system.
31

Cut off from credit and buffeted by the fall in coffee prices, the coffee growers induced
the government to create the Caja de Crédito Agrario in 1931, with the government providing a
quarter of the capital for it, to provide loans up to two years. Supervised by the
Superintendencia, it drew most of its capital from the federal government. In 1932, its
operations were expanded to include five year industrial loans, and it was rechristened the Caja
de Crédito Agrario, Industrial y Minero. The reports of the Superintendencia praised this new
bank for expanded credit faster than all the other banks combined. The Superintendencia that
had been a bastion of the liberal regime shifted to promote direct intervention in the financial
system. In 1932, a new mortgage bank, the Banco Central Hipotecario was founded on a similar
model; in 1939 the Institute de Crédito Territorial was organized to make loans for low cost
housing for the poor; and to promote industrial development, the Institute de Fomento Industrial
was created in 1940. To provide more resources to these quasi-governmental banks, a postal
savings system was established in 1937.
The increasing role of the government to redirect credit gained a further boost in World
War II when the demand for Colombia’s exports produced a new boom, threatening another
round of inflation. To soak up savings, the government issued national defense bonds, requiring
forced subscriptions. Viewing the market as unable to allocate resources, the superintendent
outlined a policy with three goals: (1) credit was to be democratized with a banking office
established in each town, (2) the government would direct loans, and (3) interest rates would be
controlled, with the lowest rates for the sectors that the government gave top priority. Given the
influx of wartime dollars, leading to a monetary expansion the commercial banks also expanded
under the government’s aegis, focusing on import-substituting industrialization.
In the new post-World War II environment, Colombia’s financial institutions were
reshaped to foster the government’s vision of growth. Although it took until 1973 for the Banco
de la República to be nationalized, the Treasury began to dominate the bank beginning in 1931
when the Treasury Minister Ministro de la Hacienda y Crédito Público was madbecame member
of the governing board. With its resources bolstered by its acquisition of the Stabilization Fund,
the central bank began to grant development credits in the 1950s. Financing from the central
bank and other banks supported import-substituting industrialization backed by tariffs and a
system of licensing imports. Commercial banks were drafted into this system by laws focusing
their investment.
Supervision was largely focused on increasingly complex regulations to channel credit
and bank failures were administered to ensure flows of funds were not endangered. When the
large Banco Popular, a bank mandated to have 55 percent of its loans in small industry, failed the
Treasury decided to bail it out and recapitalize it, guaranteeing its deposits. To provide funding
for the huge loss all government ministries were forced to reduce their spending for the year by 7
percent. However, when two small commercial banks failed in 1966 and 1967, they were not
accorded the same consideration. They were liquidated, and although the depositors were paid in
full, they had a long wait to receive payment.
7. Deregulation and the Globalization of Banking
Beginning in 1959, when European currencies became convertible for current account
transactions, there was a steady growth of the Eurodollar market that contributed to the
relaxation of controls on international capital and ultimately, to the re-internationalization of
32

financial markets. After the collapse of Bretton Woods, floating exchange rates, inflation, and
international capital flows helped to undermine national systems of financial repression resulting
in market-driven financial systems (Padoa-Schioppa amd Saccomanni 1994). Mastering
macroeconomic management in this new environment enhanced central banks’ visibility and
respect, yielding them greater independence from national treasuries. (Borio and Toniolo, 2008).
The United Kingdom
The deregulatory impulse, beginning with the 1970 act moved the U.K. in the direction of
a market-driven financial system. Nevertheless, British financial institutions continued to lag
behind foreign competitors and London appeared to have lost its place as a center of world
finance. In a major reform, the “Big Bang” of 1986, abolished fixed commissions and the
distinctions between stock jobbers and stock brokers, and moved the London Stock Exchange to
electronic, screen-based trading. Dismantling its system of financial repression, London
experienced spectacular growth as a minimally regulated financial center.
Beyond the Bank of England’s largely informal oversight, supervision was conducted
largely by self-regulating industry groups overseen by the Financial Intermediaries, Managers
and Brokers Regulatory Association (FIMBRA) which was recognized as a self-regulatory
organization. Yet, the government retained oversight by the creation of an independent
governmental supervisory authority in 1985, the Securities and Investments Board, to which the
Chancellor of the Exchequer delegated some statutory regulatory powers. However, a series of
scandals in the 1990s and the collapse of Barings Bank in 1995 ended the self-regulatory
approach, terminating recognition of FIMBRA; and the Securities and Investments Board
expanded its operations. Its name was changed to the Financial Services Authority (FSA) in
1997, gaining additional powers under the Financial Services and Markets Act of 2000. It
operated with considerable autonomy, drawing its funding from fees and fines and governed by a
management that was selected by the Treasury. The scope of the FSA was broad, covering most
aspects of universal banking. It was charged with maintaining confidence in the financial
system, promoting financial stability, consumer protection and a reduction in financial crime. It
followed a principles-based rather than a rules-based regulation.
Failing to anticipate the spectacular collapse of Northern Rock in 2008, the FSA was
pilloried for its weak enforcement and abolished in 2012. In its place, the Prudential Regulation
Authority was set up within the Bank of England, taking responsibility for financial stability and
supervision of banks, building societies, credit unions, insurers and investment companies. The
remaining financial services, including asset managers and financial advisors were placed under
the supervision of the Financial Conduct Authority, outside of the Bank of England.
France
Beginning in the 1960s, the French state began to reduce its role as financial intermediary
and regulator, increasing the independence of state enterprises and banks, while trying to balance
its budget. Reforms gave banks and other institutions more control over their interest rates and
balance sheets, yet the state retained wide-ranging powers of regulation and continued to direct
substantial flows of credit.

33

Financial problems arising from the oil price shock of 1974 caused the state to take
increased control of the banking sector. In an effort to revive the French economy and stabilize
exchange rates in the late 1970s, the government devised a system of bank loan subsidies to spur
investment and exports. To manage inflation, the encadrement du crédit was reintroduced in
1972, strengthening the government’s authority to ration credit and protect bank financing
(Bertrand et.al., 2007). Melitz (1982) commented, “In fact, the commercial banks are so secure
in the current arrangements that they do not hold any capital market assets at all for their
protection.”14
Integration into the European Union posed a challenge for the repressed French financial
system. With the formation of the European Monetary System (EMS) in 1979, the slow growing
French economy created a problem for the franc that was supposed to remain within a tight band
set by the EMS. When the franc weakened in early 1981, the government raised the intervention
rate above 20 percent but kept bond rates lower. Interest rates on term deposits jumped and
banks then saw profits collapse in a funding squeeze (Melitz, 1982). The election of a Socialist
government in 1981 led to the nationalization of all domestic commercial banks with deposits
above one billion francs in 1982. Nationalization spelled the temporary end to liberalization and
a continuation of the encadrement du credit. The new Socialist government began an
expansionary policy, strengthened by capital controls. Pressure was now put on the banking
sector to support weak or failing industries, with new loan schemes to preserve jobs and firms.
Interest rates ceased to allocate capital and the banks began to accumulate nonperforming loans.
The failure of this effort led to a major policy reversal. The encadrement du credit was
abolished and subsidized loans were phased out. Monetary policy switched to conventional
central bank methods of setting legal reserve requirements and interest rates. Capital controls
were fully eliminated by 1991. Between 1986 and 1990 10 percent of the banks with 20 percent
of deposits were privatized. A second wave of privatizations, de-nationalizing the major banks
and state enterprises, occurred in 1993. These reforms finally shifted the French financial sector
towards a market based system, reducing the role of the Treasury’s network. The Act of 1941
was finally repealed in 1984, and the Commission Bancaire was reorganized as an administrative
body in the Banque de France to examine, monitor and sanction banks with the Banque
providing staff and resources (Banque de France, December 2004).
Although the emerging privatized French banks gained control over their balance sheets,
they remained subject to political influence, notably Crédit Lyonnais suffering huge losses
beginning in 1991. The bank was bailed out in 1994 with the injection of new capital and the
removal of bad loans from its balance sheet to a bad bank, where losses were absorbed by the
Treasury (The Economist, April 7, 1994). Crédit Lyonnais was fully privatized in 1999, but
problems with assets in the good bank resurfaced in 2001. In 2003, it was bought by Crédit
Agricole, which reorganized the bank.
The approach of monetary union and the formation of the European Central Bank (ECB)
began to transform the Banque de France and the system of regulation and supervision.
Legislation in 1993 reformed its statutes, giving the Banque de France policy independence. In
1999, the Banque became a part of the European System of Central Banks, Eurosystème
whereby it implemented the monetary policy decisions adopted by the ECB’s Board of
Governors. Regulation and supervision remained in French hands, with increased authority over
a broad range of institutions granted in 1999. The Comité de Réglementation Bancaire et
Financière was charged with the general regulation for all credit institutions, while the
14

Melitz (1982) noted that official regulations do not permit banks to hold any open position in foreign currencies.

34

Commission Bancaire handled supervision. Although some limited protection for depositors had
existed before, through the Association Française des Banques, a formal government institution
for deposit insurance arrived with the advent of monetary union.
In the wake of the financial crisis of 2008, the French Prudential Supervisory Authority
(Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel (ACP) was organized in 2010 as an independent administrative
authority under the auspices of the Banque de France, merging the Banking Commission, the
Mutual Insurance Supervisory Authority (ACAM) and the Credit Institutions and Investment
Firms Committee (CECEI). The ACP is not a legal entity and its President is the Governor of
the Banque de France; however it has financial independence, receiving funds from contributions
of regulated institutions. It cannot issue regulations but it has the power to monitor and issue
sanctions. Supervision of financial markets remains separate under the Autorité des Marchés
Financiers.
Italy
After World War II, the Bank Act of 1936 was modestly revised in 1947. The
Inspectorate was suppressed and all its supervisory powers given directly to the Bank of Italy.
No major changes were introduced as far as regulation and supervision were concerned. There
were no substantial changes in the regulatory and supervisory architecture until the early 1990s.
What did change were the priorities and objectives of the regulator, the Bank of Italy, reflecting
changes in government policy and the international environment. For the nearly fifty years after
the Bank Act of 1946, the elaborate post-war credit-policy tools offered an institutional and
administrative framework to implement the government’s industrial policies via credit allocation
(Hogdman 1973, Forsyth 1997).
The underlying the rationale for these “industrial policies” was that the market had failed
to efficiently allocate resources over the long run. It was more or less explicitly assumed that
governments possessed more reliable information about the longer term growth prospects. In
France, such policy was conducted within the framework of a formal economic plan (Monnet
2012). In Italy the main tool used to direct credit for reconstruction, industrialization, or the
reduction of geographic income disparities was the so called credito agevolato (subsidized subprime credit) whereby banks were directed to provide credit below market rates to a number of
“strategic” recipients. The state would then pay credit institutions the difference between market
and subsidized interest rates. An inter-ministerial committee was in charge of deciding credit
allocation priorities. To facilitate this allocation after the passage of the Bank Act of 1947, there
was a “fast-growing secondary legislation, mainly rules set by the Bank of Italy. The vast
panoply of instruments at the Bank of Italy’s disposal included: authorization of loans;
authorization to issue bonds; caps on interest rates; reserve requirements; rules on the
composition of the banks’ bond portfolios. Moral suasion was also largely used” (Barbiellini,
Gigliobianco, Giordano 2913). At the same time, the central bank made sure that the banks, most
of which remained under the direct or indirect control of the state, maintained a prudent stance in
credit creation, thereby promoting the stability of the system. The Bank of Italy, therefore, had to
walk a tight rope between guarding its independence as prudential regulator and facilitating the
implementation of the government’s credit policy directives (Cotula, 2000).
This dual mandate was facilitated by the Bretton Woods international monetary regime,
which imposed controls on short term capital movements, insulating Italian and other continental
banks (Hodgman 1973) from external shocks. By the 1980s, the postwar Italian regulatory and
35

supervisory regime began to lose its underpinnings, as the Bank of Italy gained more
independence in monetary policymaking, and looser controls on capital movements
progressively undermined government-led credit allocation. Increased competition in the
financial sector also arose from the integration of market in the emerging European Union:
regulatory changes were introduced to abide by European directives and the so-called Basel soft
laws.
The Italian banking system, sometimes defined as “petrified forest”, was increasingly
unable to serve the credit needs of an ever more market-oriented economy. Legislative
recognition of this untenable position was finally recognized in a major legislative overhaul 1993
that took into account the new rules under the European Union and rapid globalization of
financial markets. The Bank Act of 1993 set in motion a process of privatization and mergers for
both state-owned banks and savings institutions that picked up speed during the decade.
The United States
Erosion of the New Deal’s Banking regime was slow, giving the appearance of a durable
financial stability. By protecting the established financial intermediaries from competition by
entry, line of business, merger and branching, and placing a ceiling on interest rates. As inflation
rose beginning in the late 1960s and peaking at the end of the 1970s, it wreaked havoc on the
New Deal regime. Attempting to protect the regulated institutions and channel flows of credit,
particularly to the housing industry, Congress first strengthened regulations and then unevenly
deregulated. The result was a complete collapse of the Savings and Loan industry and a partial
collapse of the banking industry in the late 1970s and early 1980s. (White, 2000). While banks,
savings and loans, failed in large number depositors were protected by the FDIC. However, the
FSM was significantly widened in 1984 with the failure of Continental Illinois of Chicago, the
sixth largest bank in the U.S.—which was deemed “too big to fail.” Having purchased massive
oil loans from an Oklahoma bank that also failed, Continental was exposed as much of its
funding was not FDIC-insured---and a run began. The Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and the OCC
stepped in to quell the run, with the FDIC purchasing the bank’s problem loans, and assuming its
debts, with all creditors given protection This new FSM doctrine was used to bail out failing
banks in Texas and the Northeast in the latter half of the 1980s
The elimination of many high risk banks and the tightening of regulatory standards
virtually eliminated all bank failures by the mid-1990s. At the same time, the collapse of the
financial intermediaries provoked a dismantling of much of the New Deal regulatory regime.
To ensure that banking services did not vanish in the wake of numerous failures, state and the
federal government eased the long-standing rules on branching, culminating in the granting in
1997 of full nationwide branching. The barriers to universal banking also fell; and in 1999 the
Gramm-Leach Bliley Act permitted holding companies to combine commercial banking,
investment banking and insurance.
Although capital requirements had been raised in 1981, a major change in how federal
supervisors approached the implementation was made in 1991 with the passage of the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act. Before this act, supervisors had followed the
precedent set during the Great Depression and exercised considerable discretion in the
examination of banks and during the last three decades considerable forbearance in deciding
whether to close a bank or keep it in operation in the hopes that it would recover. The
experience of the banking debacle of the 1980s led Congress to shift to a rules-based policy with
36

the 1991 Act. A clear set of rules was created specifying exact remedies that were to be
undertaken when certain capital ratios fell below certain levels, leaving supervisors with much
less discretion in the hope that a repeat of the large losses of the 1980s could be avoided.
By the turn of the century, the absence of bank failures gave the impression that the new
regulatory and supervisory strictures, coupled with the formation of larger more diversified
banks, had done their job. What was unexpected by most observers was how the change in the
supervisory regime would contribute to the next crisis in 2008. Given a rules-based system that,
by necessity, depended on accounting definitions, banks would conform and supervisors would
be able to demonstrate that it worked. When a bank was found to be deficient in some capital
measure, it was forced to meet the rules. Formal compliance was met, but banks conducted a
growing off-balance sheet business, beyond the rules of 1991, embodying higher risks and higher
returns to enterprising management. Furthermore, the old problems of “competition in laxity”
among the multiplicity of federal and state regulators allowed some bankers they pursue
“regulatory arbitrage” and find the weakest set of regulatory constraints. Finally, there had been
no change deposit insurance or the doctrine of too-big-to-fail that encouraged moral hazard.
Canada
Given the system of financial repression, new competition for Canadian banks sprung up
on the fringe with the trust and mortgage companies. These fast-growing intermediaries were
outside of the supervisory safety net. Although two of these institutions, the Commonwealth
Trust Company and the Security Trust Company had failed in 1970 and 1972, there was no
change in the supervisory regime. However, as Canada gradually open up to international
markets and deregulated its repressed financial system, the sharp recessions of the early 1980s
caused 22 trust and mortgage companies to fail between 1980 and 1987.
In response, the Estey Commission conducted an enquiry into these failures, highlighting
the need to ensure a sound approach to handling the risks associated with the financial
marketplace. In 1987, acting on the commission’s recommendations, Parliament passed the
Financial Institutions and Deposit Insurance Amendment Act and the Office of the
Superintendent of Financial Institutions Act. This legislation created a deposit insurance fund
and joined the Department of Insurance and the Office of the Inspector General of Banks to form
the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI), which was given the powers to
supervise and regulate all federally regulated financial institutions, providing a more
comprehensive approach to supervision. Yet, a new wave of trust and mortgage company
failures occurred in the early 1990s, prompting a new act, the 1996 Bill C-15, which clarified
OSFI's prime responsibilities to minimize losses to depositors and shareholders, and to contribute
to public confidence in the Canadian financial system. While the OSFI was not given a mandate
specifically to prevent failures; it was directed to promote sound business practices to reduce the
risk that financial institutions will fail. The mandate stressed the importance of early intervention
to achieve OSFI's objectives.
Colombia
The boom years for Colombia ended with the shutdown of international capital markets
in the wake of the Mexican debt crisis of 1982. Economic conditions led to a sharp deterioration
in the portfolios of most financial intermediaries that had rapidly expanded during the 1970s.
37

The problem, as in other countries, was that rising inflation was frustrating the government’s
efforts to direct credit, even as it devised new schemes to channel credit, notably the National
Development Plan of 1971. The regulation of interest rates was now the key instrument in
development strategy, but the complicated interest rate structure could not guarantee that
resources would be allocated to meet targeted goals. New financial intermediaries appeared to
compete with those closely controlled by the government. To bring these institutions under
government oversight, the Superintendencia Bancaria expanded its operations but strained under
the increasingly complex government regulations and limited resources.
A crisis erupted in 1982 when a number of financial institutions tied to the Grupo
Colombia, appeared on the brink of collapse. When depositors began to flee, the
Superintendencia took control of the bank. When faced with the insolvency of the Banco del
Estado, the government decreed a state of economic emergency on October 8, 1982 and
authorized the government to nationalize failing financial institutions, replacing their
management and adding to their capital with credits from the Banco de la República. Over the
next three years, these powers were increased to handle the massive bad loans in bank portfolios.
In 1985, a deposit insurance fund, the Fondo de Garantías de Instituciones Financieras,
was created. Although all banks had to subscribe to the fund, it was supplied with resources
from a new windfall in coffee revenues. Instead of closing banks, the Fondo nationalized them
by buying their assets for one centavo and replace their capital. As the banks slowly recovered
under government control, the government dismantled the system of financial repression in favor
of a liberalized banking system. The Ley 45 of 1990 gave banks a wide range of powers, along
the lines of universal banking. The banking sector was opened to foreign competition with
Venezuelan banks purchasing many nationalized banks, followed by American, Spanish, Dutch,
and German banks. Colombia banks responded with a wave of mergers. At the same time the
Superintendencia revised its operations, bringing its approach to supervision more in line with
the international norms (White, 1998).
8. The Internationalization of Bank Regulation
After 1971, central bank cooperation in macroeconomic and monetary issues lost the role
it played in upholding the stability of the Bretton Woods system and followed ad hoc, divergent,
paths at regional level beginning in the 1970s. At the same time, after two decades of financial
stability, bank failures and financial crises reappeared, bringing regulation and supervision back
to the fore of the central banks’ agenda: the focus of central bank cooperation shifted from
monetary to financial stability, as capital mobility increased the risk of international contagion of
banking crises. This new problem highlighted the inherent tension between the need to find a
common international ground on prudential regulation, to avoid a race to the bottom in
regulatory competition and the fact that legislation remained in the hands of national states.
Over the years, tentative solutions consisted in attempts at to develop a system of internationally
accepted “soft laws” to be “suggested” for adoption by individual states. Central banks became
the main players in this process due to their expertise in a field that most politicians found
esoteric and due to the strong links that had been developed among governors over the previous
decades (Borio and Toniolo 2008).

38

The Basel Committee on Bank Supervision (BCSC)
From the late 1950s onward a market emerged in Europe for short-term deposits and
credits denominated in a currency different from that of the country in which the deposit-taking
and credit-giving bank was located (Schenk 1998; Battilossi, 2000 and Toniolo, 2005). Since
most deposits were denominated in dollars, the term Eurodollars was created. At first central
bankers took a benign neglect attitude with respect to the Eurodollar market. In a 1967 meeting
of central bank experts, it was declared that “its undesirable side effects could be readily checked
by ad hoc measures given the sophistication reached by central bank policies both in the field of
domestic cooperation and in domestic matters” (quoted in Toniolo 2005, p. 461). By the end of
the 1960s, however, the Euro-currency market had reached such proportions that central banks
began to intervene in order to control its effects on domestic monetary aggregates.
In 1973-74, however, two events began to focus the attention of central banks on the
unintended effects of capital market liberalization on financial stability. The first was the oil
crisis of 1973, which raised the question about “the ability of the international banking system to
recycle the flow of funds from oil producers (creditors) to oil importers (debtors). The second
was the collapse of Bankhaus Herstatt in June 1974” (Goodhart 2011, p. 11). The two events
raised the issues of the international banking system’s efficiency and stability at a time when it
was required to perform new crucial functions.
After several decades of relative financial autarky, central bankers and market
participants alike faced the difficult process of learning how to operate in a liberalized and more
competitive environment and how to price risk. According to Goodhart (2011, p. 32 ff) the
Herstatt crisis acted as a catalyst for revising risk assessment. The Economist (3 August 1974)
even wondered about a “World banking crisis?” and worried about increasing risk premia
particularly for smaller banks and banks from weaker countries. These events led central
bankers’ to formally establish the Group de Contact as the Basel Committee for Bank
Supervision (BCBS) (Goodhart, 2011).
The creation of the BCBS, which first met in Basel in February 1975, was a landmark
episode in the history of bank regulation, making it a key item in the agenda of central bank
cooperation. The BCBS included the G-10 governors and Switzerland, with Luxembourg
holding a special seat. Membership included officials from the bank supervisory agencies if they
were not part of the central bank. The Committee met for two days three or four times a year at
the Bank for International Settlement in Basel, which provided support, and the first three BCSB
chief secretaries, came from the BIS staff (Goodhart 2011, p. 60).
The members of the BCBS regarded themselves as advisors to the central bank governors
who had the responsibility of lobbying their domestic constituencies in order to obtain
supporting legislation passed by national parliaments. In practice, however, each delegate came
to the negotiating table aware of the interests involved and the possible room for maneuver in his
or her country. As described by Kapstein (2008), international cooperation within the BCBS can
be seen as “two-level game” diplomacy à la Putnam (1988) where negotiators must strike deals
not only with each other but also with their domestic policy makers, which in their turn must
keep into account the relevant interests involved. Given the large number of countries involved,
some of them with more than one regulatory agency, the domestic interests concerned, and each
country’s idiosyncratic law-making process, one may wonder how the BCSC came to any
cooperative result at all, let alone to the significant ones reached over two decades, up to the
Basel II agreement. Two factors are likely to have contributed to this result. The first is that not
39

all the international players were of equal importance. The banking systems of the United States,
and the United Kingdom were larger and more global; and when these two countries acted in
concert, they could exercise a leadership role to manage the international part of the two-level
game. The second factor for the success of the BSCS is to be found in the highly technical nature
of the discussion and the familiarity of the committee members both with each other and with the
matters at hand. Over time, BSCS members got to know each other well, both personally and in
terms of their domestic concerns, making it easier to reach common resolutions. Even so, given
the enormous macroeconomic, political and institutional challenges to cooperation, the results
achieved in the 1970s and 1980s “took many observers by surprise” (Kapstein 2008, p. 126)
From the Concordat to Basel I
At its first meeting in February 1975, the BCBS selected four topics for future study and
consideration: (i) the relation between banks and foreign exchange brokers, (ii) the responsibility
for supervision of banks’ overseas branches, subsidiaries and joint ventures, (iii) the support and
rescue operations, and (iv) the definition of capital and its role (Goodhart 2011, p. 96-7). In the
following years, the issue of cross border supervision and balance sheet consolidation, came to
the fore, leading to the so-called Concordat, the first milestone in regulatory cooperation.
In the late 1970s the BCBS worked on improving the rules for the supervision of crossborder banks. These rules were eventually merged into a single code under the name of
Concordat. According to Goodhart (2011, p. 102), “the (Concordat) title first surfaces in the
archives of the BCBS in late 1979…it was coined …to indicate a set of understandings between
sovereign parties, but without being based on a common legal authority or being legally
binding”. This framework would later be known as “soft law”.
The crisis of Banco Ambrosiano in 1982 and so-called “Bank of Credit and Commerce
International (BCCI) affair” in 1991 led to discussions within the BSBC about the need to revise
of the Concordat. The two cases had quite a few similarities, the first and foremost being the
existence of a non-bank holding company, registered in Luxembourg, controlling international
affiliates in several countries. In the event, the BSBC circulated a questionnaire to the
supervisory authorities, leading in May 1992 to the issue of a paper on Minimum standards for
the supervision of international banking groups and their cross-border establishments (Goodhart
2010) sent to supervisory agencies in a number of non-BCBS member countries. On the basis of
this experience, the Concordat was eventually revised. Goodhart (2011, p. 113) summarized this
experience. “The continuing exercise of the Concordat showed the work of the BCSC to best
advantage. The basic principles involved, that every banking establishment should be supervised
and that parental (home) should do so on the basis of consolidated accounts, were largely
uncontroversial and incontrovertible. What was needed was attention to detail, patient
negotiation, and advocacy at high level. The BCBS had these qualities”
If two relatively minor bank failures led to the definition of principles for the supervision
of international banks, the first “systemic crisis” of the postwar re-focused the attention of
regulators on “the international financial architecture”. The crisis came to a head in August 1982
when Mexico declared it was unable to service its debt, mostly owned to North American banks.
Contagion affected most Latin American countries and threatened the very survival of some
large US intermediaries. When the Mexican debt crisis erupted, the BCBS had already been
discussing measures and criteria for capital adequacy, but convergence among members was
stalling (Goodhart 2010:154). The pace of decision-making was accelerated by the crisis. When
40

US president Reagan asked the Congress for additional IMF funding to provide liquidity to
distressed Latin American economies, thereby indirectly supporting US banks, some of which
were close to bankruptcy, Congress asked for capital ratios to be raised unilaterally. The banking
community voiced its fears that such measures would put the industry at competitive
disadvantage vis-à-vis foreign banks. To maintain level international playing field, Paul Volker
flew to Basel in 1984 on a mission to revive negotiations about capital adequacy. Reaching an
agreement, however, proved to be difficult as both measures and standards of capital adequacy
reflected the peculiarities of each country’s financial systems, and accounting practices (Kapstein
2008: 131). For another three years it seemed that agreement would be impossible to make. The
standstill was broken in 1987 when the United States and the United Kingdom announced a
bilateral agreement on bank capital adequacy, threatening lesser players with being marginalized.
In December 1987, the BCBS announced an agreement on a proposal for international
convergence of capital measures and standards, which came to be known as the Basel Accord
(later nicknamed Basel I).
Basel II
The Basel Accord was received with scathing criticism. Most commentators charged that
the “Accord’s approach to risk management was too crude and hardly reflected best practices”
already adopted by the leading money centers (Kapstein 2008:132). Critics from the private
sector argued that it would lead to a credit crunch, a charge repeated thereafter against every
measures aimed at increasing banks’ capital. A number of scholars argued that, contrary to its
stated objectives, the Basel Accord and its subsequent revisions would have a pro-cyclical
impact, increasing systemic risks, as intermediaries would move along the risk/return line in
order to compensate for higher capital requirements (Friedman and Kraus 2011). Even though
other scholars held the opposite opinion (Aghion and Kharroubu, 2013), there were urgent callas
for revision.
By the early 1990s, controls on capital movement, steadily reduced in the 1980s, had
almost entirely disappeared in the developed market economies and global credit expansion
followed. Both Western intermediaries and regulators felt increasingly confident about their risk
management techniques. Soon, however, the second Mexican crisis (1995) and the ensuing
contagion focused attention on the global risks posed by the banking systems of emerging
markets. In response, the BCBS drafted an agreement in 1997 called Core Principles for
Effective Banking Supervision. The Core Principles “were designed as a model for banking
supervision regardless of the specifics of individual banking systems” (Borio and Toniolo 2008).
In subsequent years, they were adopted by a large number of supervisors worldwide. The Asian
crisis provided a new stimulus to review and strengthen the Basel principles and their
dissemination. The result was the June 2004, the BCBS agreement on International
Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards. A Revised Framework, better
known in short as Basel II (BCBS 2004). It is based on three pillars: (i) Minimum capital
requirements, (ii) Supervisory review process, (iii) Market Discipline, it was designed to rein in
bank risks in both advanced and emerging economies.

41

The European Banking Union
At the time of finalizing this survey, a European Banking Union (EBU) transferring
regulatory and supervisory authority from member states to the European Union was in the
process of formation. As in most of the cases discussed in this chapter, it was a financial crisis
that exposed the need for changes in the existing national banking regimes and created the
political conditions for their implementation15. When the financial crisis that started in 2008
turned into a sovereign debt crisis in 2010, it revealed a link between the stability of each
member country’s banking system and the market’s assessment of their government’s default
probability. This situation has led to a partial “re-nationalization” of the national banking
systems within the Eurozone, with banks of one country unwilling to lend to those of another,
undermining the financial foundations of the EU’s single market. Many observers attached a
high probability to the end of the euro. The crisis also “exposed some weaknesses of the Central
Bank position (which) surprised many observers with its large purchase of the debt of distressed
governments” (Eichengreen et al. 2011, p.48). Soon, it was realized that emergency measures
were no substitute for structural reforms to correct the weaknesses of the original design of the
European Monetary Union.
To complete the EU’s economic and monetary union, the European Council initiated a
European banking union (EBU) in June 2012. Next in October 2012, the Council decided to
create a Single Supervisory Mechanism, with federal supervisory authority entrusted to the
European Central Bank (Barucci and Messori 2014). The Banking Union also included a Single
Recovery and Resolution Mechanism and the Single Deposit Guarantee Scheme. Because of the
complexity of the issues and the cumbersome EU decision-making process, details are still being
hammered out in 2014-2015; but the creation of a banking union has proceeded relatively
swiftly, reflecting the perception that the crisis threatened the survival of the monetary union.
The transfer and allocation of supervisory authority to the ECB has focused on three
issues: (1) the division of responsibilities between the ECB and the national supervisory bodies,
(2) the possible conflict of interest within the ECB between its monetary and regulatory tasks,
and (3) the problem that arises from the EU Treaties that make the ECB’s decisions binding on
members of the monetary union but not countries outside of the monetary union, even though all
EU states participate in the single market.
For supervision, a formula has been devised that allocates 130 of the largest banks to the
ECB, leaving the smaller ones to national authorities. In addition, the ECB has been granted
discretionary authority to request oversight of any additional bank. Erection of a federalized
system of bank supervision, poses potential problems for the EU, as evidenced in our narrative
by the historical experience of the US and to a lesser degree Canada, where competition in laxity
between regulators and regulatory arbitrage has weakened the effectiveness of regulation and
supervision (Nieto and White, 2013). Whether the added discretionary authority of the ECB and
other features can overcome the dangers inherent when there are plural supervisors will only be
adequately tested by the next crisis.
The debate on the pros and cons of conferring supervisory powers on a central bank
resurfaced in the creation of the EBU, although the ECB’s Statute had already granted it the
15

The role of the crisis in shaping the new rules was officially acknowledged: “Since the crisis started in 2008, the
European Commission has worked hard to learn all the lessons from the crisis and create a safer and sounder
financial sector (…) so that future taxpayers will not foot the bill when banks make mistakes” (European
Commission 2014)

42

power to “perform specific tasks concerning policies relating to prudential supervision of credit
institutions.”16 Those in favor of allocating supervisory authority to a central bank believe that it
is essential for a central bank’s LOLR function to have the fullest possible access to financial
intermediaries’ private information that is gathered by supervision. Those in favor of separating
supervision from the monetary authority are concerned that a combination creates a conflict of
interest where supervision may be compromised in the interests of monetary policy or visa versa
(Zingales, 2009; Bini Smaghi, 2014).17 Recognizing this potential problem, the Supervisory
Board was made largely but not entirely independent of the ECB’s Governing Council, its policy
making body. Again it is too early to say whether this arrangement will mitigate of the conflict of
interest when monetary and supervisory authorities are combined.
The problem arising from the presence of monetary union member and non-member
countries within the EU was addressed by making membership in the EBU compulsory for
nations using the euro. Membership remains voluntary for countries in the EU but outside of the
monetary union. However, the Banking Union’s effectiveness may be seriously undermined as
the UK, home to the largest financial center and a number of systemically important
intermediaries, will almost certainly not join the EBU.
In December 2013, EU finance ministers “laid out a blueprint for a new agency backed
by a 55 billion-euro industry-financed resolution fund,” (Blumberg 2014) that would hand most
decisions on resolution to a board of a board of EU authorities and national representatives.
However, by the end of 2014, a final decision has not yet been taken on the details of the Single
Resolution Mechanism (the central authority for resolving failing intermediaries). The thorny
issue of a bail-in of ailing financial institutions---how losses should be borne by shareholders,
bond holders, and possibly depositors, rather than taxpayers has not been resolved. Bail-in
provisions represent, in part, a return to solutions of previous banking regimes, notably double or
extended shareholder liability, for the resolution of bank failures. While the post-crisis political
climate favors large bail-in provisions, this approach may not be the most effective way of
fighting a systemic crisis, as was evidenced in the 1930s.
Unsurprisingly, the creation of a EBU is proving a complex technical, legal and political
undertaking reflecting not only the magnitude of the institutional overhaul for the European
Union but also the need to devise solutions for many of the same problems that institution
builders struggled with in previous eras.
Conclusion
The histories of supervision in our six countries highlight patterns that are likely to be
common in other European and New World countries. We observe the following evolution of
supervision. Before World War I, the FSM was understood to protect the convertibility of
banknotes into coin, anchored by a gold or bimetallic standard, requiring clearly delineated rules
governing the issue of currency. The underlying assumption was that currency stability would
also guarantee financial stability. Countries that restricted and later monopolized the issue of
bank notes conducted supervision directly, with parliaments setting the rules and monitoring of
issuing banks conducted by the executive branch of government and/or parliament. In countries,
16

Art. 22.2 of the ECB Statute
Ioannidou (2005) provides empirical evidence of how the Federal Reserve’s supervision of banks was
compromised in comparison with the FDIC and the OCC.
17

43

typically in the New World, where there was a competitive note issue, two outcomes were
observed. In Canada where large branching banks were encouraged and a concentrated banking
industry developed, supervision could be managed by cooperation among the small number of
banks, with modest direct government oversight and no central bank. In the United States,
where regulation spawned a fragmented system of unit banks, independent agencies were
delegated the task of supervision, complicated by a federal political system that created multiple
agencies. Although Colombia began with competitive banks of issue, the need of the state to
control seigniorage in a highly unstable political environment led it move to the European model.
By the end of the nineteenth century, all countries had defined their FSM; but the strict
rules governing bank note issue contributed to the growth of deposit banking, leaving a key
component of the means of payment potentially unstable. This problem was further complicated
by mergers, branching, and financial diversification that created “systemically important banks”--SIFIs---in Europe and Canada whose insolvency could threaten the broader banking and
financial system. These issues were first addressed by the execution of the FSM in extraordinary
times by expanding the LOLR function as defined by Bagehot to include the rescue of insolvent
SIFIs in Europe before 1913 and Canada afterwards. These countries were grappling with a
perennial dilemma: how to maintain a competitive market-driven banking system and prevent
large failures from disrupting the payments and settlements system without engendering moral
hazard. However, in ordinary times, there were only modest or minimal changes in supervision,
as there was resistance to an expansion of the FSM.
The enhanced role of governments in the economy during World War I brought central
banks and governments into closer cooperation, with the former subordinated to the latter. The
Great Depression and World War II forced the financial system to accept the government’s
direction of financial flows and the government to accept the need to prop up the financial
system when subjected to large systemic shocks. Laws introducing stringent anti-competitive
regulatory and supervisory regimes were introduced in every country, together with
administrative controls on capital movements. The end result of the new regulatory regimes was
financial repression in all countries and an extension of the FSM to the protection of established
banks and other financial institutions from failure. Supervision shifted from rules-based to
discretion-based systems that accommodated financial repression. Under such a broad FSM,
banking systems enjoyed systemic stability.
Beginning in the 1970s, the end to international capital controls and the slow and partial
dismantling of national systems of financial repression led to a growing series of bank failures,
arising primarily from new financial institutions competing in the unregulated “fringe” of
banking. Deregulation driven by increasing international competition in banking, demands to
finance growth and a growing consensus on the market's intrinsic stability, created incentives to
take risk by the established banks and their competitors in the 1980s. The failure of discretionbased supervision, in some countries, and more widespread forbearance, led to the adoption of a
more rules-based supervision again with new or expanded agencies inside and outside of central
banks. The globalization of finance, with the diffusion of cross-country banking, exposed the
inconsistency of home-based regulation and supervision and the dangers of a regulatory race to
the bottom. The Basel Accords represented an attempt at international coordination of the
domestic drives to ramp up regulation and supervision of market-based banking by promoting
"soft laws" aimed producing a level field regulatory environment.
The problems we face after the Crisis of 2008 are, in general terms, no different than the
problems faced at the beginning of the twentieth century. In extraordinary times, liquidity must
44

be provided during a crisis and an orderly process established for liquidating (resolving) failed
SIFIs without bailing them out; while in ordinary times, the FSM and the institutions that receive
the mandate must be credibly defined to protect the means of payment and settlement and ensure
they grow and evolve to support the economy’s financing needs. Now as in the past, the
transition from extraordinary to ordinary circumstances is a complex process requiring
discretion.
From the long-run perspective of our selected six countries, we saw that problems arose
when supervision was bent to serve allocative policies. We also observed that supervision can
support regulation but it cannot fix a flawed structure that requires reform to keep pace with
financial innovation of the payments and settlement system. Financial innovation regularly
advances ahead of regulatory updating, limiting the effectiveness of an exclusively rules-based
supervision system to monitor financial institutions. Nevertheless, there is an important balance
to be achieved, as excessive reliance on supervisory discretion often leads to inappropriate
forbearance. Independent supervisory agencies were created for competitive financial systems
where transparent rules-based supervision was established. However, when competition was
limited by market developments or efforts of the state to channel the flow of funds, supervision
was given to the central bank, with less transparency and more discretion being exercised. Our
case studies reveal that most supervisory regimes successfully managed financial systems in
ordinary times, sometimes preventing a troubled institution from generating a systemic crisis, but
were less capable of dealing with extraordinary macro-systemic shocks, which they were not
designed to confront. When macro-systemic shocks overwhelmed supervisors’ capacity to meet
the FSM, the shocks led to regulatory/supervisory regime shifts that primarily addressed past
deficiencies, rather than focusing on reforms to ensure the stability of a continually innovating
financial system.
10. References
Aghion, Philippe and Kharroub, Enisse, “Cyclical Macroeconomic Policy, Financial Regulation and
Economic Growth,” BIS Working Paper No. 434, (2013).
Aldrich, Nelson, Interviews on the Banking and Currency Systems of England, Scotland, France,
Germany, Switzerland and Italy (Washington, D.C.: National Monetary Commission.1910).
Allen, A. M, S.R. Cope, L.J. H. Dark, and H.J. Witheridge, Commercial Banking Legislation and
Control (London: Macmillan and Co., 1938).
Allen Arthur M., S.R. Cope, L.J.H. Dark and H.J. Whitebridge (1938), Commercial banking
legislation and control, MacMillan & Co.: London.
Alfredo Gigliobianco , Claire Girodano, and Gianni Toniolo (2009) “Innovation and Regulation in
the wake of Financial Crises in Italy (1880s-1930s)”, in A. Gigliobianco and G. Toniolo (eds.)
Financial Market Regulation after Financial Crises: The Historical Experience, Banca d’Italia:
Roma, 45-74.
Bagehot, W. 1873, Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. London: H.S. King.

45

Banca d’Italia (1908) Adunanza generale ordinaria degli azionisti, Banca d’Italia: Roma.
Bank of England,(2013), “The Strategy for the Bank’s Financial Stability Mission, 2013-2014
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Documents/strategy1314.pdf
Banque de France, “The Commission Bancaire,” Fact Sheet No. 132 (December 2004).
Barbiellini Amidei, Federico Giordano, and Claire Giordano, “Regulatory responses to the “roots of
all evil”: The re-shaping of the bank-industry-financial market interlock in the U.S. GlassSteagall and the Italian 1936 Banking Acts”, Banca d’Italia (mimeo, 2012).
Barbiellini, A., Gigliobianc, A. Giordano, C. “Credit Policy and Economic Development in PostWWII Italy," in H. Bonin, N. V. Haueter, A. Gigliobianco, and H. James eds. Public Policies and
the Direction on Financial Flows. Studies in Banking and Financial History (Bucarest: EABH,
2012).
Barnett, George E., State Banks and Trust Companies Since the Passage of the National-Bank Act
(Washington D.C.: National Monetary Commission, Government Printing Office, 1911)
Barucci Emilio and Marcello Messori, eds. (2014), Towards the European Banking Union.
Achievements and Open Problems (Bagno a Ripoli: Passigli)
Battilossi, Stefano, “Financial innovation and the gold ages of international banking: 1890-1931 and
1958-81,” Financial History Review 7: 2 (October 2000), pp.141-176.
Beckhart, B.H. and H. P. Willis, Foreign Banking Systems (New York: H. Holt and Company, 1929).
Beckhart B. H. and H. P. Willis, Report of the Royal Commission (Macmillan Commission), Banking
and Currency in Canada (Ottawa: J.O. Patenaude, 1933).
Bernanke, Ben S., “ A Century of US Central Banking: Goals, Frameworks, Accountability,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, (Fall 2013), 27:4 pp. 3-16.
Bertrand, Marianne, Antoinnette Schoar and David Thesmar, “Banking Deregulation and Industry
Structure: Evidence from the French Banking Reforms of 1985,” Journal of Finance Vol. 62. No.
2, (April 2007), pp. 597-628.
Bignon, Vincent, Marc Flandreau and Stefano Ugolini, “Bagehot for beginners: the making of lenderof-last resort operations in the mid-nineteenth century,” Economic History Review 65:2 (2012),
pp. 580-608.
Bini Smaghi, Lorenzo (2014), “Monetary policy and supervision: Moral Hazard and Conflicts of
Interest?, in E. Barucci and M. Messori, eds. Towards the European Banking Union.
Achievements and Open Problems (Bagno a Ripoli: Passigli, 2014), pp.55-61
Blinder, Alan S., “How Central Should the Central Bank Be,” Journal of Economic Literature 48:1
(March 2010), pp. 123-133.

46

Blancheton, Bertrand, “ Les improvisations financières de la guerre de 1914-1918 en France. Les
enjeux de la liquidité,” Cahiers du GREThA, (January 2014) No. 2014-03.
Blumberg (2014), Europe’s Banking Union (October 28, 2014),
http://www.bloombergview.com/quicktake/europes-banking-union
Bonelli, Franco (1971) La crisi del 1907. Una tappa dello sviluppo economico italiano. Fondazione
Einaudi: Torino.
Bonelli, Franco (1991), La Banca d’Italia dal 1894 al 1913. Momenti della formazione di una banca
centrale, Laterza: Roma-Bari.
Bordo, Michael, and Angela Redish, “Why did the Bank of Canada emerge in 1935?” Journal of
Economic History Vol. 47 (1987), pp. 405-17.
Bordo, Michael D., and Anna J. Schwartz, 1995. The performance and stability of banking systems
under 'self-regulation': Theory and evidence. Cato Journal 14 (3) (Winter): 453-79.
Bordo, Michael D., and David C. Wheelock. 1998. Price stability and financial stability: The
historical record. Federal Reserve Bank of St.Louis Review 80 (5) (September): 41-62.
Borio, Claudio, “Implementing a Macroprudential Framework: Blending Boldness and Realism,”
Capitalism and Society 6:1 (August 2011, pp.1-23.
Borio, Claudio and Gianni Toniolo. “One Hundred and Thirty Years of Central Bank Cooperation: A
BIS Perspective,” BIS Working Paper 197, (February 2006).
Bouvier, Jean, “The Banque de France and the State from 1850 to the Present Day,” in Toniolo,
Gianni, ed., Central Banks’ Independence in Historical Perspective (New York: De Gruyter,
1988), pp. 73-104.
Bowden, Sue and David M. Higgins, “British Industry in the Interwar Years,” in Roderick Floud and
Paul Johnson, eds., The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain, (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. 374-402.
Broadberry Stephen and Peter Howlett, “The United Kingdom during World War I: Business as
Usual?” in Stephen Broadberry and Mark Harrison, eds., The Economics of World War I
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), pp. 206-234.
Brown, William Arthur (1940), The International Gold Standard Reinterpreted 1914-34 (Cambridge,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1940).
Burgess, W. Randolph, The Reserve Banks and the Money Market (New York: Harper & Brothers,
1927).
Calomiris, C. W., “Is Deposit Insurance Necessary? A Historical Perspective,” Journal of Economic
History 50:2 (June 1990), pp. 283-296.

47

Calomiris, C.W. and Gorton, G. (1991), “The origins of banking panics: models, facts and bank
legislation”, in Hubbard, R.G., ed., Financial Markets and Financial Crises (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1991).
Calomiris, C. W. and White, E. N., (1994). “The Origins of Federal Deposit Insurance,” in Claudia
Goldin and Gary D. Libecap, The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to Political
Economy Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Capie, Forrest The Bank of England, 1950s to 1979 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010).
Cardarelli, Sergio (2009) “Il ruolo degli istituti di emissione nella concezione drispinsa” in Aldo G.
Ricci e Luisa Montevecchi(eds.) Francesco Crispi. Costruire lo Stato per dare forma alla
Nazione", Atti del convegno tenuto all'Archivio Centrale dello Stato il 27 novembre 2001 nel
centanario della morte di Crispi, Mibac:Roma.
Carr, Jack, Frank Mathewson, and Neil Quigley, “Stability in the Absence of Deposit Insurance: The
Canadian Banking System, 1890-1966,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking (November
1995), Vol. 27, No. 4, Part 1, pp. 11337-1158.Cesarano Francesco, Giulio Cifarelli and Gianni
Toniolo (2012) “Exchange Rate Regimes and Reserve Policy: The Italian Lira 1883-1911”,
Open Economies Review, 23 (2), 253-275.
Charles Favell Forth Wordsworth, The New Joint Stock Company Law of 1856, 1857, and 1858
(London: Shaw and Sons, 1859).
Clapham, J.H., The Bank of England: A History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1958).
Cotula, Franco ed (2000), Stabilità e sviluppo negli anni Cinquanta. Politica bancaria e struttura del
sistema finanziario (Roma-Bari: Laterza)
Dunbar, Charles F., The Theory and History of Banking (New York: Knickerbocker, 5th Revised
Edition, 1929).
Economist (The) (London).
Eichengreen Barry, Robert Feldman, Jeffrey Liebman, Jurgen von Hagen, Charles Wyploz (2011),
Public Debt: Nits, Bolts and Worries, (International Center for Monetary and Banking Stidies –
CEPR: Geneva and London)
European Central Bank, “What is Financial Stability,” www.ecb.int/pub/fsr/html/index.en.html
European Commssion (2014), Banking Union: Restoring Financial Stability in the Eurozone. Memo
(Brussels)
Feldstein, Martin, “What Powers for the Federal Reserve?” Journal of Economic Literature 48:1 (
(March 2010), pp. 134-145..
Fenstermaker, J.V. and J.E. Filer, “Impact of the First and Second Banks of the United States and the
Suffolk system on New England Bank Money 1791-1837,” Journal of Money Credit and
Banking 18:1 (February 1986), pp. 28-40.
48

Fernandez-Bollo, Édouard, “Structural reform and supervision of the banking sector in France,”
OCED Journal: Finance Market Trends. Vol. 2013 Issue 1 (2013).
Forsyth, Douglas and Ton Iotermans, eds., Regime Changes: Macroeonomic Policy and Financial
Regulation in Europe from the 1930s to the 1990s (Providence, RI: Berghahn Books, 1997).
Freedeman, Charles (1993). The Triumph of Corporate Capitalism in France, 1867-1914 (Rochester:
University of Rochester Press, 1993).
Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1863-1960
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963).
Galanti Enrico, Raffaele D’Ambriosio, Alessandro V. Guccione (2012), Storia della legislazilazione
bancaria, finanziaria e assicurativa dall’Unità d’Italia al 2011, Marsilio: Venezia.
Galassi, Francesco and Mark Harrison, “Italy at war, 1915-1918,” in Stephen Broadberry and Mark
Harrison, eds., The Economics of World War I (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005),
pp. 276-309.
Gigliobianco, Alfredo; Girodano, Claire; Toniolo, Gianni, “Innovation and Regulation in the wake of
Financial Crises in Italy (1880s-1930s)”, in A. Gigliobianco and G. Toniolo (eds.) Financial
Market Regulation after Financial Crises: The Historical Experience, (Rome: Banca d’Italia:
,2009), pp.45-74
Golembe, Carter H., “Deposit Insurance Legislation of 1933: An Examination of Its Antecedents and
Its Purposes,” Political Science Quarterly 75:2 (June 1960), pp. 181-200.
Golembe, Carter H. and Warburton, Clark, “Insurance of Bank Obligations in Six States During the
Period, 1829-1866,” (Washington, D.C.: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 1958)
Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert King, “Financial Deregulation, Monetary Policy, and Central
Banking,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 88-01 (1988).
Goodhart, Charles, The Evolution of Central Banks. A Natural Development? (London: the London
School of Economics STICERD, 1985).
Goodhart, Charles, “How should we regulate bank capital and financial products? What role for
living wills?” Revista de Economia Institucional, 12:23 (2010).
Goodhart, Charles, “The changing role of central banks,” Financial History Review, 18:2 (August
2011), pp. 135-154.
Grossman, Richard S., “Double Liability and Bank Risk Taking,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 33:2, Part I (May 2001), pp. 143-159.
Grossman, Richard S., “Fear and Greed: The evolution of double liability in American banking,
1865-1930, Explorations in Economic History 44:1 (January 2007), pp. 59-80.

49

Grossman, Richard S., Unsettled Account: The Evolution of Banking in the Industrialized World
Since 1800 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010).
Guarino, G., G. Toniolo, A. Gigliobianco, and G. Santonocito, La Banca d’Italia e il Sistema
Bancario, 1919-1936 (1993).
Hannah, Leslie, The Rise of the Corporate Economy (London: Methuen, 1983).
Hautcoeur, Pierre-Cyrille, Angelo Riva and Eugene N. White, “Floating A Lifeboat: The Banque de
France and the Crisis of 1889,” Journal of Monetary Economics (July 2014).
Hogdman, Donald, Credit Controls in Western Europe: An Evaluative Review (Boston: Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, 1973).
Horn, Martin, Britain, France and the Financing of the First World War, (Montreal and Kingston:
McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2002).
Ioannidou, Vasso, P., “Does Monetary Policy Affect the Central Bank’s Role in Bank Supervision,
Journal of Financial Intermediation 14: 1 (January 2005), pp. 58-85.
Jarmeski, Matthew and Kris James Mitchener, “The Evolution of Bank Supervision: Evidence from
U.S. States,” NBER Working Paper 20603, (2014)
Kryzanowski, Lawrence, and Gordon S. Roberts, “Canadian Banking Solvency, 1922-1940,”Journal
of Money Credit and Banking 25:3 (August1993), pp. 361-376.
Kryzanowski, Lawrence, and Gordon S. Roberts, “Perspectives on Canadian Bank Insolvency during
the 1930s,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking 31:1 (February 1999), pp. 130-136.
Leclercq, Yves, La Banque supérieure: La Banque de France de 1800 à 1914. Paris, Editions
Classiques Garnier, 2010).
Lescure, Michel, “Banking in France in the inter-war period,” in Charles Feinstein, ed., Banking
Currency and Finance in Europe Between the Wars (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995), pp.
314-36..
Luzzatto, Gino (1963) L’Economia Italiana dal 1861 al 1914, Milano: Banca Commerciale Italiana.
Melitz, Jacques, “The French financial system: Mechanisms and Questions of Reform,” Annales de
l’INSEE No. 47-48 (July-December 1982), pp. 361-387.
Mishkin, Frederic S. and Eugene N. White, “Unprecedented Actions: The Federal Reserve’s
Response to the Global Financail Crisis in Historical Perspective,” NBER Working Paper No.
20737, (December 2014).
Monnet, Eric, “Politique monétaire et politique du credit en France pendant les Trente Glorieuses,
1945-1973, (Ph.D. thesis, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Paris School of
Economics, 2012).

50

Monnet, Eric, “Financing a Planned Economy, Institutions and Credit Allocation in the French
Golden Age of Growth (1954-1974), (Berkeley Economic History working paper No. 2, 2013).
Monnet, Eric, “Monetary Policy with Interest Rates: Evidence from France’s Gold Age (1948-1973)
Using a Narrative Approach,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 6, No. 4
(2014), pp. 137-169.
Morgenson, Gretchen Morgenson (January 12, 2014), “Bailout Risk, Far Beyond The Banks,” New
York Times.
Negri, Guglielmo (1989), Giolitti e la nascita della Banca d’Italia, (Laterza: Roma-Bari, 1989).
Nieto, Maria J. And Eugene N. White, “Will bank supervision in Ohio and Austria be similar? A
transatlantic view of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. (March 22 2013) www.voxeu.org.
Norges
Bank,
(2014)
“Mandate
and
Core
bank.no/en/about/mandate-and-core-responsibilities/

Responsibilities,”

http://www.norges-

Occhino F. K. Oosterlinck and E. N. White,”How Much Can a Victor Force the Vanquished to Pay?
France Under the Nazi Boot,” Journal of Economic History 68: 1 (March 2008), pp. 1-45.
Padoa-Schioppa, Tommaso and Fabrizio Saccomanni, “Managing a Market-Led Global Financial
System,” in Peter Kenen, ed., Managing the World Economy: Fifty Years after Bretton Woods
(Peterson Institute, 1994), pp. 235-268..
Perkins, Edwin J., American Public Finance and Financial Services, 1700-1815 (Columbus: Ohio
State University, 1994).
Plihon, Dominique, “L’Évolution de l’Intermédiation Bancaire (1950-1993), Bulletin de la Banque de
France No. 21 (Septembre 1995), pp. 131-159.
Polsi, Alessandro (2001), Stato e Banca Centrale in Italia. Il governo della moneta e del sistema
bancario dall’Ottocento a oggi, Laterza: Roma-Bari.
Reis, Ricardo, “Central Bank Design,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27:4 (Fall 2013), pp. 17-44.
Robertson, Ross M. (1968, 1995) The Comptroller and Bank Supervision: A Historical Appraisal
Washington D.C.: Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Rockoff, Hugh, “Varieties of Banking and Regional Development in the United States, 1840-1860,”
Journal of Economic History 35:1, (1975), pp.160-181.
Rolnick, Arthur J., and Warren E. Weber, “New Evidence on the Free Banking Era,” American
Economic Review 73:5 (December 1983), pp. 1080-1091.

51

Rolnick, Arthur J., Bruce D. Smith, and Warren E. Weber, “The Suffolk Bank and the Panic of
1837,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 24: 2 (2000), pp. 3-13.
Royal Commission (Macmillan Commission), Report: Banking and Currency in Canada (Ottawa:
J.O. Patenaude, 1933).
Sayers Richard S. (1976), The Bank of England 1891-1944, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1976).
Schenk, C. R, The Origins of the Eurodollar Market in London, 1955-1963 (Amsterdam:
Elsevier,1998).
Schwartz, Anna, “The Beginning of Competitive Banking in Philadelphia, 1782-1890,” Journal of
Political Economy 55: 5 (October 1947). 417-431.
Schwartz, Anna J., “Real and Pseudo-Financial Crises,” in Anna J. Schwartz, Michael D. Bordo, and
Milton Friedman, Money in Historical Perspective (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1987).
Silber, William, When Washington Shut Down Wall Street: The Great Financial Crisis of 1914 and
the Origins of America’s Monetary Supremacy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008).
Smith, Adam, The Wealth of Nations (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1776; 2008).
Swiss National Bank (2014), “Financial Stability: The SNB Mandate,”
http://www.snb.ch/en/iabout/finstab.

Sylla, Richard, “U.S. Securities Markets and the Banking System, 1790-1840,” Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis Review (May/June 1998), pp. 83-98.
Thornton, H. 1802 An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain,
Edited by F. A. Hayek. Fairfield: August M. Kelley.
Toniolo, Gianni (1989) La Banca d’Italia e l’economia di guerra, 1914-1919, Laterza: Roma-Bari.
Toniolo, Gianni (1995), “Italian Banking, 1919-1939”, in Feinstein, Charles, Banking, Currency and
Finance in Europe Between the Wars, Clarendon Press: Oxford 296-314.
Toniolo, Gianni (1990) An Economic History of Liberal Italy, 1850-1918. London: Routledge.
Toniolo, Gianni, Central Bank Cooperation at the Bank for International Settlements, 1930-1973
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007).
Toniolo, Gianni (2013) “An Overview of Italy’s Economic Growth” in ID (ed) The Oxford Handbook
of the Italian Economy since Unification (2013), Oxford Univesrity Press (dicembre 2012, in via
di pubblicazione).
White, Eugene N. The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System, 1900-1929
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983).

52

White, Eugene N., The Comptroller and the Transformation of American Banking, 1960-1990
(Washington, D.C.: Comptroller of the Currency, 1992).
White, Eugene N. “Banking and Finance in the Twentieth Century,’ in Stanley Engerman and Robert
Gallman, eds., Cambridge Economic History of the United States (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998).
White, Eugene N., “The Evolution of Banking Regulation in Twentieth Century Colombia” (Bogotá:
Superintendencia Bancaria, 1998).
White, Eugene N. (2000). “Banking and Finance in the Twentieth Century,” in Stanley L. Engerman
and Robert E. Gallman, The Cambridge Economic History of the United States: The Twentieth
Century, Vol. 3, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 743-802.
White, Eugene N., “Legacy of Deposit Insurance: The Growth, Spread, and Cost of Insuring
Financial Intermediaries,” in Michael D. Bordo, Claudia Goldin, Eugene N. White, The Defining
Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century (Chicago:
Chicago University Press, 2007), pp. 87-124.
White, Eugene N., “’To Establish a More Effective Supervision of Bank,’: How the Birth of the Fed
Altered Bank Supervision,” in Michael D. Bordo and William Roberds, The Origins, History and
Future of the Federal Reserve: A Return to Jekyll Island (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2013), pp. 7-54.
White, Lawrence J., “The Role of Capital and Leverage in the Financial Markets Debacle of 20072008,” Mercatus on Policy, 37, (February 2009).
Wood, John H., A History of Central Banking in Great Britain and the United States (Cambridge:
Cambridge.
Zingales, Luigi, “ A New Regulatory Framework,” Forbes.Com (March 31, 2009).

53

