NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY BETWEEN
DECENTRALIZATION AND PERFORMANCE PAY
Bryan Hong
Lorenz Kueng
Mu-Jeung Yang
Working Paper 20845
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20845
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015

We would like to thank Nick Bloom, Chad Syverson, John Van Reenen; seminar participants at Emory
University, Harvard Business School, the University of Washington, the NBER Summer Institute;
and, in particular, our discussant Raffaella Sadun, for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Ergete
Ferede for sharing his residual income progression data. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20845.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Bryan Hong, Lorenz Kueng, and Mu-Jeung Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating Management Practice Complementarity between Decentralization and Performance
Pay
Bryan Hong, Lorenz Kueng, and Mu-Jeung Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 20845
January 2015
JEL No. D2,H32,J33,L2,M1,M5
ABSTRACT
The existence of complementarity across management practices has been proposed as one potential
explanation for the persistence of firm-level productivity differences. However, thus far no conclusive
population-level tests of the complementary joint adoption of management practices have been conducted.
Using unique detailed data on internal organization, occupational composition, and firm performance
for a nationally representative sample of firms in the Canadian economy, we exploit regional variation
in income tax progression as an instrument for the adoption of performance pay. We find systematic
evidence for the complementarity of performance pay and decentralization of decision-making from
principals to employees. Furthermore, in response to the adoption of performance pay, we find a concentration
of decision-making at the level of managerial employees, as opposed to a general movement towards
more decentralization throughout the organization. Finally, we find that adoption of performance pay
is related to other types of organizational restructuring, such as greater use of outsourcing, Total Quality
Management, re-engineering, and a reduction in the number of layers in the hierarchy.
Bryan Hong
Ivey Business School
Western University
1255 Western Road
London, ON N6G 0N1
Canada
bhong@ivey.ca
Lorenz Kueng
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Mu-Jeung Yang
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Savery Hall, 327
Seattle, WA 98195-3330
mjyang@uw.edu

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

1

1

Introduction

A central empirical fact regarding firm heterogeneity is that even within narrowly
defined industries, productivity differences across firms are large and persistent; see
Baily, Hulten and Campbell (1992), and Syverson (2011). This empirical pattern
is also at the heart of the modern analysis of firm heterogeneity in diverse fields,
such as industrial organization, macroeconomics, and international trade. Recent
empirical evidence suggests that management practices are closely connected to firm
productivity.1 However, little is known empirically about how different types of management practices interact to influence productivity. Specifically, complementarity
among management practices is a potential cause of persistence in firm productivity, since firms need to jointly adopt many complementary practices to reap the
full productivity gains from these management practices. However, since the joint
adoption of all these practices can be very difficult and costly to implement, lowproductivity firms might have insufficient incentive or capabilities to do so. For this
mechanism to potentially explain persistent firm productivity differences, empirical
evidence of management practice complementarity must exist. Therefore, we test
for the existence of complementary joint adoption of two key management practices
at the heart of efficient decision-making in firms: performance pay and the degree of
decentralization of decision-making. On the one hand, a vast literature starting out
Drucker (1949) and Penrose (1959) has argued that decentralized decision-making is
important to promote firm growth, induce an optimal division of labor, and enable
the efficient use of decentralized employee information.2 On the other hand, creating incentives for efficient decision-making through performance pay has been at the
core of principal-agent analysis, as exemplified by Jensen and Meckling (1976) and
surveyed in Laffont and Martimort (2002).
Since the seminal work by Milgrom and Roberts (1990), there has been considerable interest in the complementarity of management or organizational practices; see
Brynjolfsson and Milgrom (2013). Despite this interest, empirical evidence on the
issue has been limited in scope. Two challenges pose significant hurdles to further
empirical progress on this topic. First, large sample data on the internal organization of firms and use of management practices is scarce. In fact, the most prominent
empirical studies of management practice complementarity are either case studies
such as Milgrom and Roberts (1995) or industry studies such as Ichniowski, Shaw
and Prennushi (1997) or Kretschmer, Miravete and Pernias (2012). Second, even in
datasets that provide larger samples, such as that used by Bloom and Van Reenen
(2007), recovering causal estimates of complementarity proved to be difficult since
1

See, for example, Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) and Bloom, Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin,
Patnaik, Saporta Eksten and Van Reenen (2014).
2
For examples, see Aghion and Tirole (1997), Garicano (2000), Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen
(2012).

2

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

joint adoption of management practices can be driven by correlation of unobserved
adoption costs instead of complementarity; see Athey and Stern (1998).
Using unique establishment and firm-level panel data on management practices,
organization, and firm performance that is representative of all business firms in the
Canadian economy, we address both these empirical challenges and provide the first
large-sample representative evidence on management practice complementarity.3 To
establish valid inferences regarding complementarity, we address the issues raised by
Athey and Stern (1998) using an instrumental variables (IV) strategy. The basic
idea is that higher personal income tax progressivity increases the cost of providing
high-powered incentives and hence reduces the adoption of performance and can
therefore serve as an instrument for performance pay. To understand why, consider
performance pay in a standard principal-agent framework, such as Grossman and
Hart (1983). In this model, the principal needs to pay the agent a higher wage
in states of the world with high output in order to incentivize the agent to exert
hidden effort. Since progressive taxation by definition exhibits higher marginal tax
rates on higher income, more progressivity will tend to offset the incentive effects
of performance pay. In other words, to induce a given level of effort, the firm has
to pay the employee over-proportionally more in high output states to counter the
effects of tax progressivity.
We find that firms that adopt performance pay for exogenous reasons decentralize more decision-making from business owners and headquarters to employees.
This suggests that performance pay and decentralization of control are complements.
This result provides empirical evidence complementing a number of theoretical arguments that have thus far provided conflicting predictions about the relation of
performance pay and decentralization. Studies such as Prendergast (2002) and Van
Den Steen (2010) described mechanisms through which performance pay and decentralization are complements, while Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991), Krishna and
Morgan (2008) and Bester and Kremer (2008) provided theories showing that performance pay and decentralization are substitutes. It is worth emphasizing that
our results are not a direct test of these models, since it is still possible that there
are some industries or firms to which these theories apply. However, we note that
our data allows us to characterize the average degree of complementarity between
performance pay and decentralization in the entire population of firms, irrespective
of industry, size class, exporter status, and other firm and industry characteristics.
In this sense, one can interpret our findings as providing evidence on whether these
theories apply on average in the population of business firms.
While the complementarity of performance pay and decentralization is of general interest on its own, it does not tell us much about the process of decentralizing
3

More than 90% of businesses in our data are single-establishment firms. Unless noted otherwise, we therefore use the terms “establishment” and “firm” interchangeably, and we include a
multi-establishment indicator in all our empirical analysis.

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

3

decision-making to employees. This decentralization could take very different forms
that are indicative of the manner in which firms induce efficient decision-making.
For example, if information of production line workers is crucial, one would expect
decisions to be decentralized mostly to non-managerial employees. If, on the other
hand, managerial supervision and control is crucial, as suggested for example by
Atalay, Hortascu and Syverson (2013), one would expect decision authority to be
given to management. Motivated by these different views on the benefits of decentralization, we further analyze decentralization patterns by measuring decision
control separately for managerial and non-managerial employees. We find that firms
that adopt performance pay for exogenous reasons concentrate control at the management level. That is, although these firms tend to decentralize decision control
from headquarters or business owners to employees, they also reallocate decision
tasks from non-managerial to managerial employees. Compatible with this concentration of control at the manager level, we find that these firms have systematically
higher hiring rates for managers but not significantly higher overall hiring or firing
rates. In other words, not only are decision responsibilities concentrated at the management level, but firms also hire more managers to deal with these responsibilities.
Therefore, our findings support the hypothesis advanced by Atalay et al. (2013) that
the nature of firms is intimately connected to their role in “mediating managerial
supervision and control.”
To explore whether unobserved regional factors drive our results, we compare
establishments within the same location, which are part of multi-province firms. We
show that establishments of firms with headquarters located in regions with high
tax progression are less likely to adopt performance pay than establishments in the
same location that have headquarters in low tax-progression regions. Furthermore,
we find that for these multi-province firms, the same patterns apply as in the general
firm population: establishments which adopt performance pay for exogenous reasons
decentralize decision-making from principals to employees and reallocate decision
tasks from non-managerial to managerial employees.
To obtain a more general understanding of how performance pay influences management practices, we also consider the impact of performance pay adoption on other
organizational changes, exploiting the panel dimension of our data. We highlight
three findings applying to firms that adopt performance pay. First, these firms
systematically pursue business process “re-engineering.” In other words, they seek
to increase the efficiency of business processes, for example by removing activities
without much value added. Despite claims to the contrary, we find that firms which
seek to re-engineer their business processes do this without necessarily downsizing
their workforce. Second, these firms are more likely to adopt organization-wide programs to ensure a high level of product quality, such as Total Quality Management
(TQM). Third, these firms are more likely to reduce the number of managerial layers (de-layering). These results in turn have important implications for theories of

4

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

business processes and models of endogenous management layers.
The remainder of the paper is organized in the following manner. Section 2
develops a baseline theory that illustrates the incentive trade-offs that make decentralization and performance pay either complements or substitutes and guides our
empirical analysis. Section 3 describes our establishment- and firm-level data. Section 4 describes our IV strategy and discusses our baseline empirical results. Section
5 provides a number of robustness checks, and section 6 concludes our analysis.
Related Literature
This study contributes to the literature on the sources of persistent performance differences across firms: e.g., Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), Syverson (2011)
and Gibbons and Henderson (2013). In contrast to studies such as Bloom and
Van Reenen (2007) and Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013b), which characterize
the overall quality of management practices, we focus on the interaction between
management practices. In this context, we build on ideas from several fields. After the initial seminal work by Milgrom and Roberts (1990), the importance of
complementarity in a firm’s management practices and organizational activities was
introduced to business practitioners by Porter (1996) and features prominently in
the strategic management literature at least since Rivkin (2000); see also Porter
and Siggelkow (2008) for a survey of this literature. Similar ideas regarding the
importance of complementarity in production factors to explain persistent productivity differences have even been applied by Jones (2011) to total factor productivity
(TFP) differences across countries. A major contribution to this literature is that
our empirical results are representative of the entire population of business firms,
irrespective of firm size and sector. In particular, our results are not restricted to
the manufacturing sector. Moreover, since our estimates are based on what Athey
and Stern (1998) describe as “reduced form tests of complementarity based on exclusion restrictions,” they provide a valid characterization of management practice
complementarity despite potential threats to identification outlined by Athey and
Stern (1998).
Finally, we also contribute to the recent literature on endogenous firm productivity and organization, such as Grossman and Helpman (2002), Chassang (2010),
Gibbons, Holden and Powell (2012), and Powell (2013). This literature is important
in that it promises insight into the sources of firm productivity differences that is
complementary to R&D-based models, such as Klette and Kortum (2004), Luttmer
(2007), and Acemoglu, Akcigit, Bloom, Kerr and Van Reenen (2013). However,
empirical evidence on how management practices interact to influence firm productivity has been scant. Our goal is to encourage more theory development in this
important field and to guide some of this new theory with our population-based
estimates.

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

2

5

Theory

To clarify the mechanisms through which decentralization of control and implementation of performance pay can either be substitutes or complements and to
guide our empirical analysis in the rest of the paper, we develop a model of the
trade-off between centralization and decentralization and how performance pay affects this trade-off. Like much of the recent empirical literature on management
practices and decentralization, such as Bloom et al. (2012) and Bloom, Garicano,
Sadun and Van Reenen (2013a), decentralization will be based on the logic developed by Garicano (2000) and Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2012). Specifically,
more decentralization in these models allows a firm to economize on the business
owner’s time, thereby allowing her to focus only on complex and rare problems. On
the other hand, decentralization involves effort costs to train employees and communication costs if employees encounter an unsolvable problem and need to explain
it to the business owner. We extend this basic framework by assuming that part of
the effort costs spent by employees to solve problems is unobservable. This gives
rise to a classical moral hazard problem, such as Grossman and Hart (1983), which
can potentially be addressed using performance pay.
There are two players in our model: a principal, P, who can be considered the
business owner, and an agent, A, who is an employee. Firms face a unit measure
of problems z ∈ [0, 1] in their operations with cumulative distribution F (z) and
density f (z). As is standard, we assume that these are ordered by frequency and
complexity so that lower indices of z denote simple and very frequent problems and
high values of z very complex and rare problems. This is formalized by assuming
f 0 (z) < 0. Problems z need to be solved to produce output; hence, every unsolved
problem reduces output and therefore firm productivity.
To solve problems, both P and A have to exert effort to acquire knowledge to
deal with the problems. This cost is higher the more complex the problem, and we
denote the overall cost of solving problem z by ai ·z, where i ∈ {P, A} and ai > 0. As
in Bloom et al. (2013a), we assume that P knows all production tasks that employees A know, so that knowledge overlaps. If A cannot solve a particular problem, he
will communicate the problem up the hierarchy to P. This entails a communication
cost, which is denoted by h. To introduce a basic moral hazard problem into this
framework, we assume that the agent’s effort costs have two parts. First, a1,A · z
are costs associated with observable effort, as in Bloom et al. (2012). Second, there
is a part of the effort costs denoted by a2,A · z that is associated with unobservable
effort. That is, A has a hidden effort choice e ∈ {0, 1} so that if he incurs effort
e = 1, he pays an additional cost a2,A · z. As usual, while the effort choice e itself is
hidden, the level of effort costs a2,A · z is common knowledge.
Production. Output is generated as a result of solving problems, where zA denotes

6

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

the most complex problem that employees A are engaged in solving. If principal P
is confronted with a problem, we assume she is able to solve it by incurring costs
aP . However, for employees, even for problems they in principle could solve, there
is a random chance that the problem remains unsolved, possibly due to unforeseen
issues. Let xA denote an indicator for whether the employee solved the problems he
was confronted with. As is standard in principal-agent problems, we assume that
the employee can increase output by exerting the hidden effort choice e. In other
words, if the agent exerts effort, the fraction of problems that he can solve increases.
Therefore, production is given by
1 − F (zA ) for the principal and

F (zA ) · P xA = 1 e for the agent.

Preferences. Business owner P is assumed to be risk neutral and the residual
claimant of profit flows. Agent A is assumed to exhibit the following utility function
UA (wA , zA , e) = ln (wA ) − a1,A zA − e · a2,A zA ,
where wA is her wage, which can be state-contingent. Since the effort associated
with cost a1,A zA is observable, we assume that this is directly paid for by the principal.
Timing. The general timing of our model can be described as follows. At t = 0,
P first decides on the degree of decentralization and then implements the optimal
wage contract. That is, if performance pay is available, P will determine the optimal state-contingent wage payments; otherwise she will just set a constant wage
to meet the agent’s outside options. In t = 1, the agent faces the organizational
choices made by P and decides whether to exert effort. Production occurs and wage
payments are made at the end of period 1.
Performance Pay. We begin with the solution of the moral hazard problem. If
performance pay is available, P chooses to condition wage payments on whether the
agent solved a given problem. The optimal contract is designed to minimize expected
wage payments subject to incentive-compatibility and participation constraints.
 H
 L
min
P
x
A = 1 e = 1 · w A + P xA = 0 e = 1 · w A
1
0

wA ,wA

subject to:




(IC) E UA (wA , zA , e = 1) e = 1 ≥ E UA (wA , zA , e = 0) e = 0 and


(IR) E UA (wA , zA , e = 1) e = 1 ≥ UAR .

(1)

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

7

To facilitate exposition, we assume that

P xA = 1 e = 0 = 1 − k and

P xA = 1 e = 1 = 1 − k + q,
where k is the probability that a random event renders the problem unsolvable and
q is the incremental gain in successful “problem solving” if the agent exerts effort,
1
with q < k. Wages wA are contingent on problems being solved, so that wA = wA
if
0
xA = 1 and wA = wA if xA = 0.
By standard arguments, the solution to the contract design problem boils down
1
0
to (IC) and (IR) holding exactly, pinning down contingent wages (wA
, wA
). Given
the functional form assumptions on utility and probabilities, performance pay is
given by


k
1
R
and
wA (zA ) = exp UA + · a2,A zA
q


1−k
0
R
wA (zA ) = exp UA −
· a2,A zA .
q
For notational convenience, let us define


w̄(zA ) = E wA (zA ) e = 1 .
At this point, we highlight an important property of the optimal contract. In particular, the more complex the agent’s tasks are—that is, the higher zA —the higher
the costs of incentive pay. In the appendix, we show that the following inequality
holds:
w̄0 (zA ) > 0.

(2)

The reason for this relationship is that for more complex problems the agent’s effort
costs are higher. Therefore, to induce A to incur this effort, the principal has to
strengthen the high-powered incentives, which increases the costs of performance
pay.
Decentralization without Performance Pay. The baseline case of our model without performance pay simplifies to the decentralization model of Bloom et al. (2012)
and Bloom et al. (2013a), whereone can replace the “trust” parameter in Bloom et
al. (2012) with P xA = 1 e = 0 . The degree of decentralization, zA , is chosen to
maximize profits:
h
i
h
i

R
Π (zA , 0) = 1−F (zA ) +F (zA )·P xA = 1 e = 0 −h·aP · 1−F (zA ) −a1,A zA −wA
.

8

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

The optimal degree of decentralization is implicitly determined by
 
a1,A
f zA∗,0 =
,
h · aP − k

(3)

where zA∗,0 denotes the optimal degree of decentralization in a firm without performance pay. The comparative statics of this case follow from the fact that f 0 (z) < 0,
as described in Bloom et al. (2012).
Decentralization with Performance Pay. The equilibrium choice of decentralization under the existence of performance pay maximizes
h
i
h
i

Π (zA , 1) = 1−F (zA ) +F (zA )·P xA = 1 e = 1 −h·aP · 1−F (zA ) −a1,A zA −w̄(zA ).
In particular, the optimal degree of decentralization under performance pay zA∗,1 is
given by
 
a1,A + w̄0 (zA )
∗,1
f zA =
(4)
h · aP − k + q
Complementarity of Decentralization and Performance Pay. Whether decentralization and performance pay are complements or substitutes depends on the
balance of two margins. First, performance pay can induce employees to make more
efficient decisions by exerting more effort.
 This margin enters through the term
q = P xA = 1 e = 1 − P xA = 1 e = 0 and is a force toward decentralization.
This is comparable to more “trust” in the framework of Bloom et al. (2012). The
reason is that performance pay incentivizes exertion of unobservable effort, which in
turn makes higher output more likely. Second, optimal performance pay will depend
on the degree of decentralization, as shown in equation (2). More decentralization—
that is, higher zA —will increase effort costs of agents, therefore requiring more
high-powered incentives to induce effort. This is a force toward centralization, since
decentralized decision-making becomes more costly. If the incremental gain from
hidden effort of employees q is relatively high, and the marginal performance pay
costs of decentralization w̄0 (zA ) are low, then zA∗,1 > zA∗,0 and decentralization and
performance pay are complements. However, if marginal performance pay costs
of decentralization w̄0 (zA ) are high and q is low, decentralization and performance
pay will be substitutes, or zA∗,1 < zA∗,0 . The following proposition summarizes the
implications for our empirical section.
Proposition. In our baseline model of decentralization and performance pay, suppose there is exogenous variation in performance pay.
Specifically, let zA∗,0 denote the optimal degree of decentralization without performance pay and zA∗,1 the optimal degree of decentralization with
performance pay. Then,

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

zA∗,1

>

zA∗,0

9


w̄0 zA∗,1
if and only if
>
.
h · aP − k
a1,A
q

In other words, in response to a change in performance pay induced by an exogenous
change in the cost of providing high-powered incentives, decentralization of real decision authority increases if the incremental efficiency gain from effort outweighs the
increased cost of performance pay. The comparative static in the proposition clarifies the potential mechanisms underlying our empirical approach. First, as suggested
by the proposition, we will use exogenous variation in the adoption of performance
pay to then trace out the optimal degree of decentralization. Second, we note that
decentralization and performance pay can be either complements or substitutes in
our model. That is, our model nests both possibilities so that, depending on our
empirical results, the model could subsequently be calibrated to investigate the
quantitative impact of the mechanisms we describe.

3
3.1

Data and Measurement
Data

To estimate the degree of complementarity between management practices, detailed data on the internal organization of firms and the implementation of management practices is necessary. The source of our data is the Workplace and Employee
Survey (WES), conducted by Statistics Canada. It is based on a random stratified representative sample of establishments, with the universe of Canadian firms as
the target population. The survey has a cross-sectional dimension of approximately
6,500 establishments over the time period 1999 to 2006, with a low overall attrition
rate of around 20% cumulatively over the seven years. Of these 6,500 establishments, we focus on the sample of around 5,500 for-profit businesses. This data has
several advantages over other existing micro-level data on management practices
and internal firm organization. First, the WES has a comprehensive sectoral coverage, in contrast to either more narrow industry studies such as Ichniowski et al.
(1997) or manufacturing-based studies such as Bloom et al. (2014). Second, since
the target population is the universe of Canadian business firms, the WES is not
biased towards certain size classes as is the World Management Survey Data by
Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). Third, another key advantage of the WES is that
firm information is obtained within a culturally more homogeneous setting with
commonly shared institutions relative to cross-country analysis based on the World

10

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

Management Survey.4 This is important as it allows us to exclude many unobserved
cultural factors that might bias our results.

3.2

Measurement

Decentralization of Real Decision Authority. The measurement of decentralization requires a credible approach to quantifying decision authority by organizational
layer. To understand the potential measurement issues involved, take for example
measures of formal decision authority based on occupational titles or organizational
charts. As indicated by Aghion and Tirole (1997), managers higher up the hierarchy often only “rubberstamp” decisions actually made by non-managerial employees.
Therefore, an increased range of formal responsibilities and reporting relations can
imply either increased control or alternatively an even more limited attention to
certain decisions and thus and thus a de facto reduction in control.
In contrast to such measures based on organizational charts, the WES includes
detailed information regarding real decisions on 12 tasks across six layers in the
organizational hierarchy. The survey questions are similar to the ones designed to
measure worker autonomy, such as those used by Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt
(2002) or Bloom et al. (2013a), in that they allow us to measure the degree to which
principals or agents are making decisions across 12 potential tasks. Specifically, the
survey asks “Who normally makes decisions with respect to the following activities?”
The respondent is then given a choice of 12 possible activities ranging from “daily
planning of individual work” over “quality control” to “product and service development.” There are six possible responses to the question of who makes decisions,
which we call organizational layers: (i) non-managerial employees, (ii) work groups,
(iii) work supervisors, (iv) senior managers, (v) individuals or groups outside the
workplace (typically headquarters for multi-establishment firms), and (vi) business
owners.5
Table 1 summarizes the patterns of decision allocation across layers. For each of
the 12 possible tasks, it shows the level of the hierarchy the task is typically decided
and how many layers are involved. To calculate this, we assign non-managerial
employees a value of 1, work groups a value of 2, etc. As the first two columns
show, decisions on routine tasks like daily work planning are typically made in lower
layers, such as by work supervisors, and hence are more decentralized. Complex
tasks on the other hand, such as product or service development are decided at
higher levels in the hierarchy, typically involving at least senior management. In
particular, note that this pattern becomes stronger if we exclude firms that have
4

The main exception to this relative homogeneity is the province of Quebec, a fact for which
we explicitly control in our analysis.
5
Except for the summary statistics provided in table 1, we exclude the layer “work groups”
from our analysis since it cannot be unambiguously assigned to either agents or principals.

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

11

any involvement of business owners in decisions. The reason is that very small firms
are naturally centralized, as business owners are typically involved in all activities
in the firm, while larger firms take advantage of the division of labor in order to
economize on the business owner’s or senior manager’s time. The last column shows
that, on average, not much more than one layer is involved in decision-making for
most activities, suggesting that the survey’s layers are sufficiently disaggregated.
A particular advantage of the WES survey format is that it allows us to clearly
separate principals from agents. Principals are defined as residual claimants of
profit flows from the firm. In particular, since most firms are single-establishment
entities, the separation between professional senior managers and business owners
is important for identifying principals. Furthermore, for multi-unit firms, decisionmakers outside the establishment are typically headquarters, so that we identify the
principal with the headquarters in such cases. On the other hand, agents are defined
as any type of employees, including managers and non-managerial employees.
Since the data on the allocation of tasks to organizational layers is multi-dimensional, we use three functions that map to the real line, each providing different
information about the decentralization of real decision authority. For the precise
definition of our three measures of the degree of decentralization, let us begin by
defining the following sets: DPrincipal is the set of activities or tasks that principals are involved in, DManager the set of activities that management is involved
in, DNonManager the set of tasks that non-managerial employees are involved in, and
DAgent = DManager ∪ DNonManager the set of tasks that agents—that is, managerial or
non-managerial employees—are involved in. Our three measures of the allocation of
decision control within the firm are then defined as follows.6
12
X
Principal
=
1{d ∈ DitPrincipal \DitAgent }
Controlit
=

d=1
12
X

1{d ∈ DitPrincipal \(DitManager ∪ DitNonManager )},

d=1

ControlManager
=
it

12
X

1{d ∈ DitManager \(DitPrincipal ∪ DitNonManager )}, and

d=1

ControlNonManager
=
it

12
X

1{d ∈ DitNonManager \(DitPrincipal ∪ DitManager )}.

d=1

The indicator function 1{d ∈ X} equals one if condition X is satisfied by d.
P12
We also analyzed the aggregate measure of tasks exclusively carried out by agents, d=1 1{d ∈
Agent
Principal
Dit
\Dit
}. The results were similar to ControlPrincipal
—with opposite sign—; hence we
it
do not report it here separately. Moreover, since in the data the concept of the “agent” is much
more ambiguous than that of the “principal,” we focus on the two disaggregated agent measures
of managers and non-managers.
6

12

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

ControlPrincipal
counts the number of tasks that are exclusively carried out by
it
the principal—i.e., business owner or headquarters—and is thus a measure of centralization of real decision authority. In contrast, the measures ControlManager
and
it
NonManager
Controlit
count the number of tasks exclusively allocated to agents, either
managers (i.e., worker supervisors and senior management) or non-managers (i.e.,
non-managerial employees), respectively. Hence, the latter two variables measure
the degree of decentralization of control. Note that the survey allows decision tasks
to be decided by multiple layers within a firm. Since it is unclear how to allocate
the actual control in such cases, our benchmark measures of decision and control
are mutually exclusive. This implies, for example that a task is counted as being
decided by the principal only if no other decision layer is involved in the decision.7
Performance Pay. The WES survey data offers a variety of information on
performance-based compensation in firms. Specifically, it allows us to measure four
different types of performance pay: (i) individual incentive pay, such as bonuses,
commissions, piece-rates, etc.; (ii) group or team incentives, (iii) profit sharing agreements, and (iv) stock-based compensation. Additionally, the survey also asks about
the presence of merit pay, which is defined as compensation for advanced education,
such as a master’s or a doctoral degree, and hence is non-performance-based pay.
In principle, the data allows us to measure these types of performance by occupation, such as managers, production workers, sales representatives, administrators,
technical support, etc. Since most firms adopt similar performance pay for all occupations, we start out using only the data on types of performance pay. To gauge
how accurate the survey responses on performance pay are, we regress two quantitative compensation measures against the indicators of the presence of different types
of performance pay. These two quantitative measures are average wages, defined
as total payroll divided by the total number of employees, and average non-wage
benefits, defined as non-payroll labor compensation per employee. As expected,
table 2 shows that establishments with performance pay systematically pay higher
average salaries, thereby lending support to the internal consistency of our data.
To get a sense for the quantitative dimensions, consider two firms—one without
and one with individual performance pay. The firm with individual performance
pay will have annual salaries per employee that are on average $4.5 higher than
firms without performance pay. This might seem a small number at first, but note
that performance pay is usually used for managers, professionals, and other nonproduction workers, who typically constitute a minority of the overall workforce in
any establishment.
Standard principal-agent analysis characterizes very general forms of state-contingent
compensation contracts to solve the moral hazard problem. Consequently, we mea7

In unreported regressions, we obtain similar results with non-exclusive categorizations of decision control.

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

13

sure the presence of performance pay with an indicator that is one if any form of
performance pay is present. We exclude stock compensation from this measure, since
information on stock compensation is completely missing for one year and only a
very small fraction of firms offer stock compensation to their employees.

4
4.1

Identification and Empirical Results
Instrumental Variables Strategy

Endogeneity: The role of unobserved heterogeneity. Before describing our instrumental variables strategy, it is helpful to remember the possible biases when using
simple ordinary least-squares (OLS) regressions. As was pointed out by Athey and
Stern (1998), it is highly plausible that firms differ in their costs and benefits from
adopting management practices. Examples of such heterogeneity include differences
in skills of principals or differences in employee skills across firms. Depending on
the source of such heterogeneity, a simple OLS regression of the adoption of decentralization on performance pay might be biased in different directions. On the one
hand, if very skilled employees allow firms to decentralize more tasks and at the
same time lower the costs of adopting performance pay, then OLS estimates of the
complementarity of decentralization and performance pay would be upward biased.
Firms would adopt these two management practices together not because they are
complementary, but because the costs of adoption are positively correlated through
unobserved employee skill. On the other hand, productivity differences across principals could bias OLS estimates of complementarity downward. Highly productive
business owners or headquarters might be able to more effectively implement performance pay and at the same time might be more productive in making decisions,
so more tasks would be centralized. In this case, firms with highly skilled principals
might not decentralize decision-making while adopting performance pay. In other
words, the benefits of decentralization and performance pay would be negatively
correlated through unobserved principal skill, and hence estimates of complementarity using OLS would be downward biased.
Overview of IV. To identify the degree of complementarity between performance
pay and decentralization, we exploit regional variation of income taxes across Canadian provinces as an instrument for the adoption of performance pay. The basic
idea is that income tax distortions increase the cost of incentive provision through
performance pay. To implement a given level of effort, a firm has to pay a higher
marginal cost the higher income taxes are. This idea is succinctly summarized by
Roberts (2004): “So, if income tax rates are lowered, it may be more attractive
to increase the use of explicit performance pay, since the cost to the firm of providing intensity of incentives is reduced.” This logic applies even more generally to

14

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

income tax progression than to the level of income taxes; see Alford (2003). The
reason is that, fundamentally, performance pay contracts are nonlinear in that they
provide higher marginal reward in high-output states. A progressive income tax
works exactly to offset this nonlinear incentive, since high incomes result in higher
marginal tax rates; see Gentry and Hubbard (2004). Thus, regional variation in
income tax progression can be compared to a “factor price variation” where the
factor of production is the adoption of performance pay. Systematic variation in
other management practices, such as decentralization in response to exogenous variation in tax progression, is comparable to a cross-price elasticity, in the spirit of
Brynjolfsson and Milgrom (2013) and Aghion, Bloom and Van Reenen (2013). As
emphasized by Aghion et al. (2013), for this identification strategy to be valid, our
exclusion restriction is equivalent to the assumption that progressive income taxes
do not directly impact decentralization decisions, except through the adoption of
incentive pay. Under this exclusion restriction, we can utilize an IV strategy that
provides a valid reduced form test of organizational complementarity, as argued by
Arora (1996), Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994) and Athey and Stern (1998).
Income Tax Progression in Canada. Several features make Canada an ideal environment to apply the logic of our IV estimation. First, the levels of income taxation
are generally far higher than, for example, in the US, thereby causing stronger distortions in the economy. Although the top statutory income tax rates at the federal
level in Canada are in fact lower than the top federal income tax in the US, Murphy,
Clemens and Veldhuis (2013) show that tax brackets are uniformly lower, so that top
marginal taxes tend to apply even at relatively modest income levels. Second, and
more importantly, regional variation in income taxes is more prevalent in Canada
than in comparable federal countries. Murphy et al. (2013) state that “compared
to citizens in other peer countries, Canadians tend to pay a lower share of their
total income taxes to the federal government, and a greater share to provincial governments.” Since Canadian provinces have full autonomy on both income tax rates
and brackets, these provincial income taxes also tend to be applicable at relatively
modest income levels.
Construction of the IV. Specifically, we use information on income tax progression in the panel of Canadian provinces going back to 1970. This data, from the
annual publication Finances of the Nation, allows us to compute income taxes by
province. Our measure of tax progression is residual income progression, a standard
measure used in public finance to summarize tax progressivity; see Jakobsson (1976)
and Musgrave and Musgrave (1989). It is defined as
1 − MTR
,
ρ=
1 − ATR
where MTR is the top marginal income tax rate and ATR the average income tax rate.

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

15

In this measure, ρ = 1 corresponds to a flat tax system, while ρ < 1 implies that
the tax system exhibits progressivity. Consequently, higher values of ρ imply less
progressivity and will imply a higher incentive to adopt performance pay.
We adjust this basic measure of tax progression in two ways. First, the raw data
on tax progression exhibits year-to-year fluctuations due to small random changes
in statutory tax rates. Since we expect organizational changes, such as the implementation of performance pay, to exhibit long time lags, we smooth these annual
fluctuations by taking 10-year averages of the tax progression measures. Second,
for multi-province firms, we assign tax progression of the headquarters province as
reference tax progression. We do this since the adoption of management practices
in our data is mostly firm-wide.8 Firms that operate in multiple provinces have
most of their establishments in the headquarters province, so it seems reasonable
to assume that if firms adopt management practices, they use the same practices in
other regions.9 Note that the bulk of firms are single-establishment firms and we
will explicitly analyze multi-province firms in section 5.
To summarize, the variation in our instrument is driven by provincial differences
in tax progressivity and, to a limited degree, by within-province variation in tax
progressivity. We extend our instrument to cross-industry variation later in the
robustness section.

4.2

Specification

Here, we describe the precise econometric specification as a backdrop for the
discussion of all our empirical results. As discussed earlier, the potentially endogenous variable of interest is the adoption of performance pay. We measure this
management practice using an indicator denoted by I(Performance Pay)i,t , for establishment i at time t, which is one if there is any form of “pay for performance.”
We are interested in the interaction of performance pay with our three measures for
decentralization. As noted by Athey and Stern (1998), the possibility of correlated
unobserved adoption costs across firms renders raw correlations invalid for tests of
complementarity. Hence, based on the idea that income tax progression is a valid
instrument for the potentially endogenous variable I(Performance Pay)i,t , the first
8

The fact that management practices in general and performance pay in particular do not
vary much across region for multi-establishment, multi-regional firms suggests that other internal
frictions, such as equity concerns and social norms, might prevent firms from writing optimal
contracts given the local tax schedules.
9
In unreported regressions, we also assigned tax progressions based on the actual establishment
locations. When tax progression variables based on actual location and on headquarters location are included together to predict performance pay, only headquarters-based tax progression
measures are highly significant, while tax progression based on actual location is insignificant.

16

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

stage of the IV regression is
I(Performance Pay)i,t = αρ · ρi,t + controlsi,t + ε1,i,t ,
where ρi,t is the residual income progression measure described above. Since higher
values of ρ capture less progressive income taxes, one would expect that αρ > 0;
thus, less progression makes implementation of performance pay more likely. If the
exclusion restriction holds, then one can use this first stage to obtain the secondstage IV estimator
\ Pay)i,t + controlsi,t + ε2,i,t
ControlPrincipal
= βPP · I(Performance
i,t
i,t
where βPP is the causal effect of the adoption of performance pay on the degree of
centralization of real decision authority. In particular, βPP > 0 implies that adoption of performance pay increases decision control by the principal. In this case,
decentralization and performance pay would be substitutes. On the other hand,
βPP < 0 implies that adoption of performance pay leads to less control by the principal and more delegation of decisions to employees, in which case decentralization
and performance pay would be complements.
We use a number of standard variables to control for various obvious confounders.
Among them are industry and year fixed effects to control for aggregate differences
across industries or economy-wide shocks. Furthermore, we control for firm size
as measured by the log of the total number of employees, the log of establishment
age, and indicators for multi-establishment firms as well as exporter status. These
are first-order controls, as one might expect that firms have a natural tendency to
decentralize activities the larger they grow; simultaneously, the presence of more
employees might make the implementation of performance pay more cost-effective,
if the latter is associated with fixed costs of adoption.
We briefly note two properties of the estimator in use. First, to avoid running
“forbidden regressions,” we use a linear probability model for the first stage, as
recommended by Angrist (2001) and Angrist and Pischke (2009). Second, we note
that since our estimator is just-identified, any weak-instruments problem is likely
to be diagnosed simply using correctly calculated second-stage standard errors; see
Angrist and Pischke (2009). Table 3 provides first-stage estimates to ensure that the
first stage is not insignificant, which is the only case for which the weak-instruments
problems could matter in the just-identified case.10 These estimates show that in
both probit and linear probability models, the first stage is highly significant and
exhibits the expected sign for αρ .
10

Note that it is difficult to interpret the magnitudes of the estimates given the nature of the
dependent variable; hence we do not further discuss the results.

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

4.3

17

Results

As argued in section 2, predictions based on a simple theory of decentralization
with moral hazard are ambiguous on whether decentralization and performance pay
are complements or substitutes. Our baseline results in table 4 suggest that they
are complements. The first three columns provide simple OLS estimates of our
measures of decision control and the adoption of performance pay. On average,
adopting performance pay is associated with principals carrying out two tasks less
and managerial agents carrying out one more, while non-managerial agents’ control
is not correlated with performance pay. The raw regression coefficients on performance pay are compatible with the presence of this complementarity, but as Athey
and Stern (1998) indicate, they could also be generated by a positive correlation of
adoption costs for both management practices. Columns 4 to 6 report IV estimates,
which confirm the presence of complementarity performance pay and the decentralization of decisions from principals to agents. In response to exogenous adoptions of
performance pay, firms reallocate real decision authority systematically away from
principals and down the hierarchy. Note that the coefficient estimates for the IV
estimates are mostly larger in absolute value than the OLS estimates, implying that
the correlation of decentralization and performance pay in the OLS error term is
negative. As discussed above, such a correlation is potentially indicative of the importance of omitting principal skill from the OLS regression. Another possibility
that might generate this result is that performance pay is measured very noisily, so
that our IV strategy reduces attenuation.
A notable feature of our empirical approach is our ability to separate agents into
managerial employees, such as senior management and work supervisors, and nonmanagerial employees, such as production workers and sales representatives. This
allows us to answer the question of how far down the hierarchy firms decentralize in
response to the adoption of performance pay. It is evident in table 4 that firms tend
to concentrate decision-making at the management level. That is, although they
decentralize decision-making down from principals to agents in general, they also
centralize decision-making away from non-managerial employees to managers. This
is surprising for several reasons. First, one might have thought that since performance pay enables more efficient decision-making at all levels of the organization,
the adoption of performance pay induces a general movement toward decentralization. This prediction would have implied that the performance pay coefficients for
both, ControlManager and ControlNonManager are positive. Second, there exist popular
views that middle management is a wasteful bureaucratic layer. These views emphasize the importance of worker empowerment, so one would have expected that
firms would reallocate tasks from the management to non-managerial employees.
In that case, the coefficient on ControlManager should have been negative, while the
coefficient on ControlNonManager would have been positive.

18

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

To support our basic findings on the concentration of decision control at the
management level, we move beyond the analysis of decision control and analyze
labor demand patterns in firms implementing performance pay. Panel A of table 5
shows the impact of an exogenous adoption of performance pay on the occupational
composition of firms. In particular, our dependent variable is the proportion of the
workforce at an establishment, that comprises of one of five occupational classes:
(i) managers, (ii) production workers, (iii) professionals, (iv) sales representatives,
and (v) administrative staff. The key result is that establishments implementing
performance pay employ more managers as a proportion of their workforce. So not
only do firms that adopt performance pay driven by exogenous reasons allocate more
decision responsibility to management, they also maintain larger pools of managers
to meet these responsibilities.
One question is whether firms that implement performance pay do not actually
employ more managers, but might tend to lay-off non-managers, so that the fraction
of non-managers in the workforce is higher. A simple mechanism through which this
could occur is one in which managers begin cutting costs by laying off non-managerial
employees. This might explain why non-managerial employees are given less control
over decisions – there might simply be less of them at the firm. However, panel B
of table 5 shows that the coefficients on hiring and firing have the wrong sign with
firms implementing incentive pay laying off less , although the estimates are not
statistically significant and implausibly large. Hiring rates at these establishments
are lower, but the effect is not statistically significant. Instead, panel C of table 5
suggests that firms that adopt performance pay shift their hiring towards managers.
This evidence is compatible with a view that the largest gains from implementation
of performance pay occur through more efficient decision-making of managers. Consequently, firms tend to not only concentrate control at the management level, but
also tend to hire more managers to deal with the increased responsibilities. Overall, the data are compatible with the view that management plays a key role at
the intersection of production and non-production decisions. Our findings are also
supportive of the hypothesis advanced by Atalay et al. (2013) that the nature of
firms is intimately connected to their role in “mediating managerial supervision and
control.”

4.4

Extension: Organizational Change

So far we have documented how firms that adopt performance pay for exogenous
reasons, concentrate control at the management level and hire more professional
managers. However, what do these managers do with their wider range of responsibilities? This section attempts to provide some answers to this question. While
we find this question intriguing, we have to caution the reader that the wider application of our IV to variables other than decision control potentially threatens

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

19

identification. Depending on the dependent variable, tax progressivity might have a
direct impact on organizational changes beyond its influence through performance
pay. However, the plausibility of such a direct mechanism must be decided on a
case-by-case basis.
Panel D of table 5 summarizes the IV results for six management practices: (i)
decrease in the degree of centralization, (ii) re-engineering of business processes, (iii)
downsizing, (iv) adoption of TQM, (v) outsourcing, and (vi) delayering of managerial hierarchies. In each of these cases, the dependent variable is a survey response to
the question: “Has your workplace experienced any of the following forms of organizational change... (in the past year)?” An affirmative answer is coded as one, while
a negative answer is coded as zero. The first notable result that provides another
validity check on our results is that establishments that implement performance pay
do not seem to systematically decrease the degree of centralization. This seems
puzzling in light of the clear movement of the delegation of decision-making from
principals to agents in general. However, it is in fact completely consistent once we
take into account the simultaneous centralization of decisions from non-managerial
employees to management. This shows that it might be difficult for survey respondents to answer this survey question unambiguously, because as our previous
results show, there are competing forces at work; decentralization from principals
to managers, but also centralization from non-managers to managers. Moreover,
this variable probably has substantial measurement error, much more so than the
allocation of tasks to decision layers.
One of the management practices more frequently used by managers when adequately incentivized with performance pay is business process re-engineering (or
“re-engineering”). We note that this question in the survey provides a brief description of this management practice as “redesigning processes to improve performance
and cost.” After being popularized in the U.S. by Hammer (1990), business process
re-engineering has often been criticized as a cover for downsizing instead of a valid
approach to improve firm performance. While a comprehensive evaluation of reengineering is beyond the scope of our study, our data does allow us to investigate
whether managers implementing re-engineering downsize their workforce simultaneously. In particular, the survey defines downsizing as “reducing the number of
employees on payroll to reduce expenses: it is part of a reorganization in the workplace and not simply a response to a drop in demand.” The fourth column in panel
D of table 5 shows that although firms implementing performance pay are more
likely to adopt re-engineering, they are not much more likely to downsize. The latter result is consistent with our earlier findings regarding the overall layoff and quit
rate at firms. To summarize, performance pay seems to induce managers to seek
more efficient business processes, but does not necessarily lead them to downsize the
workforce.
It is also worth highlighting that exogenous implementation of performance pay

20

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

leads to more likely adoption of TQM. This is surprising, since a widespread assumption regarding the effective implementation of this management practice is
that it is complementary to worker empowerment or more decentralization towards
non-managerial employees. In contrast, our empirical results suggest that worker
empowerment and TQM are not necessarily complements, but are potentially substitutes.
Up to this point, much of our discussion of the knock-on effects of implementation of performance pay on other management practices has focused on inferring
information regarding which decisions managers might make. But are there possible
implications of the implementation of performance pay for the number of managerial hierarchies themselves? A natural starting point for this question might be a
version of Garicano (2000), in which the number of hierarchies is endogenously determined, in contrast to our baseline model that keeps the number of hierarchical
levels fixed. According to Garicano (2000), an organization will be able to deal with
more problems and responsibilities if the number of layers is high. Therefore, one
might conjecture that an increased concentration of decisions at the management
level might also increase the number of managerial layers. To analyze this point, we
use the reduction in the number of managerial levels (delayering) as a dependent
variable in the last column of panel D of table 5. It shows that the simple intuition from a model of endogenous hierarchies is not borne out in the data. Hence,
although management exhibits greater control over decisions in the firm once performance pay is implemented, it does not deal with these responsibilities by adding
more real decision layers in the organization. On the contrary, there is a systematic
tendency to delayer in these firms.

5

Robustness

In this robustness section, we address two potential concerns. First, given that
most of the exogenous variation in our instrument is driven by regional differences,
it is possible that unobserved omitted variables at the local level render our identification invalid. Second, there are possible alternative explanations for the specific
decentralization patterns observed in the data, either in addition to our proposed
mechanism via performance pay or in lieu of it.

5.1

Within-Province Variation

To explore whether unobserved regional factors drive our results, we focus on
the sample of firms that operate across multiple provinces. For these firms, we include a full set of province fixed effects that controls for unobserved factors in their
location. At the same time, since their assigned tax progression measures are based

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

21

on the headquarters region, the instrument is still valid. In other words, we compare establishments which are part of multi-province firms within the same location
and predict that establishments with headquarters located in regions with high tax
progressivity are less likely to adopt performance pay than establishments in the
same location that have headquarters in regions with low tax progressivity. This
alternative IV strategy takes full account of unobserved confounders in an establishment’s location without compromising our identification strategy. The IV estimates
in columns 1 to 3 of table 6 are quantitatively similar to our benchmark estimates,
although less precisely estimated due to the loss of 90% of the observations. The
coefficient on both those decision tasks controlled by the principal and those tasks
controlled by non-managerial employees stays significant. Note also that the coefficient on the manager tasks stay significant at the 10% level, although we cut our
sample in this robustness check by 90%.

5.2

Industry-Province Interaction IV

Another way to address possible concerns about using only regional variation in
our IV strategy is to exploit more industry level variation. To this end, we use 4digit industry variation in the share of firms reporting product innovations in 1999.
As in Holmstrom (1989), the idea is that employee activities that are important for
innovation are hard to monitor. As a result, firms that operate in industries where
innovation is important are more likely to adopt performance pay if tax progression
is low. Following this idea, we use regional tax progression as well as the interaction
of regional tax progressivity with the share of innovating firms as our instruments.
Since the IV variation is now also based on 4-digit industry variation, we cluster our
standard errors by year, region, and industry. The Craig-Donald F-statistic to test
for weak IVs has a value of 32.75, and the first stage is again highly statistically
significant. Columns 4 to 6 of table 6 show estimates of the effect of performance
pay adoption on decentralization that are very similar to the simple IV estimates
in table 4. However, the standard errors do increase somewhat, indicating that the
industry variation does add some noise.

5.3

Alternative Explanations

We argued that using provincial differences in income tax progression can be
used to instrument for the adoption of performance pay, even in the presence of unobserved heterogeneity in adoption cost, as emphasized by Athey and Stern (1998).
If our identification strategy is valid, the IV estimator recovers a valid estimate of
the degree of complementarity between performance pay and decentralization. Here,
we explore a number of alternative explanations for our results and argue that our
basic findings are robust in controlling for those extensions.

22

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

• Industry trends in technology or competition. Potential unobserved factors
influencing performance pay and decentralization include industry trends in
technology and competition. For example, suppose firms adopt better computer technology that allows them to decentralize tasks more easily. At the
same time, this technology might provide an independent noisy signal on the
effort of employees, effectively lowering the cost of performance pay. Consequently, firms might implement decentralization and performance pay, driven
by industry trends in technology. An alternative plausible industry trend is the
intensification of competition. On one hand, this could lead to decentralization
of decision-making, as argued by Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2010). On
the other hand, competition might induce principals to adopt performance pay,
as in the model of Raith (2003). To control for these types of mechanisms, we
include a full set of industry-time interactions to capture unobserved industry
trends in competition and technology. In case competition is not only national
but has an important regional component, we also use survey response data on
perceived local competition. More specifically, the WES asks respondents to
indicate whether they think that local competition is important. We therefore
include an indicator which is one if the firm perceived local competition to be
relevant.
• Total number of tasks and organizational layers. Firms might also differ in
the complexity of the problems they typically have to solve. For example,
some firms with simple business processes might not have to formally allocate
certain decisions, such as customer service, to the business owner or employees.
Other firms with complicated just-in-time production will need to assign a
large number of tasks to decision-makers, and decentralization might thus be
natural. Furthermore, such firms will also tend to implement performance
pay because of moral hazard problems in these complex business processes.
We use two proxies to control for this issue. The first is a direct measure of
the overall number of tasks the firm is involved in. The second is a proxy
for the number of decision layers the firm has, which we call “task scope.”
We base this measure on ideas of Garicano (2000) that organizations with
more layers economize on managers’ time and therefore are able to solve more
complex problems. We construct this measure in the following manner: for
each possible decision layer, we check whether the firm has assigned any of the
12 decision tasks to this layer. If it has done so, we infer that this layer exists;
otherwise, we presume that the firm does not use this layer in decision-making
problems, and hence we ignore it.
• Unobserved employee skill. Employee skill can lower costs of both decentralization and performance pay. Highly skilled employees might be more likely to
require little training to make decisions on relatively complicated tasks. Fur-

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

23

thermore, performance pay might then just be present to provide high wage
payments to very skilled employees to induce a sorting toward high-skill employees, as shown by Lazear (2000). To control for this explanation, we include
the average wage—i.e., the ratio of payroll to number of total workers—as well
as the fraction of workers in the top earnings bracket, which we call “fraction
of top earners,” to proxy for the presence of highly skilled workers.
• Novelty business strategy. The joint adoption of performance pay and decentralization might also result from a firm’s business strategy that is based
on innovating and introducing new products. For example, a firm trying to
innovate might decentralize decision-making to benefit from information acquisition of employees, as in Aghion and Tirole (1997). At the same time, the
firm might want to implement performance pay to give employees incentives
to participate in innovation. To control for this mechanism, we include an
indicator that takes the value of one if a firm’s top priority in its business
strategy is innovation. This measure is more fully developed and explained in
Yang, Kueng and Hong (2014).
• Risk. In response to empirical studies suggesting a positive correlation between
risk and performance pay, theoretical models such as Prendergast (2002) have
argued that risk can drive both decentralization and performance pay. Therefore, risk could be a potential confounder biasing our results towards a finding
of complementarity between performance pay and decentralization. We include the standard deviation of operating margin at the establishment level as
an explicit measure of risk.
• French culture. For most of our sample, it is safe to assume that the cultural
differences across Canadian provinces are minor. The obvious exception is
Quebec. There are several ways in which the presence of French culture in
Canada could influence our results. First, regarding decentralization, Bloom
et al. (2012) note that there is a tendency to centralize decision-making in
the French culture. Second, French culture as part of continental European
culture has been argued to exhibit a larger degree of inequity aversion based on
different equilibrium beliefs regarding luck vs. meritocracy; see, e.g., Alesina
and Angeletos (2005). This inequity aversion might prevent firms under French
influence from implementing performance pay. We directly control for the
effects of French culture by including an indicator of whether the establishment
is located in Quebec.
Tables 7-9 display the results from the robustness checks of our results. The
specifications include all the standard controls we used in previous specifications.
These controls are omitted here due to space constraints. As these tables show, all

24

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

baseline results are robust, whether the control variables are included sequentially or
altogether. In particular, the size of the relationship is quantitatively similar across
all specifications and remains highly statistically significant.
While the additional control variables do not affect our estimates of the degree
of complementarity between performance pay and decentralization, one might ask
whether the effects on our control variables are consistent with the mechanisms we
described above. This is indeed the case with most mechanisms, even as the signs
on some coefficients are not conclusive in this respect. For example, firms with more
decision layers tend to be more decentralized as principals are making decisions on
a lower number of tasks. This is compatible with the notion of Garicano (2000)
that more specialization is related to a higher number of layers. Similarly, higher
average salaries are correlated with a lower degree of decision authority at the level
of the principal and more decision authority by non-managerial employees. This is
exactly the type of systematic pattern one would expect if higher salaries capture
more skilled workers. However, note that in this context, the fraction of top earners
in firms enters with the opposite sign, suggesting that firms with more top earners
have a more centralized decision-making process.
Finally, a number of results in these robustness regressions are inconsistent with
the type of mechanism they are constructed to control for. The most prominent
example is the correlation of risk and decentralization. In theoretical models such
as Prendergast (2002), firms that are exposed to more risk tend to decentralize
decision-making and adopt performance pay. In contrast, as table 7 shows, risk
is positively but insignificantly correlated with centralization of decision-making.
One reason for this puzzling result could be the fact that the model of Prendergast
(2002) is a better description of the the delegation of decisions between managers and
non-managers instead of principals and agents. In other words, even if principals
do not delegate any tasks to employees, it might still be possible that managers
delegate tasks to non-managerial employees. But as tables 8 and 9 indicate, firms
that are exposed to more risk tend to grant managers more decision authority than
non-managerial employees.

6

Conclusion

Our study provides the first causal economy-wide evidence on management practice complementarity, combining regional variation on income tax progression with
business-level data on internal organization from Canada. By estimating the average degree of complementarity between decentralization and performance pay, our
results provide a benchmark to calibrate quantitative models of endogenous productivity and management practices, such as agent-based models used by Rivkin (2000).
We also provide evidence clarifying the mechanism through which management prac-

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

25

tices may influence productivity outcomes, complementing previous work highlighting their importance in explaining productivity differences across firms (Bloom and
Van Reenen (2007)). Management practices may be valuable in isolation for productivity, but different practices may also complement each other, making joint
adoption of certain types of management practices more valuable.
We note that our findings suggest several avenues for future work. While we provide evidence of complementarity of decentralization and incentive pay, estimating
the actual effects on firm productivity of joint adoption are a logical extension of
our findings. As argued by Athey and Stern (1998), management practice complementarity should have important consequences for productivity estimation, where
complementary management practices must be evaluated together to recover valid
estimates of the productivity gains from adopting management practices. One potential path for future work in this area would be to combine an instrumental variables approach with the structural estimator proposed by Athey and Stern (1998)
and Kretschmer et al. (2012). Also, our results suggest that the deployment of
professional management is a key function of firms, complementing the findings of
Atalay et al. (2013). However, the precise causal mechanisms linking the presence of
professional management, the importance of management practices, and firm productivity outcomes is not yet well understood. Future empirical work investigating
these causal relationships would add valuable insight into how management practices
are implemented within firms, and provide greater clarity into the link between internal organizational factors and productivity outcomes. Finally, future work could
also consider the link between management practice complementarity and financial
frictions. In a model of firm dynamics that includes both factors, management practice complementarity is likely to strongly interact with credit frictions, where credit
constraints may have a significant impact on firm productivity differences and aggregate productivity. Taken together, these possible avenues for future work suggest
that complementarity of management practices offers one possible explanation for
why productivity differences remain so significant and persistent across firms.

References
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, N. Bloom, W. Kerr, and J. Van Reenen, “Innovation,
reallocation and growth,” mimeo, Stanford University, 2013.
Aghion, P. and J. Tirole, “Formal and real authority in organizations,” Journal of
Political Economy, 1997.
, N. Bloom, and J. Van Reenen, “Incomplete contracts and the internal organization of firms,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 2013.
Alesina, A. and M. Angeletos, “Fairness and Redistribution: US vs. Europe,” American Economic Review, 2005.

26

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

Alford, S., “The effect of personal income tax on corporate agency costs,” mimeo,
Asper School of Business, University of Manitoba, 2003.
Angrist, J., “Models with dummy endogenous regressors: simple strategies for empirical practice,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2001.
and S. Pischke, Mostly harmless econometrics, Prince, 2009.
Arora, A., “Testing for complementarities in reduced form regressions: a note,”
Economics, 1996.
Atalay, E., A. Hortascu, and C. Syverson, “Vertical integration and input flows,”
American Economic Review, 2013.
Athey, S. and S. Stern, “An empirical framework for testing ttheorie about complementarity in ororganization design,” NBER Working Paper, 1998.
Baily, M., C. Hulten, and D. Campbell, “Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing
Plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1992.
Bester, H. and D. Kremer, “Delegation and Incentives,” Rand Journal of Economics,
2008.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
Across Firms and Countries,” Quarterly Jounral of Economics, 2007.
, L. Garicano, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, “The distinct effects of information
technology and communication technology on firm organization,” Management
Science, 2013.
, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, “Does product market competition lead firms to
decentralize?,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2010.
, , and , “The organization of firms across countries,” Quarterly Jounral of
Economics, 2012.
, , and , “Management as Technology?,” mimeo, Stanford University, 2013.
Bloom, Nicholas, Erik Brynjolfsson, Lucia Foster, Ron S Jarmin, Megha Patnaik,
Itay Saporta Eksten, and John Van Reenen, “IT and Management in America,”
2014.
Bresnahan, T., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. Hitt, “Information technology, workplace
organization and the demand for skilled labor: firm-level evidence,” Quarterly
Jounral of Economics, 2002.
Brynjolfsson, E. and P. R. Milgrom, “Complementarity in Organizations,” Handbook
of Organizational Economics, 2013.
Chassang, S., “Building Routines: Learning, Cooperation and the Dynamics of
Incomplete Relational Contracts,” American Economic Review, 2010.
Drucker, P., The Concept of the Corporation, Transaction Publishers, 1949.
Garicano, L., “Hierachies and the organization of knowledge in production,” Journal

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

27

of Political Economy, 2000.
and E. Rossi-Hansberg, “Organizing Growth,” Journal of Economic Theory,
2012.
Gentry, W. and G. Hubbard, “The Effects of Progressive Income Taxation on Job
Turnover,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004.
Gibbons, R. and R. Henderson, “What do managers do?,” Handbook of Organizational Economics, 2013.
, R. Holden, and M. Powell, “Organization and information: firms’ governance
choices in rational-expectations equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2012.
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman, “Integration vs. outsourcing in industry equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002.
and O. Hart, “An Analysis of the principal-agent problem,” Econometrica, 1983.
Hammer, M., “Reengineering work: don’t automate, obliterate!,” Harvard Business
Review, 1990.
Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom, “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership and Job Design,” Jounral of Law, Economics and
Organization, 1991.
and , “The firm as an incentive system,” American Economic Review, 1994.
Holmstrom, Bengt, “Agency Costs and Innovation,” Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 1989.
Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw, and G. Prennushi, “The effects of human resource management practices on productivity: a study of steel finishing lines,” American
Economic Review, 1997.
Jakobsson, U., “On the measurement of the degree of progression,” Journal of Public
Economics, 1976.
Jensen, M.C. and W.H. Meckling, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs, and Ownership Structures,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1976,
3 (4), 305–360.
Jones, Charles I., “Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic
Development,” American Economic Journal: Macro, 2011.
Klette, T. and S. Kortum, “Innovating firms and aggregate innovation,” Journal of
Political Economy, 2004.
Kretschmer, T., E. Miravete, and J. Pernias, “Competitive pressure and the adoption of complementary innovations,” American Economic Review, 2012.
Krishna, V. and J. Morgan, “Contracting for information under imperfect committment,” Rand Journal of Economics, 2008.

28

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

Laffont, J. and D. Martimort, The theory of incentives: the principal-agent model,
Princeton University Press, 2002.
Lazear, E., “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Economic Review, 2000.
Luttmer, E., “Selection, growth and the size distribution of firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts, “The economics of modern manufacturing: technology,
strategy and organization,” American Economic Review, 1990.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, “Complementarities and fit strategy, structure,
and organizational change in manufacturing,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 1995.
Murphy, R., J. Clemens, and N. Veldhuis, “The economic costs of increased marginal
tax rates in Canada,” Studies in Budget and Tax Policy, Frazier Institute, 2013.
Musgrave, R. and P. Musgrave, Public finance in theory and practice, McGraw-Hill,
1989.
Penrose, E., The theory of the growth of the firm, Oxford University Press, 1959.
Porter, M., “What is strategy?,” Harvard Business Review, 1996.
and N. Siggelkow, “Contextuality within activity systems and substainability of
competitive advantage,” Academy of Management Perspectives, 2008.
Powell, M., “Productivity and credibility in industry equilibrium,” mimeo, Kellogg
School of Management, Northwestern University, 2013.
Prendergast, C., “The tenuous trade-off between risk and incentives,” Journal of
Political Economy, 2002.
Raith, M., “Competition, risk and managerial incentives,” American Economic Review, 2003.
Rivkin, J., “Imitation of complex strategies,” Management Science, 2000.
Roberts, J., The Modern Firm, Oxford, 2004.
Steen, E. Van Den, “Disagreement and the Allocation of Control,” Journal of Law,
Economics and Organization, 2010.
Syverson, C., “What determines productivity?,” Journal of Economic Literature,
2011.
Yang, Mu-Jeung, Lorenz Kueng, and Bryan Hong, “Business Strategy and the Management of Firms,” mimeo, University of Washington, 2014.

29

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

Table 1: Summary statistics of the hierarchical layers
Average layer
all
layers

excl.
bus. own.

1. Daily work planning

3.24
[0.032]

2.85
[0.08]

1.16
[0.012]

2. Weekly work planning

3.32
[0.031]

2.97
[0.08]

1.17
[0.012]

3. Purchase of supplies

3.34
[0.031]

3.09
[0.076]

1.17
[0.012]

4. Equipment maintenance

3.4
[0.035]

3.13
[0.088]

1.17
[0.014]

5. Customer relations

3.47
[0.028]

3.2
[0.076]

1.25
[0.017]

6. Quality control

3.55
[0.025]

3.37
[0.075]

1.25
[0.017]

7. Follow-up of results

3.56
[0.026]

3.25
[0.075]

1.17
[0.012]

8. Training

3.63
[0.025]

3.5
[0.062]

1.17
[0.011]

9. Filling vacancies

3.84
[0.018]

3.65
[0.059]

1.08
[0.0082]

3.85

3.8

1.12

[0.02]

[0.064]

[0.011]

3.86

3.84

1.09

[0.02]

[0.066]

[0.0089]

3.87

3.71

1.07

[0.017]

[0.059]

[0.007]

5,311

2,246

5,311

No. of layers

Tasks/Activities:

10. Product or service development
11. Production technology choice
12. Set staffing levels
Number of obs.

Notes: Organizational layers are coded as 1 (non-managerial employees), 2 (work group), 3 (work supervisor), 4 (senior manager), 5 (headquarters), 6 (business owner). All data is for the 2003 cross section.
The first column displays population-weighted average layers involved across the 12 tasks. The second
column displays the population-weighted average number of layers involved across the 12 tasks where the
business owner is not involved at all in decision-making. The third column displays the average number
of layers involved in a given task across all firms. All summary statistics are weighted using survey
weights to make results representative for all business firms in Canada. Standard errors in parenthesis.

30

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

Table 2: Performance pay and average compensation

Avg. annual
salary

Avg. non-wage
benefits

4.479***
(0.887)

0.131
(0.139)

I(Group Incentives)

2.205*
(1.163)

0.262
(0.179)

I(Profit Sharing)

3.364**
(1.320)

0.171
(0.162)

I(Stock Compensation)

4.182*
(2.385)

0.852*
(0.454)

0.493
(1.267)

0.138
(0.252)

log(employment)

0.934**
(0.409)

-0.121
(0.103)

log(establishment age)

1.382***
(0.375)

0.469***
(0.084)

I(multi-establishment firm)

1.695
(1.702)

1.079**
(0.425)

I(exporter)

2.374**
(0.981)

0.093
(0.151)

Industry FE
Time FE
Number of obs.
R-squared

Yes
Yes
17,104
0.299

Yes
Yes
12,568
0.254

Dependent variables:
Performance Pay Adoption:
I(Individual Incentives)

Non-Performance Pay Adoption:
I(Merit-Based Pay)

Firm Characteristics:

Notes: Dependent variables are: payroll/(total employees) in column 1 and (nonpayroll labor compensation)/(total employees) in column 2. Industry fixed effects are
at the 4-digit NAICS level. Data is for years 2001, 2003, and 2005, excluding 1999,
which does not include data on stock compensation. Standard errors are clustered
by sampling strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. All regressions
use sampling weights.

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

Table 3: First stage—performance pay adoption on tax progression

Dep. var.: I(Performance Pay)

OLS

Probit

1.433***
(0.130)

5.435***
(0.658)

log(employment)

0.140***
(0.005)

0.488***
(0.019)

log(establishment age)

-0.011**
(0.005)

-0.042**
(0.022)

I(multi-establishment firm)

0.155***
(0.024)

0.460***
(0.082)

I(exporter)

0.028
(0.020)

0.087
(0.065)

Industry FE
Time FE
Number of obs.
R-squared

Yes
Yes
22,285
0.258

Yes
Yes
22,285
–

Performance Pay Instrument:
ρ(tax progression)

Firm Characteristics:

Notes: The measure of tax progression is residual income progression as defined in the text, where tax region is defined to be the location of the headquarters. Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Data is for
years 1999, 2001, 2003, and 2005. Standard errors are clustered by region
and year. All regressions use sampling weights. Results for first stage using
only 2003 and 2005 are similar: the tax progression measure enters with a
highly significant coefficient of 1.415 with a standard error of (0.24). The
Craig-Donald F-statistic to test for weak IVs has a value of 249.05.

31

32

Table 4: Decentralization and performance pay

IV

OLS
Dep. var.: Control by

Principal

Manager

NonManager

Principal

Manager

NonManager

-1.943***
(0.359)

0.892***
(0.191)

0.049
(0.089)

-5.838***
(1.128)

5.290***
(1.187)

-1.966***
(0.733)

-1.749***
(0.119)

0.622***
(0.095)

-0.134**
(0.052)

-1.192***
(0.210)

0.000
(0.124)

0.147
(0.121)

log(establishment age)

0.042
(0.090)

0.020
(0.097)

0.065*
(0.033)

-0.096*
(0.058)

0.141***
(0.043)

0.007
(0.037)

I(multi-establishment firm)

-0.343
(0.236)

-0.646***
(0.248)

-0.329***
(0.114)

0.353
(0.252)

-1.427***
(0.292)

0.008
(0.162)

I(exporter)

0.383
(0.323)

-0.373**
(0.187)

0.064
(0.084)

0.348
(0.269)

-0.402**
(0.197)

0.036
(0.143)

Industry FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Time FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Number of obs.

11,684

11,684

11,684

11,684

11,684

11,684

R-squared

0.355

0.255

0.186

–

–

–

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

34.61

34.61

34.61

Performance Pay Adoption:

Firm Characteristics:
log(employment)

1st-stage F-stat.

Notes: The dependent variables are number of decisions made by principals, management and non-managerial employees. OLS-columns use dummy
for performance pay as independent variable. IV-columns use a LIML IV estimator with tax progression as instrument and the linear probability first
stage displayed in table 3. Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Years are 2003 and 2005 as information distinguishing business owners
from senior management is only available in these years. Standard errors are clustered by sampling strata for OLS, which are broad industry-size-region
categories; clustering for IV is by region and year. All regressions use sampling weights.

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

I(Performance Pay)

Table 5: IV regressions—inspecting the mechanism

A. Occupation composition

B. Hiring and firing

prod. workers

0.300***
(0.060)

-0.233***
(0.090)

0.046*
(0.027)

layoffs

Rate of
quits
dismissals

sales rep.

admin. staff

0.014
(0.038)

-0.007
(0.027)

hiring

-0.139
(0.100)

0.029
(0.088)

-0.002
(0.040)

-0.123
(0.162)

C. Hiring by occupation

managers

prod. workers

professionals

sales rep.

admin. staff

I(Performance Pay)

0.039**
(0.017)

-0.230**
(0.091)

0.009
(0.013)

0.124***
(0.047)

-0.001
(0.024)

D. Organizational change

decentralize

re-engineer

downsize

adopt TQM

outsource

delayer

I(Performance Pay)

-0.017
(0.031)

0.334***
(0.066)

0.026
(0.054)

0.183***
(0.062)

0.184*
(0.100)

0.063***
(0.023)

Yes
Yes
Yes
22,285

Yes
Yes
Yes
22,285

Yes
Yes
Yes
22,285

Yes
Yes
Yes
22,285

Yes
Yes
Yes
22,285

Yes
Yes
Yes
22,285

Firm characteristics
Industry FE
Time FE
Number of obs.

Notes: The specification is a LIML IV estimator with tax progression as instrument and the linear probability first stage displayed in table 3. Industry fixed
effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Firm characteristics include log employment and log establishment age as well as indicators for multi-establishment
firms and exporters. Years are 1999, 2001, 2003, and 2005. Standard errors are clustered by region and year. All regressions use sampling weights.

33

I(Performance Pay)

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

I(Performance Pay)

managers

Fraction of
professionals

34

Table 6: Robustness: Within-province and industry-interaction IVs

industry-interaction IV

within-province
Dep. var.: Control by

Principal

Manager

NonManager

Principal

Manager

NonManager

-8.495***
(2.089)

3.225*
(1.918)

-1.975**
(0.925)

-5.573***
(1.378)

4.747***
(1.459)

-1.900**
(0.743)

log(employment)

-0.105
(0.247)

0.315
(0.320)

0.023
(0.102)

-1.229***
(0.224)

0.075
(0.188)

0.137
(0.110)

log(establishment age)

0.419
(0.327)

-0.221
(0.306)

-0.007
(0.083)

-0.088
(0.086)

0.124
(0.077)

0.009
(0.045)

-1.448***
(0.364)

-0.126
(0.646)

-0.299
(0.279)

0.306
(0.412)

-1.330***
(0.305)

-0.004
(0.165)

0.772
(0.569)

-0.464
(0.587)

0.048
(0.173)

0.349
(0.296)

-0.403**
(0.201)

0.036
(0.126)

Industry FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Time FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Province FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

1,540

1,540

1,540

11,684

11,684

11,684

Performance Pay Adoption:

Firm Characteristics:

I(multi-establishment firm)
I(exporter)

Number of obs.

Notes: OLS-columns use dummy for performance pay as independent variable. IV-columns use a LIML IV estimator with tax progression as instrument
and the linear probability first stage displayed in table 3. Years are 2003 and 2005 as information distinguishing business owners from senior management
is only available in these years. Standard errors are clustered by sampling strata for OLS, which are broad industry-size-region categories. Clustering for
IV is by region and year. All regressions use sampling weights. The dependent variables are number of decisions made by principals, management, and
non-managerial employees.

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

I(Performance Pay)

Table 7: Robustness: Alternative mechanisms—Principal
Dependent variable: ControlPrincipal
I(Performance Pay)
I(local competition)

-5.661***
(1.125)

-6.227***
(0.952)

-5.212***
(1.360)

-5.569***
(1.093)

-5.369***
(0.855)

-8.630***
(1.828)

0.047
(0.133)

-7.640***
(1.573)
0.168
(0.196)

Task scope

0.788***
(0.035)

0.732***
(0.037)

No. of decision layers

-1.294***
(0.152)

-1.139***
(0.167)

Average wage

-0.012**
(0.005)

-0.002
(0.005)

Fraction of top earners

1.978**
(0.886)

2.498**
(1.016)

I(novelty as top stgy.)

0.228
(0.260)

Std(operating margin)

0.540*
(0.323)
42.844
(37.670)

I(Quebec)
Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,605

Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,602

Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,442

-0.826***
(0.213)

-0.490*
(0.276)

Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,301

Notes: The dependent variable is the number of decisions made by principals. The main controls capture various alternative mechanisms and are discussed in
the main text. The IV specification is a LIML estimator with tax progression as instrument and the linear probability first stage displayed in table 3. Firm
characteristics include log employment and log establishment age as well as indicators for multi-establishment firms and exporters. Years are 2003 and 2005 as
information distinguishing business owners from senior management is only available in these years. Standard errors are clustered by region and year. All
regressions use sampling weights.

35

Firm characteristics
Industry× Time FE
Number of obs.

23.482
(30.031)

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

-5.630***
(1.125)

36

Table 8: Robustness: Alternative mechanisms—Management
Dependent variable: ControlManager
I(Performance Pay)

5.140*** 5.141***
(1.012)
(1.002)

I(local competition)

4.878***
(0.833)

5.288***
(1.128)

5.047***
(0.949)

5.006***
(1.037)

6.276***
(1.990)

-0.295**
(0.121)

5.697***
(1.675)
-0.324**
(0.150)

0.257***
(0.040)

0.290***
(0.046)

No. of decision layers

-0.741***
(0.171)

-0.833***
(0.213)

Average wage

-0.003
(0.003)

0.000
(0.004)

Fraction of top earners

-0.887
(0.686)

-1.273*
(0.731)

I(novelty as top stgy.)

-0.345
(0.314)

Std(operating margin)

-0.271
(0.352)
78.294***
(24.843)

I(Quebec)
Firm characteristics
Industry× Time FE
Number of obs.

Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,605

Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,602

Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,442

76.689***
(24.466)
0.313
(0.265)

0.300
(0.235)

Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,301

Notes: The dependent variable is the number of decisions made by managerial employees. The main controls capture various alternative mechanisms and
are discussed in the main text. The IV specification is a LIML estimator with tax progression as instrument and the linear probability first stage displayed
in table 3. Firm characteristics include log employment and log establishment age as well as indicators for multi-establishment firms and exporters. Years
are 2003 and 2005 as information distinguishing business owners from senior management is only available in these years. Standard errors are clustered by
region and year. All regressions use sampling weights.

HONG, KUENG, AND YANG

Task scope

Table 9: Robustness: Alternative mechanisms—Non-Management
Dependent variable: ControlNonManager
I(Performance Pay)
I(local competition)

-2.023***
(0.679)

-1.912***
(0.606)

-2.184***
(0.728)

-1.992***
(0.637)

-1.984***
(0.649)

0.017
(0.048)

Task scope
No. of decision layers

-0.011
(0.018)

-0.036
(0.028)

0.445***
(0.070)

0.598***
(0.116)

Fraction of top earners

0.006***
(0.002)

0.006**
(0.003)

0.158
(0.316)

0.769*
(0.426)

I(novelty as top stgy.)

0.070
(0.142)

Std(operating margin)

0.213
(0.204)
-38.714**
(17.316)

I(Quebec)
Yes
Yes
11,605

Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,602

Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,442

-36.589
(26.874)
-0.457***
(0.152)

-0.547***
(0.178)

Yes
Yes
11,684

Yes
Yes
11,301

Notes: The dependent variable is the number of decisions made by non-managerial employees. The main controls capture various alternative mechanisms and
are discussed in the main text. The IV specification is a LIML estimator with tax progression as instrument and the linear probability first stage displayed in
table 3. Firm characteristics include log employment and log establishment age as well as indicators for multi-establishment firms and exporters. Years are 2003
and 2005 as information distinguishing business owners from senior management is only available in these years. Standard errors are clustered by region and
year. All regressions use sampling weights.

37

Yes
Yes
11,684

-3.909***
(1.220)
0.111
(0.077)

Average wage

Firm characteristics
Industry× Time FE
Number of obs.

-3.669***
(1.186)

MANAGEMENT PRACTICE COMPLEMENTARITY

-2.011***
(0.668)

