                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DOES DELAY CAUSE DECAY? THE EFFECT OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION
   TIME ON THE LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION AND EARNINGS OF DISABILITY
                             APPLICANTS

                                           David H. Autor
                                           Nicole Maestas
                                          Kathleen J. Mullen
                                          Alexander Strand

                                         Working Paper 20840
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20840


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015


We thank Raj Chetty, Mary Daly, Stephen Goss, Magne Mogstad, Tim Moore, Kevin Murphy, Jim
Twist, Bob Weathers, participants of the 2012 American Economic Association meetings, 2012 All-California
Labor Economics Conference, 2013 NBER Summer Institute, 2013 Conference on Empirical Labor
Economics in Honor of Finis Welch and 2014 IZA/SOLE Transatlantic Meeting of Labor Economists,
and seminar participants at Brown University, Cornell University, the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, Harvard University, Princeton University, UC Berkeley, UT Austin for many valuable suggestions.
We thank Dejanir Silva for exceptional research assistance. This research was supported by two grants
from the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) through the Michigan Retirement Research Center
under grant #UM11-01 and through grant #1 DRC12000002-02-00 to the National Bureau of Economic
Research as part of the SSA Disability Research Consortium, and by grant #1R01AG046290 from
the National Institute on Aging. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors
and do not represent the opinions or policy of SSA, NIA, any agency of the Federal Government, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20840.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by David H. Autor, Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Delay Cause Decay? The Effect of Administrative Decision Time on the Labor Force
Participation and Earnings of Disability Applicants
David H. Autor, Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand
NBER Working Paper No. 20840
January 2015
JEL No. H53,I13,J22,J38

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper measures the causal effect of time out of the labor force on subsequent employment of
Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) applicants and distinguishes it from the discouragement
effect of receiving disability benefits. Using a unique Social Security Administration workload database
to identify exogenous variation in decision times induced by differences in processing speed among
disability examiners to whom applicants are randomly assigned, we find that longer processing times
reduce the employment and earnings of SSDI applicants for multiple years following application, with
the effects concentrated among applicants awarded benefits during their initial application. A one standard
deviation (2.1 month) increase in initial processing time reduces long-run “substantial gainful activity”
rates by 0.36 percentage points (3.5%) and long-run annual earnings by $178 (5.1%). Because applicants
initially denied benefits spend on average more than 15 additional months appealing their denials,
previous estimates of the benefit receipt effect are confounded with the effect of delays on subsequent
employment. Accounting separately for these channels, we find that the receipt effect is at least 50%
larger than previously estimated. Combining the delay and benefits receipt channels reveals that the
SSDI application process reduces subsequent employment of applicants on the margin of award by
twice as much as prior literature suggests.


David H. Autor                                       Kathleen J. Mullen
Department of Economics, E17-216                     RAND Corporation
MIT                                                  1776 Main Street
77 Massachusetts Avenue                              P.O. Box 2138
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER                                             Kathleen_Mullen@rand.org
dautor@mit.edu
                                                     Alexander Strand
Nicole Maestas                                       Social Security Administration
RAND Corporation                                     Office of Retirement and Disability Policy
1776 Main Street                                     500 E. St., NW
P.O. Box 2138                                        Washington, DC 20254
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138                          Alexander.Strand@ssa.gov
Nicole_Maestas@rand.org
Introduction

An influential body of research analyzes the causal effect of receipt of Social Security Disability

Insurance benefits (SSDI) on employment and earnings by comparing the post-application labor

force participation of applicants awarded benefits relative to those denied benefits.1 Implicit in this

analytic approach is the assumption that the SSDI determination process affects applicants’ labor

supply through a single causal channel—the allowance or denial decision. While this channel is

undoubtedly important, it is unlikely to capture the total effect of the SSDI on the employment and

earnings of disability applicants. A second potential channel, and the focus of this paper, is that

the disability determination process itself may directly reduce applicants’ subsequent employment

and earnings potential by prolonging their time out of the labor force.2 Due to a combination of

strong non-work incentives and substantial waiting times built into the SSDI determination process,

workers seeking SSDI benefits may face prolonged periods out of the labor force while awaiting a

final disability determination. We refer to this mechanism as the delay channel.3 If applicants’ em-

ployment potential decays while they are non-participants in the the labor force, then the observed

post-application labor supply of denied and allowed applicants may understate their employment

potential at the time of SSDI application. Moreover, if either the rate of deterioration or average

SSDI processing time differs between allowed and denied applicants, a comparison of their labor

supply following the SSDI determination may not identify the pure effect of the SSDI award on

employment outcomes. Though prior literature has posited that the decay channel may be economi-

cally important (Parsons, 1991), there is no existing work that empirically identifies this mechanism

or estimates its magnitude.

    This paper offers the first causal analysis of the effect of SSDI application processing times on
    1
      Bound (1989) introduced the empirical approach of using the labor supply of denied SSDI applicants to form an
upper bound on the potential labor supply of accepted applicants, an approach recently employed by von Wachter,
Song, and Manchester (2011). Bound (1991) and Parsons (1991) debate the validity of this comparison. Several recent
papers in this literature, including Chen and van der Klaauw (2005), Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2013), and French
and Song (2014) exploit plausibly exogenous variation in SSDI awards to estimate the causal effect of receiving SSDI
benefits on labor supply.
    2
      A third channel by which the SSDI determination process may impact labor supply is inducement: unemployed
workers and those with weak labor force attachment may potentially exit the labor force to apply for SSDI rather
than seek employment (Parsons 1980, Black, Daniel and Sanders 2002, Autor and Duggan 2003). Our analysis does
not shed light on this channel.
    3
      In our administrative sample of SSDI applicants, discussed below, the average time from SSDI application to final
determination exceeds one year (14.1 months). Nearly half of SSDI applicants—including those who are ultimately
allowed as well as denied—challenge their initial determination and face processing times on average exceeding two
years (28.7 months).


                                                          1
the post-application employment and earnings of SSDI applicants. We draw upon a unique Social

Security Administration (SSA) workload database containing the universe of SSDI applications re-

ceiving initial determinations in 2005 to identify exogenous variation in applicants’ initial decision

times induced by differences in processing speed among the disability examiners to which they are

randomly assigned. The average examiner in our sample spends around three months reviewing a

case prior to making an initial determination. However, mean determination times differ significantly

across examiners, with the 90/10 range in mean examiner time equal to 1.9 months. The character-

istics of applicants assigned to each examiner and geographic variation in processing times explain

less than half of the cross-examiner variation, with the remaining variation plausibly attributable

to productivity differentials among examiners. After accounting for the Disability Determination

Services office (DDS) to which applicants apply and a small number of applicant characteristics used

in some offices for initial screening, we cannot reject the hypothesis that applicants are condition-

ally randomly assigned to examiners within their DDS offices. We show that this examiner-level

variation in average processing times significantly affects applicants’ total processing time but is

uncorrelated with initial allowance decisions (and, ultimately, SSDI receipt). In combination with

the random assignment of applicants to examiners within a DDS office, these findings permit us to

use examiner-specific mean processing times as an instrumental variable for the realized processing

times of the cases to which they are assigned.

       Our empirical analysis first explores whether the length of the SSDI determination process af-

fects the subsequent employment of applicants who are awarded benefits at the initial application.4

Initially allowed applicants are a particularly interesting group because they typically have compar-

atively high pre-onset earnings, and hence their employment prospects may be relatively sensitive

to time out of work. In addition, they face no immediate work disincentives after receiving their

disability allowance. Following entitlement, beneficiaries are given a Trial Work Period (TWP) dur-

ing which they can return to work with no risk of benefits suspension.5 Exploiting examiner-level
   4
     As above, the examiner processing time instrument is uncorrelated with initial allowance rates. Thus, focusing
only on initially allowed does not induce selection bias.
   5
     The SSDI program allows new beneficiaries to “test” their ability to work by engaging in Substantial Gainful
Activity (SGA) without penalty during a combined (not necessarily consecutive) 9-month Trial Work Period (TWP)
and 3-month Grace Period, which commence after a 5-month Waiting Period during which beneficiaries must refrain
from working more than SGA. Beneficiaries exhausting the TWP and Grace Period then enter a 3-year Extended
Period of Eligibility (EPE) during which benefits are paid for months in which earnings are below SGA and not paid
when earnings are above SGA. After the EPE, beneficiaries may no longer engage in SGA or their benefits will be
suspended; however, they are then eligible for Expedited Reinstatement (EXR) if they become unable to engage in


                                                        2
variation in processing times, we find that longer processing times significantly reduce the employ-

ment and earnings of initially allowed SSDI applicants in the years after their determination. Our

estimates indicate that a one-month increase in processing time reduces annual post-decision em-

ployment rates by 0.4 to 0.5 percentage points (points, for brevity) or 4 to 5 percent and lowers

post-decision annual earnings by $130 to $240 or 8 to 13 percent. This employment effect persists for

at least six years following the initial disability application (through 2011, the final year we observe),

while the earnings impact attenuates in years five and six after application (though it remains sig-

nificant). Our identification assumptions imply that these persistent employment impacts may be

interpreted as the causal effect of additional time out of the labor force on subsequent employment.

    Corroborating this interpretation, we next document that the effect of additional processing

time on subsequent employment stems entirely from delays that extend the allowance date beyond

five months after disability onset.6 This observation is significant because an applicant’s benefit

payments and Trial Work Period cannot commence until five months have elapsed since the onset

of disability. Delays in the application process that do not extend the time to allowance beyond

this five month waiting period are therefore infra-marginal: they should have no incentive effect

on contemporaneous labor force participation and, under our delay-decay hypothesis, will have no

effect on post-allowance employment. This is precisely what we find. We detect no significant

impact of variation in processing time on post-award employment of beneficiaries who are notified

of their award during the waiting period. For those notified after the waiting period, however, each

additional month of processing time reduces subsequent employment by 0.4 to 0.6 points, slightly

exceeding the effect for the full initially allowed group.

    We next broaden the analysis to include all SSDI applicants—those initially allowed and initially

denied—and we examine the effects of both processing time and SSDI receipt on their subsequent

labor supply. Identification of the causal effect of SSDI receipt requires an additional source of vari-

ation that affects the likelihood of receiving an SSDI allowance but is uncorrelated with applicants’

health or other unobserved factors affecting labor supply. Following Maestas, Mullen and Strand
SGA. Benefit payments also commence at the end of the Waiting Period. Beneficiaries notified after the Waiting
Period has elapsed may receive up to 17 months of back-dated benefits (without interest), so there is little difference
in the present discounted value of the benefit stream for applicants notified before or after the Waiting Period. See
SSA regulation DI 10105.015 “Retroactivity of Disability Application.”
   6
     Onset date is defined by SSA based on the applicant’s allegations, work history and medical evidence. In practice,
the onset date is usually the date when the disability began to interfere with work or the date the individual stopped
working, whichever is later.


                                                          3
(2013), we use variation in examiner allowance propensity as this second source of variation. The

random assignment of applicants to disability examiners with different allowance propensities gener-

ates exogenous variation in decision outcomes that is unrelated to unobserved impairment severity

or labor force attachment. Exploiting both sources of variation, we find that the impact of waiting

time on the full set of applicants—both those initially denied and initially allowed—is somewhat

smaller than the effect of waiting time on the initially allowed sample and tends to decline in mag-

nitude several years after the initial determination, though this latter inference is clouded by large

macroeconomic shocks that affected the U.S. economy in the later years of our sample.

       The existence of an employment decay effect as a distinct causal channel through which the SSDI

determination process affects post-application labor supply outcomes—separate from the benefit

receipt effect, which has been the sole focus of existing literature—has important implications for

the total impact of the SSDI program on available and unrealized work capacity. As we show formally

below, studies that estimate the effect of disability allowances on labor supply but do not account

for systematic differences in processing time between allowed and denied applicants will generally

produce biased estimates of the effect of benefit receipt. The source of this bias is applicant appeals.

Because applicants frequently appeal SSDI denials but never appeal SSDI allowances—except to seek

an earlier established onset date and hence a higher initial payment—applicants who are randomly

assigned to examiners with higher allowance propensities will have higher allowance rates, fewer

appeals, and thus shorter processing times than those randomly assigned to examiners with lower

allowance propensities (Maestas, Mullen and Strand, 2013).7 If, as we establish below, waiting time

has an independent negative effect on subsequent employment, then conventional two-stage least

squares (2SLS) estimates will underestimate the causal effect of the disability allowance on labor

supply by confounding the positive labor supply effect of disability denial with the negative labor

supply effect of additional waiting time.

       We find that the bias that arises from ignoring the effect of the decay channel on labor supply

is substantial, especially in the short run when the decay effect is strongest. Instrumental vari-

ables estimates of the effect of SSDI award on labor supply that do not account for the decay

channel imply that the disability award reduces labor force participation by 27 points three years
   7
    We document below that examiners with higher allowance propensities are neither systematically faster nor slower
than examiners with lower allowance propensities.




                                                         4
following application, and 17 points six years following application, for those on the margin of pro-

gram entry. Accounting for the delay-decay channel raises this estimate to 48 points in year three

post-application, and 25 points in year six (though the difference between the two estimates—not

controlling for endogenous processing time and controlling for endogenous processing time—is not

statistically significant at year six).

      On net, our results imply that neither the recent nor established SSDI literature has fully captured

the labor supply impacts of the disability system on applicants and beneficiaries. While prior

literature has posited that the decay channel may be economically important, no prior paper has

provided direct estimates of this causal pathway. Moreover, due to the confounding of allowance odds

and processing times, existing literature has underestimated the labor supply effects of SSDI awards

on beneficiaries. Accounting for both mechanisms provides a more complete—and economically more

sizable—picture of the aggregate labor supply impacts of the Social Security Disability Insurance

program. Combining the labor supply decay effect with new estimates of the benefit receipt effect

that are purged of waiting time bias suggests that the SSDI program effect on employment is 100

to 140 percent larger than previous estimates have suggested for applicants on the margin of SSDI

receipt .

      Our findings finally contribute to a longstanding and active literature on duration dependence

in unemployment (Kroft, Lange, and Notowidigdo 2013, Davis and von Wachter 2011, Ljungqvist

and Sargent 1998, and Blau and Robins 1990). While our results pertain most directly to the labor

force participation of disability applicants rather than unemployed workers, one can interpret our

findings more broadly to indicate that involuntary time out of the labor force exerts an adverse causal

effect on subsequent employment of workers with marginal employment prospects. We hypothesize

that this decay channel operates through deteriorating human capital, but it may also plausibly be

explained by workers losing their taste for employment during periods of non-participation, or by

employers discriminating against workers who have experienced extended spells of unemployment

(as in Kroft et al., 2013). Our results may also be relevant to current SSA initiatives that aim

to increase return to work rates among SSDI beneficiaries by reducing the large financial penalty

for those who work in excess of SGA.8 If, as our results imply, the work capacity of beneficiaries
  8
    For  details   of    SSA’s     Benefits    Offset   National    Demonstration  (BOND)      initiative,   see
http://www.ssa.gov/disabilityresearch/offsetnational.htm. See also Weathers and Hemmeter (2011).




                                                       5
continues to decline as they remain out of the labor force, a relaxation of work disincentives while

receiving SSDI benefits may be insufficient to return long-term beneficiaries to work. Our findings

suggest that modifications to the disability determination process that increase applicants’ labor

force participation while the determination is ongoing may be more effective in increasing longer-

term employment among this population. Given that nearly 25 million Americans applied for SSDI

benefits in the past ten years—with nearlythree million applications filed in 2010 alone at the height

of the Great Recession—even modest improvements in the incentive effects of the determination

process could have economically significant aggregate benefits.9

         The paper proceeds as follows. The next section discusses relevant features of the SSDI system

and details our research database. Section 2 lays out our identification strategy. Section 3 presents

estimates of the labor supply effects of processing delays, both for initially allowed applicants and

for the full sample of allowed and denied applicants. Section 4 documents that previous estimates

of the benefit receipt effect are confounded with the effect of delays on subsequent employment,

and shows that purging this confound substantially increases the estimated discouragement effect of

benefits receipt on labor supply. Section 5 concludes.



1         Data Sources and Sample Characteristics

We make use of a unique workload management database called the Disability Operational Data

Store (DIODS) which temporarily stores information about the universe of initial and reconsideration

disability decisions that are recorded in the National Disability Determination Service System. The

main advantage of the DIODS over SSA administrative data sources used in prior literature is that

it includes alphanumeric codes linking applicants to the disability examiner who was (conditional on

observable characteristics) randomly assigned to evaluate their case. Our sample contains data on

all initial medical determinations (that is, excluding technical denials) made in 2005. We restrict the

sample to primary claimants (i.e., excluding dependents) for adults ages 18-64 assigned to examiners

handling at least 30 such cases in 2005 (and fewer than 900 cases to rule out training cases).10 The

DIODS contains applicant characteristics, notably impairment type (i.e., broad body system affected

as well as somewhat finer diagnosis codes), which can factor into examiner assignment at some DDS
    9
         Statistics available at http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/STATS/dibStat.html, accessed 9/22/2014.
    10
         Examiners decided 145 cases on average in 2005.


                                                           6
offices.11 Linking the DIODS to SSA’s “831” research files (derived from Form SSA-831 which

summarizes the result of the disability determination for applicants) allows us to observe cases of

alleged terminal illness (TERI), which are flagged for priority processing, sometimes by examiners

who specialize in such cases. Conditional upon these two variables—broad impairment type and

TERI—it is our understanding from interviews with SSA DDS offices that SSDI applications are

randomly assigned to examiners within a DDS office (see Maestas, Mullen and Strand, 2013, for

more details). We verify below that the data are consistent with random assignment of applicants

to examiners within DDS offices.

       In addition to the outcome of the initial disability determination, the DIODS includes application

filing date, date of receipt at the regional DDS office (after being forwarded from the local field office),

date of the initial determination and, for initially allowed applicants, the disability onset date. We

measure examiners’ average processing time using recorded time at DDS, equal to date of initial

determination minus date of receipt at DDS.

       Denied applicants can appeal their initial determination up through four levels: reconsideration,

where the application is returned to the original DDS office in most states12 ; a hearing before an

administrative law judge (ALJ); a review by an SSA Appeals Council; and finally Federal Court.

At any stage in the appeals process the applicant can present new evidence. Because appealing an

initial denial can add several months and in many cases years to the time of final decision, some

applicants who appeal may simultaneously submit a new application (“reapplication”).

       To measure applicants’ total processing time, we employ several data sets. We observe recon-

siderations and reapplications using a DIODS extract and 831 files, respectively, including decisions

through 2006. We observe ALJ hearings through November 16, 2012 using data from the Case Pro-

cessing and Management System (CPMS). Although we are unable to directly observe cases that

proceed to the Appeals Council and/or Federal Court, we can observe date of benefit receipt for
  11
     For the most part, we avoid using diagnosis codes in the analysis because the codes themselves are determined by
the examiner and as such may be correlated with examiner allowance propensity. However, because some DDS offices
assign new examiners homogenous caseloads as part of their training we include the 20 most common diagnosis codes
(with at least 10,000 cases and with significant numbers of both positive and negative determinations). Examples of
these conditions are: back disorders, affective disorders, osteoarthritis, disorders of the muscle, ligament and fascia,
and diabetes.
  12
     In 1999, the reconsideration step was eliminated in ten “prototype” states (Alabama, Alaska, California (Los
Angeles North and Los Angeles), Colorado (West), Louisiana, Michigan, Missouri, New Hampshire, New York and
Pennsylvania). Despite this, we found that mean total processing times were virtually identical in prototype and
non-prototype states, largely because more applicants in the prototype states initiated appeals.




                                                           7
cases that were ultimately allowed using data from the Payment History Update System (PHUS)

coupled with the Master Beneficiary Record (MBR) to verify that the payments were SSDI pay-

ments. We observe these payments through 2011. We measure applicants’ total processing time by

calculating time from filing date to the last observed decision. We consider any new application filed

within one year of the last observed denial (e.g., at the ALJ) to be a continuation of the previous

claim (reapplication) and add processing time for that or any following decisions to the applicant’s

total processing time. For applicants receiving SSDI benefits whose last decision was observed as a

denial, we use time to benefit receipt date (inferring that the applicant was allowed through one of

the “higher appeals” levels).13

    Finally, we observe labor market outcomes by linking our sample to the Detailed Earnings Record

(DER) that gives uncapped annual earnings from box 5 (Medicare wages and tips) of individuals’

W2 tax forms. We observe earnings up to and including 2011. In order to ensure that the earnings

records represent a full year of potential work, we link to the date of death information in the

Numerical Identification System (NUMIDENT) and restrict the sample to applicants who were

alive through the end of the calendar year in which earnings are observed.


1.1     Sample characteristics

Table 1 presents summary statistics on the sample, overall and separately for initial and final al-

lowance decisions.14 After applying our sample restrictions, we observe SSDI applications for just

over one million individuals in 2005.15 Average examiner processing time is just under three months

and does not differ systematically across applicant groups according to case disposition (columns 2

- 5): those initially allowed, those initially denied, those finally allowed, and those finally denied.

Approximately one-third of applicants are initially allowed benefits, although more than two-thirds
  13
     According to the Office of Disability Program Management Information, for around two percent of claims, the
last determination is a denial at the appeals council or federal court levels. For these and any claims in process more
than seven years after the initial determination, we will underestimate true processing time.
  14
     Finally allowed includes applications that were either initially allowed or allowed on appeal or reapplication.
Finally denied includes applications that were initially denied but not appealed and applications that were denied
after all appeals.
  15
     Our sample statistics differ from SSA official statistics for three reasons: first, we exclude technical denials, which
did not receive a medical determination; second, we drop approximately 108,000 applicants who died within two
years of their initial decision (8% of all medical determinations); third, we drop approximately 187,000 applicants
who previously applied for or received SSDI or SSI benefits. The last restriction excludes cases from SSA’s “Special
Disability Workload” outreach initiative which identified SSI recipients who had worked enough to become insured
for SSDI. (Note that, while the medical and vocational criteria are the same for both programs, unlike SSDI, SSI
recipients who earn more than SGA retain their eligibility for SSI and receive reduced benefits.)


                                                             8
are observed to receive SSDI benefits by the end of 2011. Sixty-four percent of initially denied appli-

cants continue their claim by either pursuing an appeal or submitting another application. Of these,

the vast majority (more than 95 percent) pursue an appeal and 70 percent of these are successful at

the next stage (reconsideration or ALJ if the applicant lives in a prototype state).16 Approximately

half of SSDI claims are concurrent with claims for Supplemental Security Income (SSI), which pays

additional benefits to disabled individuals with limited income (counting SSDI) and assets.

       Applications are assigned to examiners and evaluated according to the same medical and voca-

tional criteria for concurrent and non-concurrent applications. Fewer than 1 percent of applications

are flagged as high priority terminal illness cases, and these cases have disproportionately high (ini-

tial) allowance rates. The average applicant is 46.5 years old at the time of the initial determination

and has low pre-onset earnings—$22,308 (in 2008 dollars) averaged over the 3-5 years prior to initial

determination. Earnings and employment (measured as earning more than $1,000 per year) are even

lower three and six years after initial determination, and are declining over time.

       A central takeaway from Table 1 is that the primary driver of total processing time is whether

or not an applicant pursues an appeal. Initial time at the DDS office averages 2.8 and 3.0 months

respectively for applications that were initially allowed and initially denied. In contrast, average

processing time is just over 28 months for applicants who pursued an appeal or reapplication (and

this is slightly underestimated for the finally denied, since we do not observe denials at higher levels of

the appeals process). On average, applicants who ultimately received benefits had longer processing

times (15.3 months) than applicants who did not (11.6 months, as of the end of our followup period).

This is because among the ultimately denied applicants only about a third continued their claim

after the initial level compared with half of ultimately allowed applicants.

       Table 2 presents average cumulative application processing times by administrative review level.

It takes about one month on average for an application to be transmitted from the originating

field office to the DDS, and just under four months for an initial determination. The median

initial processing time is 3.4 months and 90 percent of applications are processed at this stage in

under 6.2 months. Breaking out examiner processing time by decision step—the point at which

the examiner provides the formal justification for an allowance or denial—reveals that applicants
  16
    In addition, 16 percent of initially denied applicants submit a new application (most while simultaneously pursuing
an appeal), yet only 12.5 percent of these new applications are successful.




                                                          9
who are allowed or denied for clear cut reasons receive somewhat faster decisions than applicants

who are evaluated using a combination of medical and vocational criteria.17 Just over a quarter

of applications proceed through reconsideration, which adds just over five months on average. Just

under a third of applicants participate in a hearing at the ALJ level, which adds more than two years

to average cumulative processing time.18 A very small fraction of applicants receive benefits after

appealing a negative ALJ decision, but those who do wait on average an additional 15.4 months.

Finally, applicants who submit a new application (either after an initial denial or a denial at the

reconsideration or ALJ level) also have a lengthy processing time because the vast majority of them

also pursue an appeal.



2     Empirical Strategy

From the time that an SSDI application is filed to the time a final determination is made, the

applicant may not earn more than approximately $1,000 per month, since this would exceed the

Substantial Gainful Activity (SGA) threshold and result in a denial of benefits.19 Thus, the vast

majority of SSDI applicants would be expected to remain out of the labor force while awaiting a

disability determination, regardless of their work capacity. Does this occur in practice? Figure 1

plots the fraction of denied 2005 SSDI applicants who were participating in the labor force during

each of the six years before and after their initial decision.20 Applicants are further subdivided into

six groups according to the year of their last observed SSA decision (2005 – 2011). This variation in

last decision date stems in large part from applicants’ appeal behavior: applicants who do not appeal

their initial denial or whose appeal moves extremely rapidly will have a last decision date of 2005;

those who appeal and reach closure by December of the year following their initial denial will have

a 2006 date, etc. Figure 1 documents that labor force participation falls for all six applicant groups
  17
     Clear cut cases include a disability that meets medical listings or, alternatively, a disability that is judged non-
severe or “obviously” temporary, meaning unlikely to last longer than 12 months.
  18
     The fraction entering reconsideration is smaller than the fraction receiving an ALJ hearing because in 10 “proto-
type” states, the reconsideration step was temporarily eliminated, as discussed in footnote 12.
  19
     An exception is when work during the 5-month waiting period qualifies as an unsuccessful work attempt. To
qualify, the employment spell must be terminated (or earnings reduced to below SGA) as a result of the impairment
or the “removal of special conditions related to the impairment that are essential to the further performance of work.”
Different rules apply to unsuccessful work attempts of different lengths but an unsuccessful work attempt may not
last more than 6 months.
  20
     The figure focuses on denied applicants to avoid confounding post-decision employment rates with SSDI re-
ceipt/work disincentives. Our empirical work analyzes the impact of SSDI decision times on the subsequent employ-
ment of both allowed and denied applicants.


                                                           10
in the years prior to SSDI application, consistent with the onset of disability. Consistent with SSDI

program incentives, applicants’ employment trajectories vary systematically with their date of final

decision. Applicants whose final decision year coincides with their initial denial year of 2005 exhibit

a 12 point rebound in employment between 2005 and 2006. Those whose final decision date occurs

a year later in 2006 regain only four points of employment between 2005 and 2006—prior to their

final decision—and 11 points in the year thereafter. Applicants who obtain a final decision in 2007

gain approximately two to three points per year between 2005 and 2007 and then six points in the

year immediately thereafter.21 While this empirical regularity does not correspond to the causal

effect of delays on subsequent employment—the variation in delay seen here stems largely from

applicants’ own appeal decisions—it clearly reveals that applicants curtail labor force participation

while awaiting their SSDI determinations. This motivates our use of examiner processing time as

an instrumental variable for applicants’ time out of the labor market, potentially leading to a decay

effect.

       Figure 2 presents a simple schematic to illustrate the potential importance of the human capital

decay effect and its relationship to the widely studied benefit receipt effect. The figure shows observed

earnings of SSDI applicants as a function of time since the SSDI application for an applicant in two

potential states of the world: allowed (green) and denied (red). In this figure, the vertical distance

γ represents the causal effect of an SSDI allowance on earnings (or alternatively, the probability of

labor force participation). The slopes of the red and green lines, δ, reflect the causal effect of time

out of the labor force on earnings (or employment): both allowed and denied applicants lose work

capacity at rate δ with elapsed time out of the labor force. Thus, the observed earnings of denied

SSDI applicants understate their earnings potential at the time of application, with the gap between

initial and final work capacity growing with the length of the application process.

       To empirically test for the delay-decay effect of SSDI application on subsequent employment and

earnings, we estimate a causal model of labor supply analogous to that in Figure 2:


                                      yi = Xi β + γDIi + δTi − si + εi .                                       (1)


Here, yi is the observed labor supply of applicant i measured two to six years following the initial
  21
    Also noteworthy, the employment rebound associated with the final claims adjudication date appears to attenuate
with each passing year following the initial denial.


                                                        11
determination, respectively, Xi is a vector of observed individual characteristics that influence labor

supply (e.g., age, impairment type), DIi is an indicator for whether the applicant was ultimately

awarded benefits (i.e., was observed to be a SSDI beneficiary within six years of the initial determi-

nation), Ti is the applicant’s total processing time measured in months from the application filing

date to the last observed decision date, si represents unobserved factors that affect labor supply such

as impairment severity or lack of labor force attachment, and εi is an idiosyncratic error term. As

in the figure, the causal parameters of interest are γ and δ, which respectively measure the benefit

receipt effect—the reduction in labor supply caused by receipt of disability benefits—and the labor

supply decay rate, that is, the reduction in labor supply caused by an additional month of appli-

cation processing time. Since our outcome variable yi captures earnings or employment following

completion of the SSDI application process, δ reflects the causal effect of pre-decision waiting time

on post-decision employment and earnings rather than the mechanical effect of waiting time on labor

force participation during the application process.22 The combined effect of SSDI on post-application

labor supply operating through these two causal channels is γ + δT for an allowed applicant and δT

for a denied applicant.

       A key challenge for consistently estimating γ and δ is that unobserved determinants of labor

supply contained in si may also affect both the ultimate award decision and application processing

time. For example, applicants with severe impairments are both more likely to be allowed and

more likely to be decided at an earlier decision step (i.e., based on the medical listing criteria)

than applicants with less severe impairments. If processing time is shorter for those with more

severe impairments, then the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimate of δ will be biased towards

zero. Intuitively, applicants with shorter processing times will have relatively low post-decision

labor supply due to their unobservably poor health while those with longer processing times will

have higher post-decision labor supply due to their relatively good health. Estimates of δ would

therefore understate the health-constant impact of additional processing time on subsequent labor

supply. Conversely, if processing time is shorter for applicants with stronger labor force attachment

because they are more likely to discontinue a claim in favor of returning to the labor force, then the

OLS estimate of δ will overstate the true decay effect. These same factors also confound estimation
  22
    Two to three years following the initial determination, some rejected applicants remain in the appeals process.
This fraction becomes vanishingly small after six years, which is the close of our sample window.




                                                        12
of the benefit receipt effect. The OLS estimate of γ is biased upward to the extent applicants with

more severe impairments are both more likely to be allowed benefits and less able to work, and

biased downward to the extent applicants with lower labor force attachment are both less likely to

be allowed benefits and less likely to participate subsequently.

   To overcome these confounds, we leverage the empirical strategy of Maestas, Mullen and Strand

(2013, MMS hereafter) to estimate the effect of SSDI benefit receipt on labor supply (γ). MMS show

that DDS examiners differ in the implicit thresholds that they employ when judging the severity

of a disability. All else equal, applications sent to low-threshold examiners are more likely to be

allowed than others whereas those sent to high-threshold examiners are more likely to be denied.

MMS observe that because applications are conditionally randomly assigned to examiners, examiner-

specific allowance rates can be used to instrument for the ultimate allowance decision for individual

applicants, thereby identifying the causal effect of the allowance decision on subsequent labor supply.

   Building on MMS, we take advantage of the fact that DDS examiners also vary in the speed at

which they process disability applications—some DDS examiners are considerably faster than oth-

ers. Using the conditional random assignment of cases to DDS examiners, this natural variation in

examiner processing speed during the initial determination phase generates exogenous variation in

total processing time (which includes time spent in the appellate phases) that is uncorrelated with

unobserved applicant characteristics, as we document below. Thus, we can use examiner assign-

ment to isolate exogenous variation in applicant processing times that is independent of impairment

severity and labor force attachment.

   Specifically, we divide total time T into t1 , representing applicants’ time to initial decision, and

t2 , representing time in the appeals process or reapplication, where T = t1 + t2 . Note t2 = 0 for

initially allowed applicants and those initially denied applicants who decide not to continue pursuing

disability benefits after their initial determination. Let


                                         t1ij = Xi β 0 + τj + ti ,                                 (2)


where τj represents the examiner-specific component of processing speed. We construct a jackknife

instrumental variable, EXT IM Ej(i) , which measures the average processing time of the examiner




                                                    13
j to which applicant i is randomly assigned, excluding applicant i’s own processing time:23

                                                         1    X Nj
                                   EXT IM Ej(i) =                k6=i,k=1 t1k ,
                                                       Nj−1

where our construction of EXT IM Ej(i) parallels the construction of the measure of examiner al-

lowance propensity in MMS 2013, which is equal to the (jackknifed) examiner allowance propensity,

EXALLOWj(i) , for the examiner to which an applicant is assigned. As documented in MMS, SSDI

applications are randomly assigned to DDS examiners conditional on a small set of “assignment

variables”—case information that is identified when the application is transmitted from the field

office to a particular DDS, and which could potentially be used in the (computerized) assignment

of cases to examiners depending on the DDS. All DDS offices use priority processing flags (primar-

ily terminal illnesses in our sample period), which they may use to assign cases to specialty units;

furthermore, some DDS offices assign cases based on the affected broad body system (mental, muscu-

loskeletal, etc.) or common condition (e.g., anxiety disorders, back disorders) to new examiners still

completing their training. Conditional random assignment of applicants to DDS examiners ensures

that after controlling for assignment variables, individual case characteristics are not correlated with

examiner processing speed and, apart from a common additive component due to average case mix

across all examiners, EXT IM E is an unbiased estimator of examiner speed τj .


2.1    Verifying the research design

To verify that the data are consistent with random assignment of applicants to case examiners within

DDS offices, Table A-1 presents the results of “balance tests” where we regress examiner character-

istics EXALLOW (average allowance propensity) and EXT IM E (average processing time) on the

non-assignment variables, age and prior earnings, with and without assignment variables included

as controls (i.e., body system codes, top 20 diagnosis codes, terminal illness flag, month of receipt at

DDS, concurrent status and 3-digit zip codes). We examine earnings six to nine years prior to the

initial decision to avoid potentially confounding earnings with onset date, which some DDSs use as

an assignment variable when case volumes or backlogs are high. As indicated by the F-tests at the

bottom of the table, we find that after controlling for assignment variables, individual characteristics
   23
      We construct EXT IM E using time at the DDS office, excluding the time it takes to arrive at the DDS office
from the field office upon filing. Thus t2 includes this initial component of processing time for all applicants.


                                                       14
no longer predict examiner characteristics.

       Although there is wide variation in initial processing times at the applicant level, it does not

necessarily follow that there is significant variation in average processing times at the examiner

level. To assess this variation, we plot in Figure 3 the distribution of examiner processing time

expressed as deviations from the average processing time across all examiners within the same DDS

office. The DDS-office mean processing time is three months. Adjusting for case-mix differences

tightens the distribution of examiner times, reducing the standard deviation from 0.8 months to 0.4

months, but there is still significant variation in average processing times across examiners within

the same DDS office (adjusted coefficient of variation of 0.13).24 Figure 4 plots our measure of

examiner speed EXT IM E against the measure of examiner allowance propensity EXALLOW from

MMS. Interestingly, these two attributes of examiner screening—allowance propensity and processing

speed—are essentially uncorrelated with one another (after adjusting for case mix, ρ = 0.016).

       The variable EXT IM E is a valid instrument for final decision time under two key assump-

tions. The first is a monotonicity assumption: cases processed by “fast” examiners would take longer

if processed by “slow” examiners.25 While this assumption cannot be directly verified, Table A-2

presents a test of its face validity in which we regress time to decision on variants of EXT IM E

and EXALLOW that are constructed using all cases assigned to the same examiner except those of

the same body system type. These estimates confirm that processing speed has a strong examiner-

specific component: applicants with body system impairment type A assigned to examiners who

make relatively rapid determinations on impairments of type A0 also receive relatively fast determi-

nations, and similarly for applicants assigned to relatively slow examiners.

       The second key assumption is an exclusion restriction. For EXT IM E to be a valid instrument for

decision time, it must be orthogonal to other factors affecting labor supply. While conditional random

assignment breaks the correlation between Ti and si , there remains the possibility of a correlation

between the instrument EXT IM Ej(i) and the indicator for ultimate allowance, DIi .26 Even though
  24
      We do this adjustment by regressing EXT IM Ej(i) on DDS office indicators and examiner caseload characteristics
(3-digit zip code, body system codes, top 20 diagnosis codes, terminal illness high-priority flag, month of receipt at
DDS, age group, average pre-onset earnings and concurrent application status) and plot the residuals from this
regression.
   25
      The monotonicity assumption is not required if we instead assume that the treatment effect of processing speed
is constant in the applicant population. We find the monotonicity assumption more palatable, however, and view our
estimates as recovering a local average treatment effect (Imbens and Angrist, 1994).
   26
      As noted above, DIi is also an endogenous regressor correlated with si .



                                                         15
examiner speed is uncorrelated with examiner allowance propensity in the initial allowance decision,

it could still be the case that the speed of the initial decision could affect the likelihood of a denied

applicant continuing his claim through an appeal or reapplication and thus potentially the likelihood

that he ultimately receives SSDI benefits (at a later stage). We investigate this possibility in Table

A-3 and find that assignment to a slow or fast examiner does not affect likelihood of benefit receipt.

       Finally, Table A-4 presents a series of overidentification tests of the causal pathways through

which examiners affect applicants’ employment rates two to six years after the initial determination.27

We reject examiner speed as the sole causal pathway but fail to reject (p>0.05) the combination

of examiner speed and allowance propensity as the sole pathways for all applicants after two years

(when many applicants are still in the appeals process). For the subgroups defined by allowance

status, we fail to reject examiner speed as the sole causal pathways after two years (and for all years

among the initially allowed). Thus, the accept the null hypothesis that there are no additional causal

channels through which examiners affect applicants’ subsequent labor supply other than application

processing time and SSDI receipt.28

       The above results imply that consistent estimate of δ can be obtained by estimating an instru-

mental variables model with one endogenous regressor—application processing time—on the full set

of applicants ignoring SSDI receipt. At the same time, because EXT IM E is uncorrelated with ben-

efit receipt, either initially or ultimately, we can estimate decay effects for different subpopulations,

namely the initially allowed, the finally allowed and the finally denied.29 Our causal framework

implies that variation in examiner processing time will only adversely affect the labor supply of

applicants who receive a favorable determination after the five month waiting period has elapsed; it

should not affect labor supply of applicants who receive a favorable determination sooner since these

applicants must still complete the five month waiting period before engaging in gainful employment.
  27
       Specifically we compute the following test statistic:
                                       RSSR − RSSU   N − J H0
                                                   ×       ∼ F (J − M, N − J)                                       (3)
                                          J −M       RSSU
where RSSR is the residual sum of squares from the “restricted” reduced form regression of employment on
EXALLOW and/or EXT IM E (and covariates) depending on the causal pathway being tested, RSSU is the residual
sum of squares from the “unrestricted” regression of employment on J examiner dummies in lieu of EXALLOW and
or EXT IM E, and M is the number of degrees of freedom in the restricted regression.
  28
     This finding makes intuitive sense. Arguably, the only applicant outcomes that examiners can affect are processing
time and the initial allowance or denial decision. SSDI benefit amounts are solely determined by prior earnings.
  29
     Note that we cannot estimate such models for the subsample of initially denied applicants since examiner time
also affects the likelihood of reapplication in the initially denied sample (Table A-3).




                                                               16
We directly test this causal mechanism using the subsample of initially allowed applicants, for whom

we observe recorded disability onset date (needed to compute the length of the waiting period) in

Section (3).30

       When we subsequently broaden the sample to include all SSDI applicants—including both the

initially allowed and initially denied—to examine the joint effects of processing time and SSDI receipt

on subsequent labor supply, we require an additional source of variation that affects the likelihood of

receiving an SSDI allowance but is uncorrelated with applicants’ health or other unobserved factors

affecting labor supply. We use variation in examiner allowance propensity as this second source of

variation.

       Table 3 presents first-stage regression estimates of the effects of EXT IM E and EXALLOW on

initial processing time, time until final decision and SSDI receipt in columns 1–3, respectively, for the

full sample of SSDI applicants. Columns 4–6 present estimates of the effect of EXT IM E on final

processing time separately for the initially allowed, finally allowed and finally denied, corresponding

to the first stage regressions for each of these subgroups. We display the coefficient obtained under

three different specifications. The first specification is an OLS regression specification with no con-

trols. The second is a specification that includes the assignment variables (DDS indicators, terminal

illness flag, body system codes and top 20 diagnosis codes). The third specification further adds ap-

plicant characteristics (age, pre-disability earnings, three-digit zip code). This exercise also doubles

as an additional randomization test: if the coefficient on EXT IM E is statistically unchanged upon

the inclusion of individual characteristics, then our assumption of conditional random assignment is

supported.

       The first column presents a regression of time from filing to initial decision on EXT IM E and

EXALLOW for the full sample. Without covariates, the coefficient on EXT IM E is 0.953, which

is close to its theoretical value of one. The attenuation away from one is due to sampling variation

in the construction of EXT IM E, which is computed over finite examiner caseloads.31 The coeffi-

cient on EXT IM E falls to 0.642 when we include the necessary assignment variables and remains

unchanged once we add applicant characteristics, indicating that EXT IM E is indeed uncorrelated
  30
     The DIODS data only provided recorded onset data for initially allowed applicants.
  31
     If EXT IM E were constructed as a simple mean rather than a jackknife measure, this coefficient would be
mechanically one. Attenuation bias due to sampling variation in EXT IM E does not bias the causal estimate of the
effect of processing time in the second stage since it affects both the first stage and reduced form proportionally.




                                                        17
with applicant characteristics (after conditioning on the assignment variables).32 Column 2 shows

that EXT IM E is slightly less predictive of final time than initial time, where final time corresponds

to time from filing to the final (observed) decision, including appeals or reapplication. Nevertheless

the first stage coefficient of 0.529 is statistically significant, with an Angrist-Pischke multivariate

F-statistic of 286, which indicates a strong first stage (Angrist and Pischke, 2009, pp. 217-18).33

Column 2 also indicates that applicants assigned to examiners with higher allowance rates have

substantially lower total processing times—since an initial allowance obviates the need for appeal.

This implies that even a small effect of processing time on subsequent employment could have im-

portant consequences for estimating the effect of SSDI receipt: assignment to the examiner with

the lowest versus highest allowance propensity in a DDS office adds nearly seven months on average

to an applicant’s time out of the labor market. Finally, column 3 presents the first stage for SSDI

receipt (Angrist-Pischke multivariate F-statistic = 158). Consistent with findings from Table A-3,

applicants assigned to slower examiners are not any more or less likely to receive SSDI benefits.34



3        Do Processing Times Affect Labor Supply of SSDI Beneficiaries?

We first present estimates of the processing time effect for the subsample of initially allowed appli-

cants, then subsequently consider the joint effects of processing time and benefit receipt for all SSDI

applicants. Because the examiner processing time instrument is uncorrelated with the ultimate al-

lowance decision for those who are initially allowed (Table A-3), we can test for a delay-decay effect

of the application process on SSDI beneficiaries specifically without being concerned about sample
    32
      Although EXT IM E and EXALLOW are uncorrelated, the coefficient on EXALLOW is statistically significant
and positive in the column 1 models because EXT IM E and EXALLOW are both constructed on the same finite
sample of applicants. This induces a correlation between EXALLOW and the measurement error in EXT IM E,
now part of the error term in Equation (2) (since EXT IM E measures “true” average examiner processing time τ
with error). This biases the coefficient on EXALLOW , which reflects the correlation with the error term rather than
its theoretical value of zero. We confirm that the coefficient on EXALLOW is insignificant and small (-0.01) when
we exclude EXT IM E (and hence any measurement error) from the regression. Consistent with the two theoretical
constructs being uncorrelated, excluding EXALLOW from the regression has only a small effect on the estimated
coefficient on EXT IM E (0.640 vs. 0.642).
   33
      The incremental F-statistics for the subsamples are 3,119 for the initially allowed, 107 for the finally allowed and
166 for the finally denied. (Note that these models only have one endogenous regressor, processing time.)
   34
      The Table 3 estimate of 0.165 for EXALLOW is slightly smaller than the analogous estimate of 0.204 in MMS
(Table 2, column 6). This is due primarily to the inclusion of indicators for the top 20 diagnosis codes to allow for a
finer level of homogenous case assignment to trainee examiners to improve balance. We are also now able to directly
observe TERI cases, as opposed to having to impute them, although this does not substantially affect the estimated
coefficient on EXALLOW . Our sample also differs slightly because we exclude examiners with small (<30) caseloads
in 2005 whereas MMS excluded examiners with small combined caseloads in 2005 and 2006.




                                                           18
selection. Moreover, by comparing the decay effect for the initially allowed with our estimates for

the whole sample (presented in Section 3.3), we can determine whether the decay effect appears to

be different for the initially allowed and denied. Finally, the fact that examiner processing time is

non-binding for the subset of allowed applicants who receive their decision prior to the end of their

mandatory 5-month waiting period allows us to implement an informative falsification test of our

identification strategy using only initially allowed applicants.


3.1     The effect of processing time for the initially allowed

Table 4 presents presents OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effect of processing time on the employment

and earnings of the initially allowed, measured at two through six years following their initial decision

in 2005. The OLS estimates in columns 1–3 indicate that each additional month of processing time

is associated with a reduction in employment (measured as annual earnings of at least $1, 000) of

0.17 points two years later. This association persists for at least six years. These associations should

not be taken as causal since, as discussed above, observed claimant-level variation in processing

times may reflect both exogenous and endogenous factors, most importantly applicant health. It is

plausible that applicants with the most severe health impairments are allowed more quickly by DDS

examiners because their impairments meet medical listings. This would bias OLS estimates towards

underestimating the effect of processing time on subsequent employment (since those least able to

work would receive faster awards).

      Instrumental variables estimates of the impact of processing time on labor supply using the ex-

aminer instrument EXT IM E are consistent with this reasoning. We find that an additional month

of processing time causes a 0.44 point reduction in employment (Panel A), a 0.29 point reduction

in the probability of engaging in SGA (Panel B) and a $167 reduction in annual earnings (Panel

C) two years later. These effects increase slightly in year three and then fall in year four (2008),

when unemployment rates were at their peak during the Great Recession.35 However, the estimated

effects have rebounded to approximately their initial levels by 2011 (the end of our follow-up pe-

riod). These point estimates are more than twice as large in magnitude than the corresponding OLS

estimates. Extrapolating to an average initial processing time of 3.6 months, the 2SLS estimates
 35
    Labor force statistics from the BLS website http://data.bls.gov/pdq/SurveyOutputServlet?request_action=
wh&graph_name=LN_cpsbref3, accessed 9/22/2014.




                                                    19
imply that employment among SSDI beneficiaries who were allowed at the initial level is 1.4 to 1.6

points (approximately 14 percent) lower than it would be if they were able to remain in the labor

force during the determination process without jeopardizing the allowance decision. This interpre-

tation assumes that processing time affects post-application labor supply by inducing applicants to

withdraw from or remain out of the labor force while awaiting a disability determination. We test

this interpretation next.


3.2      Testing the identification strategy using the five month waiting period

To qualify for SSDI, applicants may not perform substantial gainful activity for at least five months

before benefits may commence. This rule suggests an identification test for our research design: for

applicants who are awarded benefits within five months of disability onset, examiner speed should

have no marginal effect on labor force participation after benefit payments begin. Thus, evidence of

an examiner time-induced decay effect among applicants awarded benefits within five months would

point to a violation of the exclusion restriction assumption.36

       We perform this test by partitioning total processing time into two components: time during

which examiner delays are non-binding constraints on labor supply (i.e., during the mandatory

waiting period), and time during which examiner delays are binding constraints (i.e., time after

the waiting period).37 Figure 5 shows three possible cases. In the first case, the applicant files

for benefits shortly after disability onset, and the allowance decision comes before the applicant’s

remaining waiting period has elapsed. Since the applicant cannot work before the end of the waiting

period (and the start of the Trial Work Period), examiner processing time has no marginal effect

on labor supply. Approximately one-quarter of initially allowed applicants in our sample are in this

category. In the second case, the applicant files shortly after onset, but the allowance decision comes

after the applicant’s remaining waiting period has elapsed. This describes another one-quarter of

initially allowed applicants. For these applicants, every additional month of examiner delay results in

an additional month in which labor force non-participation is potentially constrained (and in which
  36
     This particular test is only applicable to the initially allowed: denied applicants who appeal their determination
will almost universally wait longer than five months for a final allowance. In addition, in SSA’s administrative data
used for this analysis, only allowed applicants have recorded an established onset date, which is necessary to compute
the length of the waiting period.
  37
     Note that these constraints are only binding for the subset of applicants who would otherwise wish to participate
in gainful employment.




                                                          20
the start of the Trial Work Period is delayed). In the third case, the applicant files for benefits

substantially after the onset of disability (perhaps after a period of unemployment), so the waiting

period is satisfied at the time of application. For this group, which encompasses approximately

one-half of initially allowed applicants, examiner time is fully binding on potential labor supply for

applicants who would otherwise work.

      To implement this test, we modify Equation (1) as follows


              Yi = δ0 min [decision_timei , wpi ] + δ1 max [decision_timei − wpi , 0] + si + εi ,   (4)


where

                                          wpi = min [time_to_appi , 5] .

In Equation (4), decision_timei , measures total time from disability onset to final decision, time_to_appi

measures time between disability onset and filing, wpi measures how much of the five month waiting

period has elapsed prior to i0 s application, and as before si is unobserved severity or labor force

attachment and is likely correlated with both total decision time and the time it takes the applicant

to file after disability onset. Since the five-month waiting period begins with the date of disability

onset and therefore precedes the filing date, the function wpi measures how much of applicant i0 s

waiting period has already been satisfied as of the filing date. Our hypothesis is that variation in

examiner processing time that occurs during an applicant’s five-month waiting period should have

no impact on subsequent labor force participation (hence δ0 = 0) whereas variation in examiner

processing time that effectively prolongs the waiting period will adversely affect post-application

employment (hence δ1 < 0).

      In partitioning processing time in this manner, we impose a nonlinearity in our endogenous

regressor Ti , which complicates instrumental variables estimation. We accordingly implement a

control function approach: to account for the endogenous component of decision_timei , we include

in (4) the residuals from our first stage regression of total processing time on EXT IM E j(i) (obtained

from Table 3, column 4, Panel C). To control for the endogenous component of wpi (time from onset

to application), we include time_to_appi itself, which we can compute from our data.38

      Table 5 reports the estimated effect of examiner processing time that occurs before and after the
 38
      Mean time from onset to application is 7.94 months, with a standard deviation of 10.66.


                                                          21
waiting period on applicants’ subsequent labor supply using the control function specification. Ad-

ditional processing time before the waiting period has fully elapsed causes no incremental reduction

in employment two to six years after the initial decision. Thus, the point estimates for δ0 are an

order of magnitude smaller than δ1 and statistically indistinguishable from zero. In sharp contrast,

an additional month of processing that occurs after the applicant has satisfied the waiting period

causes a 0.53 point reduction in employment two years later, and this effect falls only slightly by

year six. This evidence is strongly consistent with the implications of our identification strategy.

We also note that the estimated decay effect for applicants that face binding constraints on labor

supply is larger than the effect for all initially allowed applicants (Table 4). This result is expected

because the estimated causal effect for all applicants in Table 4 averages the null effect δ0 for the

unconstrained group with the somewhat larger effect δ1 for the constrained group.


3.3   Estimates of the decay effect using allowed and denied applicants

We now broaden the inquiry to incorporate all SSDI applicants. Table 6 presents our main in-

strumental variables estimates of Equation (1) for employment and earnings outcomes at years two

through six following initial application. Because many applications in the full sample are still in

progress two years after the initial decision, and to avoid the period of unusually high national un-

employment during 2009-2010, we focus our discussion on effects on outcomes three and six years

after the initial decision (2008 and 2011) as our preferred estimates of the short and long run effects,

respectively, of SSDI application processing times and benefit receipt on labor supply.

   Turning first to the processing time estimates, the three panels of the table document that

application delays lead to significant declines in the probability that applicants’ annual earnings

exceed either $1,000 (Panel A) or annual SGA (Panel B), and significant reductions in average

annual earnings (Panel C), in the short run (three years later), though not necessarily in the long

run or in the intervening years where unemployment rates were unusually high during the Great

Recession. We find that each additional month of processing time reduces employment of SSDI

applicants by 0.47 points, reduces the probability of substantial gainful activity by 0.31 points, and

lowers annual earnings by $133 three years after the initial decision.

   How large are these effects? Noting that processing time averages 14.1 months across all appli-

cants, the Table 6 estimates imply that processing delays reduce employment by 6.7 points, SGA

                                                  22
by 4.3 points and annual earnings by $1,875.39 Relative to observed employment, these effects are

economically significant. Only 24 percent of SSDI applicants earn more than $1,000, and 12 percent

earn more than SGA, three years post-application; average annual earnings are only $4,063 overall

(including zeroes). Thus, we estimate that an average processing delay of 14.1 months reduces sub-

sequent employment of SSDI applicants by 27.5 percent, the probability of employment above SGA

by 35 percent, and annual earnings by 46 percent. These effects attenuate to around half of their

previous levels after three years post-initial decision, and the employment effect is not statistically

significant (and SGA only marginally significant) in year six (2011, the end of our follow-up period).

    Since denied applicants’ incentives to participate in the labor force post-denial are not constrained

by SSDI program rules, one might have anticipated that the magnitude of the delay-decay channel

would be larger for all applicants (including allowed and denied applicants) than for the initially

allowed (Table 4). Table 6 finds instead that the effects of processing time on any employment and

working above SGA in the full sample of applicants are similar in levels to the effects among initially

allowed applicants in the short run, but less persistent than for the initially allowed. The pattern

for the effects on total earnings is also distinct: while the delay effect on earnings falls substantially

for both groups several years after the initial application, the adverse impact on the initially allowed

is larger than for the overall population in both the short and long run.

    What might account for these different effect sizes? Initially allowed applicants differ from the

overall applicant population along a number of dimensions. First, initially allowed applicants receive

their decision in a matter of months, compared to the average waiting time of 14.1 months among

all applicants. If the marginal effect of processing time is declining with longer wait times, then

the larger estimates among the initially allowed might reflect a steeper slope at shorter processing

times. Second, initially allowed applicants differ from the overall applicant population in terms of

both observable and (presumably) unobservable characteristics, most notably severity and type of

impairment and prior earnings. Finally, as noted above, allowed but not finally denied applicants

face SSDI’s Substantial Gainful Activity cap, which reduces or eliminate payments for beneficiaries

who earn more than approximately $1,000 per month (after completion of the Trial Work Period
   39
      Note that although examiner processing speed only directly affects the duration of initial disability determinations,
it indirectly affects final processing times among all applicant groups (since total processing time is cumulative) as
shown in Table 3. Thus, the Table 6 models that pool all applicant groups identify a local average treatment effect
of additional months of waiting time among applicants with a wide range of spell durations, including those initially
allowed, finally allowed, and finally denied.


                                                            23
and Grace Period).

       We explore these explanations in Table 7 by estimating effects of processing time separately for

finally allowed and finally denied applicants. Recall that this subgroup analysis is valid because

examiner speed does not affect SSDI receipt (Table A-3), thus examiner speed is a valid instrument

for final processing time in both groups. This subgroup analysis provides two useful sets of con-

trasts. First, comparing the effects of processing time on initially versus finally allowed applicants

allows us to hold constant the role of SSDI work disincentives and focus on differences due to (po-

tentially) nonlinear decay effects and differences in severity or case mix. Average processing time

for all finally allowed applicants is 15.3 months, compared to 3.6 months among the initially allowed

subpopulation. Initially allowed applicants are likely to include individuals with more severe health

impairments than the overall beneficiary population, and they tend to include a more balanced mix

of musculoskeletal versus mental disorders (27 percent and 26 percent, respectively, as reported in

Table 1) as compared to finally allowed applicants (36.5 percent musculoskeletal, 21 percent men-

tal).40 Despite the differences in case mix due to impairment type, however, initially and finally

allowed applicants tend to have relatively similar pre-onset earnings (Table 1).

       The second useful contrast comes from comparing the effects of processing time for finally allowed

versus finally denied applicants. This comparison allows us to hold approximately constant average

final processing times (15.3 vs. 11.6 months, respectively) and focus on differences in outcomes due

to SSDI work disincentives and differences in severity and case mix. Table 1 reveals that finally

allowed and finally denied applicants have a relatively similar mixture of mental and musculoskele-

tal impairments, while of course finally allowed applicants tend to have more severe impairments

overall than finally denied applicants. The sharpest contrast between these groups lies in pre-onset

earnings, which average $25,520 and $15,582 among finally allowed and finally denied applicants,

respectively.41

       Panel I of Table 7 focuses on finally allowed applicants. The estimated effects of processing
  40
     As discussed by MMS 2013, the types of cases allowed differ between those allowed at the DDS office and
those allowed on appeal. von Wachter, Song and Manchester (2010) find that applicants allowed on appeal tend to
be younger, have lower prior earnings, and have a higher frequency of musculoskeletal and mental disorders than
applicants allowed by DDS examiners.
  41
     Opposite to initially allowed applicants, finally denied applicants appear most likely to be seeking SSDI for
economic rather than medical reasons. Relative to both the initially and finally allowed, finally denied applicants
are younger, have weaker earnings histories, and often have difficult to verify impairments such as musculoskeletal
disorders.




                                                        24
delays on subsequent employment and earnings for the finally allowed tend to mirror those of the

overall applicant population, which is logical since finally allowed applicants comprise two-thirds of

our sample.42 In all cases, we find that finally allowed applicants suffer smaller decay effects per

additional month of processing time (though not in net, due to their longer processing times) than

do initially allowed applicants (Table 4), though these differences are more pronounced in year six

than in year three. For instance, the estimated effect of additional processing time on employment

among all allowed applicants is 84 percent as large as the estimated employment effect among the

initially allowed in year three, but it is only 54 percent as large as the estimated effect among the

initially allowed in year six. The fact that the waiting time effect is similar for finally allowed and

initially allowed applicants during the first three years following application suggests that, while

nonlinearity in the waiting time effect may play a role over the longer run, it does not fully explain

the different estimates between these two groups. This leaves differences in case mix as a likely

explanation.

       To investigate the role of case mix, Table 8 presents estimates of the effects of processing delays

and SSDI allowances on employment for applicants whose primary reported impairment is a mental

disorder (Panel A) or a musculoskeletal disorder (Panel B). For these models we pool allowed and

denied applicants to conserve power. We find similar decay effects among applicants with mental

and musculoskeletal disorders, respectively, in the short run, but only persistent (albeit imprecise)

decay effects among applicants with mental disorders. This pattern suggests that heterogeneity in

the effect of processing time by case mix plays an important role in understanding the differences

between initially and finally allowed applicants.

       Next we turn our attention to estimates of the decay effect for finally denied applicants (Table

7, Panel II). Because finally denied applicants comprise only one-third of our sample (similar to our

sample sizes by body system in Table 8), the estimates for this subpopulation are imprecise. We

find that one month of additional processing time reduces employment of the finally denied by 0.28

points in year three after the initial decision but this falls to less than a tenth of a point by year

six; the estimated effects on substantial gainful activity are similar in magnitude. In contrast to

the extensive margin estimates, the estimated effects on annual earnings (including zeros) are fairly
  42
    One notable exception is the estimated effect of processing time on the probability of earning more than the SGA
threshold, discussed further below.




                                                        25
persistent: $45 and $53 per additional month of processing time in years three and six, respectively.

   Extrapolating to the average processing time of 11.6 months among applicants who are finally

denied benefits (Table 1), the Table 7 estimates imply that processing delays reduce employment

(i.e., earnings above SGA) by 3.3 points and reduce average annual earnings by $528 three years

after the initial decision (typically the year immediately following the final decision for applicants

who appealed their initial denial to the ALJ level). Recalling that annual earnings three years

post-application average $8,752 among finally denied applicants, with only 48 percent exceeding

$1K and only 29 percent exceeding SGA, we estimate that a twelve month processing delay reduces

subsequent earnings of denied applicants by six percent, the probability of employment by seven

percent, and the probability of substantial work activity by twelve percent over the first three years.

Of course, these calculations should be viewed as provisional since the point estimates for earnings

in the finally denied sample are statistically insignificant, potentially reflecting smaller sample size,

though they are also persistent and stable in magnitude across years.

   Why do earnings effects stemming from delays appear to persist into year six for finally denied

applicants while estimated effects on any employment and earnings above SGA attenuate? One

potential explanation is that a substantial fraction of denied applicants will ultimately return to

the labor market if they are not able to obtain benefits. Indeed, Table 1 shows that 48 percent

of finally denied applicants have positive earnings three years after application and 29 percent are

working above SGA. However, these applicants have substantially lower average earnings after their

final denial than before their initial application; post-denial earnings in years three and six are

roughly half of pre-application earnings (Table 1). Thus, our tentative interpretation of the Table

7 results for finally denied applicants is that time out of the labor force does not ultimately reduce

the probability of any earnings, but it may erode earnings capacity nonetheless.

   It is also instructive to compare the estimated decay effects for the finally denied with those of

the finally allowed (Table 7, Panel I). Whereas the employment and earnings effects are much larger

for the finally allowed than the finally denied in both the short and long run, the estimated effects

on substantial gainful activity are actually smaller for the allowed in the short run and similar in

magnitude in the long run. Since SSDI work disincentives likely discourage allowed applicants from

earning above SGA—a phenomenon sometimesreferred to as ‘parking’—it is possible that if the

constraint on earnings were removed, the SGA effect would in fact be larger for allowed applicants


                                                   26
(Weathers and Hemmeter, 2011). Thus, the finding that processing time reduces finally allowed

applicants’ total annual earnings but does not affect their likelihood of engaging in SGA suggests

that SSDI program rules play a significant role in the labor supply outcomes of beneficiaries.

    We finally examine heterogeneity in the effects of processing time on employment three and six

years post-application according to applicant sex, age, and prior earnings quartile. These results,

presented in Figures A-1 and A-2, do not for the most part detect significant differences in the

effects of delay on employment across groups. One notable exception is that post-determination

employment of applicants in the lowest quartile of pre-application earnings appears to be relatively

insensitive to either processing time or benefit receipt (the latter of which is presented in Figures

A-3 and A-4). It appears plausible that applicants with extremely low prior earnings possess limited

work capacity, so their labor market activity is only minimally affected by their interactions with

the SSDI program.

    In summary, the analysis in Tables 4 through 8 documents that delays in the disability determina-

tion process have unambiguously negative and persistent effects on the post-allowance employment

and earnings of applicants who are initially allowed, a group that has relatively high prior labor

attachment and receives positive disability determinations relatively rapidly. Among the full popu-

lation of allowed applicants, which is comprised approximately equally of initially allowed applicants

and those allowed on appeal, adverse earnings effects of delay also persist for the full six years of

the sample window, but these effects are less sizable than for the initially allowed subsample. For

the finally denied group, our estimates suggest still smaller (but non-trivial) adverse earnings ef-

fects that also appear to persist to the end of the sample. Available precision does not allow us to

confidentially reject the null of no effect for this group, however.



4    The Causal Effect of SSDI Receipt on Labor Supply Revisited

We finally turn to the topic that has been the primary focus of the prior literature on SSDI determi-

nations: the causal effect of SSDI allowances on labor supply. The second row of each panel of Table

6 reports estimates of these causal effects. We find that an SSDI allowance lowers the probability

of employment—that is, annual earnings of at least $1, 000—by 48 points in year three following

application and by 25 points in year six. Of course, $1,000 is a very low benchmark for earnings, and


                                                   27
it is not clear whether earnings near this threshold should be viewed as economically consequential.

Panel B, however, shows that the effect of an SSDI allowance on the probability of annual earnings

in excess of SGA—approximately $12, 000—is approximately 70–75 percent as large as its effect on

any earnings: a reduction of 33 percent in year three and 19 percent in year six. As shown in Panel

C, earnings reductions stemming from marginal SSDI awards average $7, 828 in year three following

application, and $5, 613 in year six. Relative to the observed annual earnings of those who are finally

denied (column 5 of Table 1), these point estimates imply reductions on the order of 70–90 percent

of annual earnings.43

       A critical implication of the results above for existing literature on the labor supply effects of

the SSDI program is that studies that estimate the effect of disability allowances on labor supply

in the short run but do not account for systematic differences in processing time between allowed

and denied applicants will generally produce biased causal estimates. As MMS 2013 note, because

applicants assigned to examiners with lower allowance propensities are more likely to appeal their

denials, allowance odds will be confounded with processing times in the full sample of applicants.

       We can analytically characterize this bias by examining both the first stage regressions for SSDI

receipt and final processing reported in Table 3, and the reduced form regressions for labor supply

outcomes reported in Table A-5. Suppressing covariates, the two first stage equations are:


                           DIi = π1d · EXALLOWj(i) + π2d · EXT IM Ej(i) + εdi                                   (5)


and



                            Ti = π1t · EXALLOWj(i) + π2t · EXT IM Ej(i) + εti .                                 (6)

Substituting these equations into our causal labor supply model (Equation (1)), we obtain the

following expression for the reduced form model:


                  yi = (γπ1d + δπ1t ) · EXALLOWj(i) + (γπ2d + δπ2t ) · EXT IM Ej(i) + εyi .                     (7)
  43
    In Table 8 we present estimates of the SSDI receipt effect for applicants with the two most prevalent types of
disorders–musculoskeletal and mental disorders. These results echo those of MMS 2013 (Table 6), who find that SSDI
allowances result in the largest labor supply reductions for applicants with reported mental impairments and smaller
labor supply reductions among applicants with reported musculoskeletal disorders. Like the decay effect, the SSDI
receipt effect is persistent for applicants with mental disorders but not for those with musculoskeletal disorders.


                                                        28
This equation demonstrates why excluding waiting time from a regression of employment on ex-

aminer allowance rates will lead to bias estimates. In an IV regression that excludes waiting time,

akin to the model that MMS estimate, the plim of the IV estimate will simply equal the ratio of

the reduced form to first stage coefficients on EXALLOW . We refer to this IV estimate as γ M M S ,

where
                                                             γπ1d + δπ1t
                                                  γM M S =               ,                                         (8)
                                                                 π1d

         As is clear from inspection, γ M M S equals the causal parameter of interest (γ in (1)) only if waiting

time does not affect employment (δ = 0) or examiner allowance rates do not affect final waiting time

(π1t = 0). Neither of these conditions holds in reality (see Tables 3 and 6). Rather, our analysis

indicates that δ < 0 (delay causes decay in employment) and π1t < 0 (assignment to an examiner

with a higher allowance propensity causes shorter processing time). Accordingly, the reduced form

coefficient on EXALLOW will be larger than γπ1d , and thus the estimator that excludes waiting

time, γ M M S , will be biased upward relative to γ.44 Since γ < 0, this implies that the MMS estimate

will understate the magnitude of the true causal effect of SSDI receipt.45 Intuitively, the shorter final

processing time resulting from an applicant’s assignment to an examiner with a higher allowance

propensity mitigates the decrease in her employment resulting from the applicant’s higher odds of

receiving an SSDI allowance.46

         How large is this ‘processing time bias?’ We benchmark its magnitude in Table 9 by comparing

two sets of point estimates for the association between allowances and employment (earnings of at

least $1, 000) at years three and six following application. The first column of the table presents

simple OLS comparisons of allowed and denied applicants, akin to those first reported by Bound

(1989). Though Bound argued that such comparisons would place an upper bound on the effect of

SSDI allowances on labor supply—since allowed applicants are presumably less healthy than denied

applicants—recent literature has questioned this interpretation since rejected applicants may differ

not only in health but also in their skills and motivation to participate in the labor force.
    44
         We obtain the following expression for the bias in the MMS estimate by rearranging Equation (8): γ M M S − γ =
      πt
δ   · πd1 .
        1
     45
     Note that, since EXALLOW andEXT IM E are uncorrelated, regressing SSDI receipt on EXALLOW omitting
EXT IM E still obtains a consistent estimate of the denominator, π1d .
  46
     Note that, since π2d = 0 and EXALLOW andEXT IM E are uncorrelated, omitting EXALLOW and taking the
ratio of estimated coefficients on EXT IM E from Equations (6) and (7) will result in a consistent estimate of the
causal effect of processing time on labor supply.



                                                             29
   The second column of Table 9 implements the instrumental variables strategy used in recent

literature where allowances are instrumented with examiner allowance propensity as in MMS 2013,

which in turn is closely akin to the strategy of instrumenting allowances using Administrative Law

Judge allowance propensity (French and Song, 2014). Following our reasoning above, we would

expect these instrumental variables estimates to underestimate the causal effect of allowances on

labor supply because they do not account for the fact that applicants assigned to examiners or ALJs

with lower allowance propensities have both lower allowance odds and longer processing times. The

third column of Table 9 presents our preferred estimates (akin to Table 6) where both processing

time and allowance odds are instrumented by examiner speed and allowance propensity. Finally,

the fourth column of Table 9 presents the difference between our preferred estimate and the 2SLS

estimate excluding processing time. To account for the correlation between the two estimators, we

bootstrap the distribution of the difference by sampling observations clustered by examiner with

replacement S = 300 times; we report the 95 percent confidence interval obtained by taking the

2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of this distribution. Note that the estimates in columns 2 and 3 are both

local average treatment effects (LATEs) that apply to the same 16.5 percent of applicants on the

margin of SSDI receipt based on initial examiner assignment.

   The results in Table 9 indicate that processing time bias is of first order importance, particularly

in the short run (three years later, in 2008), though less so over the longer run (six years later,

in 2011), when the effect of processing time on employment falls to half of its previous magnitude

and becomes statistically indistinguishable from zero. A comparison of the column 1 and column 2

estimates would naively suggest that OLS comparisons of allowed and denied applicants overstate the

causal effects of allowance on labor supply, consistent with the influential argument of Bound (1989).

Our reasoning implies instead that the column 2 estimates—which instrument for allowances using

examiner allowance propensity but do not account for the indirect effect of allowance propensity on

waiting times—are likely to underestimate the direct effect of allowances on work. The column 3

estimates, which instrument for both variables, corroborate this contention. In year three following

application, the column 3 estimate of the causal effect of allowance on labor force participation,

holding processing time constant, is substantially larger than the either the conventional 2SLS

estimate or the canonical OLS estimate. In year six, our preferred estimate is lower than the OLS

estimate but not significantly so. Taken together, our results suggest that OLS estimates of the


                                                 30
effect of SSDI receipt on labor supply outcomes cannot be relied upon to produce an upper bound

on the magnitude of the true causal effect.



5    Discussion and Conclusion

A well-known body of research explores how the award of SSDI benefits affects the labor supply

and earnings of beneficiaries. In this paper we explore a complementary—and we believe equally

consequential—question: how do long application processing times, during which applicants must

not earn more than $1,000 per month, affect the subsequent employment of denied applicants and

SSDI beneficiaries? Our approach exploits exogenous variation in average processing time by disabil-

ity examiners as an instrument for applicant waiting time. Using a unique administrative workload

database, we evaluate how the substantial time spent out of the labor market during the applica-

tion and appeals process—more than one year on average, across all applicants—affects subsequent

employment opportunities and earnings of both allowed and denied applicants.

    We find that longer processing times significantly reduce the employment and earnings of SSDI

applicants in the years after their initial decision. Our main estimates indicate that a one standard

deviation (2.1 months) increase in initial processing time reduces annual employment rates by about 1

point (4.1%) in the three years following the initial determination, falling to 0.43 points (2.2%) by six

years after the initial determination. Extrapolating to total applicant processing times, we estimate

that the SSDI determination process directly reduces the long-run post-application employment of

denied applicants by approximately 2.4 points (5.8%) and allowed applicants by approximately 3.1

points (36.5%).

    On net, our results imply that neither the recent nor established SSDI literature has fully cap-

tured the labor supply impacts of the disability system on applicants and beneficiaries. Though

prior literature has posited that the decay channel may be economically important (Parsons, 1991),

no prior paper has provided direct estimates of this causal pathway. Moreover, due to the con-

founding of allowance odds and processing times, the existing literature has underestimated the

labor supply effects of SSDI awards on beneficiaries. Accounting for both mechanisms provides a

more complete—and economically more sizable—picture of the aggregate labor supply impacts of

the Social Security Disability Insurance program. For instance, using the instrumental variables


                                                   31
methodology of Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2013), the estimated effect of SSDI receipt on employ-

ment ignoring processing time implies that the SSDI program reduces employment by 9 points in

the short run and 5.5 points in the long run, among the subset of applicants on the margin of SSDI

receipt.47 However, in this paper we estimate that this effect is closer to 22 points in the short run

and 11 points in the long run accounting for processing time.48 That is, combining the labor supply

decay effect, estimated for the first time in this paper, with new estimates of the benefit receipt

effect that are purged of waiting time bias implies that the SSDI program effect on employment is

105 to 150 percent larger than previous estimates have suggested for applicants on the margin of

SSDI receipt. A key implication of our findings is that the design of disability insurance programs

should account for not only the work disincentives that arise from benefit receipt but also those that

arise from the disability determination process itself.




6        References

Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiri-
cist’s Companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
    Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. (2003). “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline
in Unemployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 157–206.
    Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. (2010). “Supporting Work: A Proposal for Modernizing
the U.S. Disability Insurance System.” Washington, DC: Center for American Progress and The
Hamilton Project, December.
    Ben-shalom, Yonatan, Maura Bardos, and David Stapleton (2012). “Longitudinal Statistics for
New Longitudinal Statistics for New Supplemental Security Income: Final Report” Mathematica
Policy Research, #08977.933, November, Washington, DC.
    Blau, David M and Philip K. Robins (1990). “Job Search Outcomes for the Employed and
Unemployed,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(3), 637-655.
    Bound, John (1989) “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants.”
American Economic Review, 79(3), pp. 482-503.
    Bound, John (1991). “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants:
Reply.” American Economic Review, 81(5), pp. 1427-1434.
    Chen, Susan and Wilbert van der Klaauw (2008). “The Work Disincentive Effects of the Disability
Insurance Program in the 1990s.” Journal of Econometrics, 142, pp. 757-784.
    Davis, Steven J. and Till von Wachter (2011). “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2011(2), 1–72.
    47
      The estimated effect of the SSDI program for applicants on the margin of SSDI receipt ignoring processing time
is p · γ M M S , where p = 0.331 is the initial allowance rate from Table 1 and γ M M S is the updated estimate at either
three years post-decision (short run) or six years post-decision (long run) from Table 9. .
   48
      Our estimate of the effect of the SSDI program is p · (γ + δT A ) + (1 − p) · (δT D ) where estimates of γ and δ
are taken from Table 6 and T A and T D are average total processing times for initially allowed and initially denied
applicants (3.6 and 19.3 months), respectively, reported in Table 1.


                                                           32
    French, Eric and Jae Song (2014). “The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2), 291-337.
    Imbens, Guido W, and Joshua D Angrist (1994). “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
Treatment Effects.” Econometrica, 62 (2), 467-475.
    Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2013). “Duration Dependence and
Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
128(3), 1123–1167.
    Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent (1998). “The European Unemployment Dilemma,”
Journal of Political Economy, 106(3), 514-550.
    Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen Mullen and Alexander Strand (2013). “Does Disability Insurance
Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt.”
American Economic Review, 103(5), 1797–1829.
    Office of the Inspector General (2008). “Disability Claims Overall Processing Times.” Audit
Report A-01-08-18011.
    Parsons, Donald (1980). “The Decline in Male Labor Force Participation.” Journal of Political
Economy, 88(1), 117–134.
    Parsons, Donald (1991). “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants:
Comment.” American Economic Review, 81(5), pp. 1419.1426.
    Social Security Advisory Board (2006). “Disability Decision Making: Data and Materials.” Wash-
ington, DC (available at www.ssab.gov).
    von Wachter, Till, Jae Song and Joyce Manchester (2010). “Trends in Employment and Earnings
of Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the Social Security Disability Insurance Program.” American
Economic Review, 101, 3308–3329.
    Weathers, Robert R. II and Jefferey Hemmeter (2011). “The Impact of Changing Financial Work
Incentives on the Earnings of Social Security Disability Insurance Beneficiaries.” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 30(4), 708-728.




                                                33
   Figure 1. Employment at or above Substantial Gainful Activity (SGA) Before and After Initial
                 Decision, Denied Applicants, by Year of Last Observed Decision




  Figure 2. Conceptual Sketch of the Effects of SSDI Processing Time and Benefit Receipt on
                                        Labor Supply
Labor
Supply



                                    slope  
 T

                                                                                   Denied
                                                                                    Applicant


                                                                                    Allowed
                                                                                    Applicant


                                      T                                      Processing Time
                                                  Figure 3. Distribution of Examiner Mean Processing Times



                          1.5
                                                                                                                               Raw
                          1                                                                                                    Adjusted
       Percent
                          .5
                          0




                                             -4                 -2                0             2                          4          6
                                                                                 Residuals (Months)
                                             Source: 2005 DIODS Data. Examiners with 10 - 900 decisions only.
                                             Caseload characteristics includes DDS, geography, body system code,
                                             age, pre-onset earnings, concurrent status, and Terminal Illness diagnosis.




Figure 4. Scatter Plot of Residualized Examiner Allowance Rate and Residualized Examiner
                                        Waiting Time
                          40
       Examiner allowance rate, percentage
          -20          0            20




                                             -4                      -2              0                2                           4
                                                                      Examiner processing time, months
                  Figure 5. Examples of Non‐binding and Binding Processing Time




                              5 months



Non‐
binding
          Onset      Filing              Decision   Waiting
          date       date                date       period
                                                    elapses

Binding

          Onset      Filing                         Waiting   Decision
          date       date                           period    date
                                                    elapses

Binding

          Onset                                     Waiting     Filing   Decision
          date                                      period      date     date
                                                    elapses
                                     Table 1. Summary Statistics

                                            (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)
                                                      Initially    Initially    Finally   Finally
                                            All       Allowed      Denied      Allowed    Denied

% of sample                               100.0%       33.1%        66.9%       67.7%      32.3%

Continue claim | initial denial           64.1%          ‐‐         64.1%       91.3%      34.9%
Allowance rate | continued claim          69.7%          ‐‐         69.7%       94.4%       0.0%
   Appeal | initial denial                61.1%          ‐‐         61.1%       88.7%      31.6%
   Allowance rate | appeal                70.3%          ‐‐         70.3%       93.8%       0.0%
   Reapplication | initial denial         15.7%          ‐‐         15.7%       20.2%      10.9%
   Allowance rate | reapplication         12.5%          ‐‐         12.5%       18.0%       0.0%

Time at DDS (months)                       2.91         2.77        2.98         2.93       2.88
                                           (1.65)      (1.74)       (1.60)      (1.69)     (1.57)
Total Processing Time                      14.12        3.64        19.31       15.35      11.55c
                                          (17.64)      (2.22)      (19.53)     (17.70)    (17.23)
Total Processing Time | Continue             ‐‐           ‐‐       28.05       28.72      26.16c
Claim after Initial Denial                                         (19.51)     (18.19)    (22.69)

Examiner processing time (EXTIME),         2.91         2.89         2.92        2.92       2.90
months                                    (0.79)       (0.79)       (0.78)      (0.80)     (0.76)
                                           0.33         0.36         0.32        0.34       0.32
Examiner allowance rate (EXALLOW)         (0.10)       (0.11)       (0.10)      (0.11)     (0.10)

Concurrent claim                          49.9%        39.1%        55.2%       44.9%      60.3%
Terminal illness                           0.6%         1.2%         0.3%        0.7%       0.3%
Musculoskeletal                           38.0%        27.0%        43.4%       36.5%      41.0%
Mental                                    20.7%        25.7%        18.2%       21.0%      20.0%
Age                                        46.5         50.5         44.5        48.4       42.6
                                          (11.0)       (10.5)       (10.7)      (10.1)     (11.6)
Earnings (2008$, thousands)
 3‐5 years prior                          22.308       28.320       19.333      25.520     15.582
                                         (22.937)     (26.072)     (20.575)    (23.937)   (19.005)
 3 years later                            4.063         1.768       5.174        1.792     8.752
                                         (11.711)     (10.061)     (12.277)     (8.877)   (14.998)
 6 years later                            3.495         1.604       4.363        1.289     7.870
                                         (11.080)      (8.799)     (11.882)     (7.512)   (15.017)
Employed (earning more than
$1,000)
 3 years later                            24.2%        11.5%        30.3%       12.7%      47.9%
 6 years later                            19.3%        9.7%         23.7%       8.5%       40.8%

Performing SGA (earning more than
SGA threshold)
 3 years later                            12.4%         4.0%        16.4%       4.6%       28.5%
 6 years later                            10.3%         3.6%        13.4%       3.0%       24.8%

No. observations                        1,039,221     344,069      695,152     703,358    335,863
                                            c
Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. Denotes censored due to unobserved higher level
                                   Table 2. SSDI Processing Times in Months:
                    Cumulative Time from Filing to Observed Decision, by Administrative Level

                                                                 (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)
                                                              % Cases       Mean      Std. Dev. 50th Perc. 90th Perc.
Initial                                                        100.0         3.8         2.1       3.4        6.2
 Time at DDS office                                            100.0         2.9         1.7       2.6        5.1
   Duration < 12 months or non‐severe? (denied)                 17.1         2.6         1.5       2.3        4.6
    Meets listings? (allowed)                                   13.9         2.5         1.7       2.1        4.7
    Capacity for past work? (denied)                            24.5         3.1         1.6       2.8        5.2
    Capacity for any work? (allowed or denied)                  44.5         3.1         1.7       2.8        5.3
Reconsideration                                                 27.5         8.9         3.9       8.0        13.8
ALJ                                                             31.9        33.7        18.9       28.8       63.9
Higher Appeals*                                                 0.3         49.1        17.4       51.4       70.2
Reapplication                                                   10.5        21.8        12.2       17.5       40.4

Final Decision                                                  3.4          14.1        17.6        5.5     37.1
Note: * indicates we only observe time to decision at these stages if the final decision is allowance.
                  Table 3. First Stage Regressions of SSDI Receipt and Time to Decision on
      Examiner's Allowance Propensity (EXALLOW) and Examiner's Average Processing Time (EXTIME)

                                                                      Initially
                                  All Applicants                     Allowed      Finally Allowed Finally Denied
                        (1)             (2)         (3)                  (4)             (5)             (6)
                   Initial Time    Final Time SSDI Receipt          Final Time       Final Time     Final Time

                                             A. Without Covariates
EXTIME             0.953***        1.272***       0.00896***       0.912***         1.662***         1.065***
                   (0.0051)         (0.0305)        (0.0010)       (0.0078)         (0.0764)         (0.0435)
EXALLOW            0.162***        ‐20.68***       0.309***
                   (0.0322)         (0.2230)        (0.0068)
R2                   0.126           0.019            0.005          0.106            0.006           0.002

                                         B. Plus Assignment Variables
EXTIME             0.642***        0.520***        0.000417       0.593***          0.520***         0.673***
                   (0.0084)         (0.0303)        (0.0009)       (0.0107)         (0.0545)         (0.0533)
EXALLOW            0.294***        ‐7.160***       0.169***
                   (0.0454)         (0.2730)        (0.0085)
R2                   0.263           0.073            0.084         0.276             0.132           0.029

                                        C. Plus Individual Characteristics
EXTIME             0.642***        0.529***         ‐0.000232        0.592***       0.536***         0.677***
                   (0.0084)         (0.0298)         (0.0008)        (0.0106)       (0.0519)         (0.0525)
EXALLOW            0.301***        ‐6.984***         0.165***
                   (0.0454)         (0.2620)         (0.0079)
R2                   0.265           0.118             0.147           0.279          0.206           0.049

n                  1,039,221       1,039,221        1,039,221        344,069         703,358         335,863

Note: Assignment variables include: DDS indicators, body system codes, top 20 diagnosis codes, terminal illness
flag, month of receipt at DDS, concurrent status and 3‐digit zip codes. Individual characteristics include: five‐
year age group dummies and average prior earnings 3‐5 years before application.
                                Table 4. OLS and 2SLS Estimates: Effect of Final Time to Decision
                               on Labor Supply Outcomes among Initially Allowed Applicants Only

                           OLS Estimates                                                 2SLS Estimates
                  (1)           (2)           (3)                (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
             2 Years Later 4 Years Later 6 Years Later      2 Years Later 3 Years Later 4 Years Later 5 Years Later 6 Years Later
                (2007)        (2009)        (2011)             (2007)        (2008)        (2009)        (2010)        (2011)

                                                  A. Dependent Variable: Earn >= $1,000/Year

Final Time   ‐0.00174***   ‐0.00137***     ‐0.00175***       ‐0.00442**    ‐0.00523***        ‐0.00270*   ‐0.00340**   ‐0.00381**
              (0.000276)    (0.000275)      (0.000277)       (0.001760)     (0.001720)       (0.001620)   (0.001620)   (0.001680)
R2               0.054         0.052           0.055            0.053          0.056            0.052        0.051        0.055

                                                        B. Dependent Variable: Earn >= SGA

Final Time   ‐0.00138*** ‐0.000964*** ‐0.00111***            ‐0.00291***   ‐0.00269**        ‐0.00270**    ‐0.00178*   ‐0.00257**
              (0.000162)   (0.000165)  (0.000172)             (0.001120)   (0.001120)        (0.001050)   (0.001040)   (0.001180)
R2               0.039         0.04       0.044                  0.039         0.04             0.039         0.04        0.043

                                             C. Dependent Variable: Annual Earnings (in Thousands)

Final Time   ‐0.0473***     ‐0.0416***     ‐0.0446***         ‐0.167**      ‐0.237***         ‐0.0667      ‐0.121**     ‐0.131**
               (0.0080)       (0.0076)       (0.0074)         (0.0733)       (0.0900)         (0.0800)     (0.0573)     (0.0563)
R2              0.035          0.032          0.051             0.035         0.042            0.032         0.046        0.05
n              344,069       321,835        302,683            344,069       332,304          321,835      312,134      302,683
             Table 5. Effect of Time to Decision on Employment Before vs. After Waiting Period (WP)
                                      Has Elapsed, Control Function Estimates

                                   (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
                             2 Years Later     3 Years Later     4 Years Later     5 Years Later     6 Years Later
                                 (2007)           (2008)            (2009)            (2010)            (2011)
Time Before WP                 ‐0.000453         ‐0.00164          0.000492         ‐0.000605          ‐0.00167
                              (0.002090)        (0.001950)        (0.001930)        (0.001810)        (2.900000)

Time After WP                ‐0.00526***       ‐0.00610***         ‐0.00323*        ‐0.00456**        ‐0.00434**
                              (0.002040)        (0.001900)        (0.001890)        (0.001740)        (0.001880)

Elapsed time onset to       ‐0.000776***      ‐0.000852***      ‐0.000744***      ‐0.000636***       ‐0.000677***
filing                        (0.000054)        (0.00001)         (0.000050)        (0.000052)         (0.00005)

Residual from first stage       0.00253         0.00328*            0.00101           0.00229           0.00199
                              (0.002080)        (0.00195)         (0.001890)        (0.001770)         (0.00193)

R2                                 0.055            0.059              0.053             0.052            0.056
n                                352,495           332,304           329,630           319,665          302,683
Notes: See text for details of estimation. Standard errors calculated by bootstrap clustered on examiner (S=200).
          Table 6. Joint Estimation of Effect of SSDI Receipt and Time to Decision
                       on Employment and Earnings, 2SLS Estimates

                    (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
               2 Years Later 3 Years Later 4 Years Later 5 Years Later 6 Years Later
                  (2007)        (2008)        (2009)        (2010)        (2011)

                              A. Dependent Variable: Earn >= $1,000/Year

Final time      ‐0.00381*** ‐0.00472***        ‐0.00237*      ‐0.00154       ‐0.00203
                  (0.00150)   (0.00149)        (0.00139)      (0.00133)      (0.00131)

SSDI
                 ‐0.486***      ‐0.478***      ‐0.298***      ‐0.256***      ‐0.254***
receipt
                 (0.07540)      (0.07490)      (0.07030)      (0.06750)      (0.06620)

R2                 0.124          0.141          0.194          0.198          0.205

                                  B. Dependent Variable: Earn >= SGA

Final time      ‐0.00342*** ‐0.00306***        ‐0.00165        ‐0.0011       ‐0.00173*
                  (0.00114)   (0.00118)        (0.00107)      (0.00102)      (0.00103)

SSDI             ‐0.388***      ‐0.330***      ‐0.212***      ‐0.179***      ‐0.192***
                 (0.05870)      (0.05910)      (0.05410)      (0.05210)      (0.05200)

R2                 0.058          0.127          0.156          0.159          0.164

                        C. Dependent Variable: Annual Earnings (in Thousands)

Final time       ‐0.164***      ‐0.133***       ‐0.0667       ‐0.0673*       ‐0.0847**
                  (0.0481)       (0.0488)       (0.0467)      (0.0394)        (0.0391)

SSDI             ‐12.06***      ‐7.828***      ‐5.382**       ‐4.667**       ‐5.613***
                  (2.3220)       (2.1580)      (2.1660)       (1.9000)        (1.9080)

R2                 0.039          0.124          0.128          0.142          0.146
n                1,039,221      1,018,984       999,779        981,000        962,045
        Table 7. 2SLS Estimates: Effect of Final Time to Decision on Labor Supply Outcomes,
                           Finally Allowed and Finally Denied Applicants

                    (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)
               2 Years Later      3 Years Later    4 Years Later     5 Years Later     6 Years Later
                  (2007)             (2008)           (2009)            (2010)            (2011)

                                        Panel I. Finally Allowed Applicants

                                    A. Dependent Variable: Earn >= $1,000/Year

Final Time      ‐0.00339**        ‐0.00441***         ‐0.00204          ‐0.00188         ‐0.00205
                 (0.00147)          (0.00142)        (0.00130)         (0.00126)        (0.00126)
R2                                                      0.016             0.024            0.031

                                        B. Dependent Variable: Earn >= SGA

Final Time      ‐0.00217**        ‐0.00192**         ‐0.00150*         ‐0.000592         ‐0.00129
                 (0.00090)         (0.00092)         (0.00082)         (0.00077)        (0.00082)
    2
R                                                       0.004             0.026            0.023

                               C. Dependent Variable: Annual Earnings (in Thousands)

Final Time       ‐0.153***         ‐0.150***          ‐0.0492           ‐0.0648*         ‐0.0717*
                 (0.05460)         (0.05290)         (0.04980)         (0.03780)        (0.03700)
    2
R                                                       0.02              0.021            0.023
n                 703,358           686,475           670,574            655,101          639,578

                                         Panel II. Finally Denied Applicants

                                    A. Dependent Variable: Earn >= $1,000/Year

Final Time        ‐0.00228          ‐0.00281          ‐0.00146         0.000121         ‐0.000809
                 (0.00225)         (0.00225)         (0.00220)         (0.00216)        (0.00211)
R2                 0.139             0.147             0.131             0.118            0.132

                                        B. Dependent Variable: Earn >= SGA

Final Time       ‐0.00326*          ‐0.00289         ‐0.000511         ‐0.000703         ‐0.00113
                 (0.00198)         (0.00204)         (0.00194)         (0.00192)        (0.00191)
    2
R                   0.132             0.136             0.113             0.115             0.12

                               C. Dependent Variable: Annual Earnings (in Thousands)

Final Time         ‐0.101           ‐0.0455           ‐0.0469           ‐0.0244          ‐0.0527
                 (0.06300)         (0.06700)         (0.06420)         (0.06390)        (0.06490)
    2
R                   0.217             0.21             0.195             0.183            0.182
n                 335,863           332,509           329,205           325,899          322,467
       Table 8. Joint Estimation of Effect of SSDI Receipt and Time to Decision
      on Probability of Earnings Exceeding $1,000/yr, Claimants with Mental or
                  Musculoskeletal Disorder as Primary Impairment

                  (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
             2 Years Later 3 Years Later 4 Years Later 5 Years Later 6 Years Later
                (2007)        (2008)        (2009)        (2010)        (2011)

                              A. Primary Impairment Mental Disorder

Final time    ‐0.00375        ‐0.00302        0.0015      ‐0.00388         ‐0.00403
              (0.00358)       (0.00346)     (0.00325)     (0.00313)        (0.00315)
SSDI          ‐0.494***      ‐0.457***        ‐0.217      ‐0.455***        ‐0.398***
receipt       (0.15100)      (0.14600)      (0.14000)     (0.13700)        (0.13500)

R2              0.111          0.148          0.152         0.126           0.15
n              215,110        212,887        210,582       208,066         205,513

                          B. Primary Impairment Musculoskeletal Disorder

Final time    ‐0.00307*      ‐0.00333*      ‐0.00241      ‐0.00067         ‐0.00173
              (0.00184)      (0.00186)      (0.00179)     (0.00178)        (0.00171)

SSDI          ‐0.324***      ‐0.345***       ‐0.206**      ‐0.0847           ‐0.126
receipt       (0.09580)      (0.09600)      (0.09390)     (0.09330)        (0.09110)

R2              0.192          0.216          0.207         0.154           0.193
n              394,513        390,770        386,852       382,695         378,187
        Table 9. The Effect of SSDI Award on Probability of Positive Annual Earnings (>$1K)
             in Years Following Application, Impact of Accounting for Processing Time

                                         2SLS:
                                       Excluding     2SLS: Including
                                       Processing      Processing     Difference in
                           OLS                                                                N
                                          Time            Time       2SLS Estimates
                            (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)

3 Years Later (2008)    ‐0.328***       ‐0.273***      ‐0.478***        ‐0.205***      1,018,984
                          (0.001)         (0.038)        (0.075)         (0.064)†
                                                                     [‐0.329,‐0.087]

6 Years Later (2011)    ‐0.306***       ‐0.166***      ‐0.254***         ‐0.088         962,045
                          (0.001)         (0.037)        (0.066)        (0.062)†
                                                                     [‐0.205,0.042]
† Standard errors calculated by bootstrap (S=300 simula ons).
Note: Bootstrapped 95 percent confidence intervals in brackets.
 Figure A‐1. Heterogeneity in Effect of Processing Time on Employment Three Years After
                               Initial Decision, All Applicants




Figure A‐2. Heterogeneity in Effect of Processing Time on Employment Six Years After Initial
                                  Decision, All Applicants
Figure A‐3. Heterogeneity in Effect of SSDI Receipt on Employment Three Years After Initial
                                  Decision, All Applicants




  Figure A‐4. Heterogeneity in Effect of SSDI Receipt on Employment Six Years After Initial
                                   Decision, All Applicants
                                           Table A‐1. Balance Tests

                                  Without Assignment Variables            With Assignment Variables
                                     (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)
                                  Examiner           Examiner            Examiner          Examiner
                               Allowance Rate    Allowance Time       Allowance Rate   Allowance Time
                                 (EXALLOW)           (EXTIME)           (EXALLOW)          (EXTIME)
Age
18‐24                             ‐0.000237           0.005380           ‐0.000067          ‐0.004190
                                 (0.000436)          (0.003780)         (0.000438)          (0.003660)
25‐29                            ‐0.000772*          0.00688**           ‐0.000323          ‐0.003660
                                 (0.000446)          (0.003310)         (0.000383)          (0.003120)
30‐34                             ‐0.000463          0.0106***            0.000140          ‐0.002770
                                 (0.000480)          (0.003580)         (0.000371)          (0.003240)
35‐39                           ‐0.000976**         0.009840***          ‐0.000379          ‐0.003830
                                 (0.000422)          (0.003090)         (0.000340)          (0.002770)
40‐44                          ‐0.001210***         0.012100***         ‐0.000533*          ‐0.002000
                                 (0.000427)          (0.003080)         (0.000314)          (0.002670)
45‐49                          ‐0.001300***         0.012600***        ‐0.000640**           0.000905
                                 (0.000388)          (0.002910)         (0.000308)          (0.002550)
50‐54                          ‐0.000985***         0.014700***          ‐0.000425           0.003040
                                 (0.000344)          (0.002700)         (0.000283)          (0.002380)
55‐59                           ‐0.000669**         0.009320***          ‐0.000308           0.002580
                                 (0.000288)          (0.002340)         (0.000255)          (0.002160)
Prior Earnings
t‐6                             0.000020***         ‐0.000237***         0.000003           ‐0.000064
                                 (0.000007)           (0.000057)        (0.000006)          (0.000052)
t‐7                             0.0000150*             0.000089          0.000012            0.000087
                                 (0.000008)           (0.000069)        (0.000008)          (0.000067)
t‐8                              ‐0.000009            ‐0.000020         ‐0.000011           ‐0.000041
                                 (0.000010)           (0.000075)        (0.000009)          (0.000072)
t‐9                               0.000009             0.000035          0.000005            0.000005
                                 (0.000007)           (0.000057)        (0.000007)          (0.000055)

R2                                 0.602                0.481               0.61               0.515

P value F test Age                 0.006                0.000               0.214              0.092
P value F test Prior Earning       0.000                0.001               0.058              0.726
P value F test Both                0.000                0.000               0.105              0.216

No. observations                                                1,039,221

Note: All regressions include DDS dummies. Assignment variables include: body system codes, top 20
diagnosis codes, terminal illness flag, month of receipt at DDS, concurrent status and 3‐digit zip codes.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                 Table A‐2. Monotonicity Tests: First Stage Regressions of Time to Decision an
                      Leave‐Body‐System‐Out Measures of EXTIME and EXALLOW for Select B

                         Initial Time                              Final Time
                (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
                           Mental        Muscul.                     Mental       Muscul.
          All Applicants Disorders      Disorders   All Applicants Disorders     Disorders

EXTIME     0.598***       0.616***      0.626***     0.519***      0.442***      0.480***
           (0.00836)      (0.0102)      (0.01230)     (0.0331)      (0.0507)      (0.0708)
EXALLOW    0.336***       0.621***      0.492***     ‐2.165***     ‐3.062***     ‐4.086***
           (0.04060)      (0.0578)      (0.08120)     (0.3480)      (0.4080)      (0.5950)
R2           0.262          0.258         0.236         0.117         0.129         0.076

n          1,039,221       394,513      215,110      1,039,221      394,513       215,110
             Table A‐3. Effect of Examiner Average Processing Time (EXTIME) on
                   Initial Determination, Appeal Rate and Benefit Receipt

                           (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)        (5)
                                            Conditional on Initial Denial
                                       Continue                                  Receive
                      Initial Denial    Claim        Appeal           Reapply    Benefit

EXTIME                  0.000235       ‐0.000629     ‐0.000981    ‐0.00224***     ‐0.0036
                        (0.00167)      (0.00108)     19.34410       (0.00079)    (0.00103)
R2                        0.248          0.075         0.081          0.028       0.147

Mean Dep. Variable        0.669         0.641          0.661          0.157        0.677
n                       1,039,221      695,152        695,152        695,152     1,039,221
                  Table A‐4. P‐values from Overidentification Tests of Causal Pathways


                                                                   Initially      Finally   Finally
                                     All Applicants                Allowed       Allowed    Denied
                            (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)       (6)
Dependent Variable:      EXALLOW         EXTIME     EXALLOW &
Earn >= $1,000/Year        only           only        EXTIME       EXTIME        EXTIME     EXTIME
2 Years Later (2007)      0.0120        0.0000       0.0155        0.4983        0.0105     0.0817
3 Years Later (2008)      0.0526        0.0004       0.0691        0.3765        0.0883     0.0865
4 Years Later (2009)      0.0513        0.0027       0.0558        0.6956        0.2895     0.2365
5 Years Later (2010)      0.6047        0.2116       0.6119        0.7781        0.4735     0.8903
6 Years Later (2011)      0.2370        0.0606       0.2474        0.2298        0.4166     0.8467
     Table A‐5. Reduced Form Effect of Examiner's Allowance Propensity (EXALLOW) and
               Average Processing Time (EXTIME) on Employment and Earnings
                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
              2 Years Later   3 Years Later   4 Years Later   5 Years Later   6 Years Later
                 (2007)          (2008)          (2009)          (2010)          (2011)
                              A. Dependent Variable: Earn >= $1,000/Year

EXALLOW        ‐0.0534***      ‐0.0465***      ‐0.0328***      ‐0.0320***      ‐0.0281***
                (0.00649)       (0.00644)       (0.00663)       (0.00629)       (0.00630)
EXTIME         ‐0.00191**     ‐0.00232***      ‐0.00115        ‐0.000748       ‐0.00102
                (0.00078)      (0.00078)       (0.00077)        (0.00074)      (0.00073)

R2                0.091          0.091            0.08           0.079           0.084

                                  B. Dependent Variable: Earn >= SGA

EXALLOW        ‐0.0401***      ‐0.0335***      ‐0.0235***      ‐0.0222***      ‐0.0200***
                (0.00497)       (0.00525)       (0.00494)       (0.00479)       (0.00504)

EXTIME         ‐0.00172***     ‐0.00150**      ‐0.000799       ‐0.000535       ‐0.000876
                (0.00059)       (0.00063)       (0.00059)       (0.00057)       (0.00057)

R2                0.053          0.057           0.053           0.054           0.059

                                C. Dependent Variable: Annual Earnings

EXALLOW         ‐0.841***         ‐0.37         ‐0.424**         ‐0.304          ‐0.342*
                 (0.2140)       (0.3400)        (0.1980)        (0.1980)        (0.2050)

EXTIME         ‐0.0840***      ‐0.0676***       ‐0.0335         ‐0.0346        ‐0.0441**
                (0.0252)        (0.0259)        (0.0251)        (0.0216)        (0.0218)

R2
n               1,039,221       1,018,984       999,779         981,000         962,045
        *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
