                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               BUSINESS STRATEGY AND THE MANAGEMENT OF FIRMS

                                           Mu-Jeung Yang
                                           Lorenz Kueng
                                            Bryan Hong

                                        Working Paper 20846
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20846


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




Funding for this study was generously provided by Ivey Business School, Kellogg School of Management,
University of Washington-Seattle, and Industry Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mu-Jeung Yang, Lorenz Kueng, and Bryan Hong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Business Strategy and the Management of Firms
Mu-Jeung Yang, Lorenz Kueng, and Bryan Hong
NBER Working Paper No. 20846
January 2015
JEL No. D22,D23,D24,D92,M21

                                                ABSTRACT

Business strategy can be defined as a firm's plan to generate economic profits based on lower cost,
better quality, or new products. The analysis of business strategy is thus at the intersection of market
competition and a firm's efforts to secure persistently superior performance via investments in better
management and organization. We empirically analyze the interaction of firms' business strategies
and their managerial practices using a unique, detailed dataset on business strategy, internal firm organization,
performance and innovation, which is representative of the entire Canadian economy. Our empirical
results show that measures of business strategy are strongly correlated with firm performance, both
in the cross-section and over time, and even after controlling for unobserved profit shocks exploiting
intermediates utilization. Results are particularly striking for innovation, as firms with some priority
in business strategies are significantly more likely to innovate than firms without any strategic priority.
Furthermore, our analysis highlights that the relationship between strategy and management is driven
by two key organizational trade-offs: employee initiative vs. coordination as well as exploration of
novel business opportunities vs. exploitation of existing profit sources.


Mu-Jeung Yang                                           Bryan Hong
Department of Economics                                 Ivey Business School
University of Washington                                Western University
Savery Hall, 327                                        1255 Western Road
Seattle, WA 98195-3330                                  London, ON N6G 0N1
mjyang@uw.edu                                           Canada
                                                        bhong@ivey.ca
Lorenz Kueng
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu
                                 BUSINESS STRATEGY                                     1


1     Introduction
    What drives different types of persistent comparative advantages across firms? Recent
applied models in a variety of fields such as industrial organization, macroeconomics, or
international trade describe the equilibrium implications of different types of comparative
advantages between businesses. For example, static trade models are often based on cost
or quality differences across firms, while comparative advantages in endogenous growth
models are often based on new products or drastically better quality. However, even
conditional on a particular comparative advantage, there typically exist alternative models
with different implications for equilibrium outcomes. A case in point are models of cost
competition, which can exhibit either constant markups, as in Melitz (2003), or markups
which are declining in marginal costs, as in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003) or
Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). Differences in firms’ behavior imply differences in the impact
of policy affecting competition and trade. Despite this theoretical ambiguity, empirical
evidence on how firms act when they pursue different types of performance advantages
remains rare.
    At the same time, a parallel empirical literature argues that a large part of persistent
firm performance differences can be explained by differences in management practices; see
e.g., Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) and Bloom, Eifert, McKenzie, Mahajan and Roberts
(2013a). This literature mostly focuses on management practices that every optimizing
firm should adopt, as argued by Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2013c). Yet, the adoption
of some management practices might be a function of the type of comparative advantage
pursued by the firm. For example, a firm pursuing high-quality might adopt management
practices such as training programs for high-skilled workers, while a low-cost producer
might not. Using the concept of business strategy, we join these two questions and link
the structure of management practices to the types of comparative advantage pursued.
Business strategy can be defined as a firm’s plan to generate economic profits through
higher value creation due to lower cost, better quality, or newer products compared to
competitors.
    To our knowledge, this is the first empirical paper to analyze the interaction of business
strategies, the management of firms, and firm performance in a representative sample of
businesses. To this end, we exploit unique detailed data on business strategies, internal
organization, and firm performance which is representative of all Canadian business firms.
We build on recent advances in models of firm heterogeneity, in which superior value
creation is based on cost advantages, higher quality, or newer products, to guide our
empirical analysis. We therefore measure business strategy as a firm’s top priority to
compete in a product market via lower costs, better quality, or newer products. This
leads us to categorize firms into four types: (i) novelty firms have the development of new
products or services as top strategic priority; (ii) high-quality firms pursue higher-quality
products or services; (iii) low-cost firms have low-cost as their top strategic priority; and
we use (iv) firms for which business strategy is not important as the main comparison
group.
     2                             YANG, KUENG AND HONG


    Four sets of results stand out. First, business strategy priorities are systematically
correlated with firm performance, and these correlations are robust in a number of ways.
They hold for performance data that is entirely based on auxiliary tax information which
has been gathered independently of the survey data we utilize. They hold in the cross-
section and also after including firm fixed effects and controlling for unobserved profit
shocks exploiting intermediates usage. These systematic correlations reassure us about
the validity of our measures of business strategy.
    Second, we provide stylized facts that are of importance for different static models of
firm heterogeneity with high-quality or low-cost as the source of performance differences.
For instance, models such as Melitz (2003) predict that markups should be unrelated
to cost differences across firms, while models such as Bernard et al. (2003) or Foster,
Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008) predict that firms with lower marginal costs exhibit
higher markups. We show that firms with low-cost strategies exhibit higher market shares,
but also lower markups. Similarly, high-quality firms in models such as Johnson (2012)
and Kugler and Verhoogen (2012) do not have higher markups than lower-quality firms, in
contrast to models such as Sutton (2012), where higher quality implies higher markups.
We find that high-quality firms exhibit systematically higher markups, higher market
shares, and higher profitability compared to firms with other strategic priorities.
    Third, we document correlations between innovation and business strategy that are
potentially interesting for further theory development of endogenous growth models. For
example, in models such as Klette and Kortum (2004) and Acemoglu, Akcigit and Ce-
lik (2014), exogenous differences in the ability to innovate drive performance differences
across firms. Our evidence suggests that differences in the likelihood to innovate are
systematically related to business strategy. Firms with some strategic priority are signif-
icantly more likely to innovate than firms without any strategic priority. Furthermore,
firms with novelty as their top strategic priority are more likely than firms with high-
quality or low-cost as their top strategic priority to generate new products or processes
instead of just improving upon existing ones. These patterns suggest that modeling the
choice of business strategy is a promising way forward to endogenize firms’ comparative
advantage to innovate.
    Fourth, we document systematic correlations between firms’ business strategies and a
broad range of management practices, such as the distribution of real authority within
the firm, the implementation of performance pay, the demand for skilled employees, the
use of job-training programs, and operational practices like coordination along the value
chain and re-engineering. Together with our empirical results on business strategy and
firm performance, our analysis suggests that the joint choice of strategy and management
is driven by two key organizational trade-offs, summarized in table 1 and similar to those
discussed by Roberts and Saloner (2013). First, organizations need to trade off employee
initiative vs. employee coordination, as many management practices that encourage em-
ployee initiative—such as the decentralization of decision-making—can directly reduce the
extent of employee coordination. The second trade-off is between the exploration of future
business opportunities and the exploitation of current profit sources, since incentives tied
                                BUSINESS STRATEGY                                   3


               Table 1: Business strategies and organizational trade-offs

                                                Business opportunities

                                           exploration      exploitation

                          initiative        novelty firm   high-quality firm
              Employee
                          coordination                       low-cost firm




to short-term profits may conflict with activities that promote long-term performance;
see e.g., March (1991), Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991), and Manso (2011). Our baseline
results suggest that novelty firms tend to adopt management practices that emphasize
the exploration of future business opportunities at the expense of current profitability,
while they systematically value employee initiative more than employee coordination. In
contrast, high-quality firms tend to implement organizational designs that exploit current
profit opportunities despite a heavy emphasis on employee initiative. These high-quality
firms in turn differ systematically from low-cost firms, which adopt management prac-
tices that foster the coordination of employees by professional managers and emphasize
the exploitation of current profitability.
    It is worth highlighting that these systematic correlations between business strategy
and management are open to different interpretations. On the one hand, these correlations
might suggest patterns of consistency or “fit” across management practices for firms with
a given business strategy. On the other hand, unobserved heterogeneity in managerial
talent could drive the correlations of strategy and management practices, as pointed out
by Athey and Stern (1998). However, even in this case, these stylized facts are still
interesting as they reflect different “managerial styles”, similar to Bertrand and Schoar
(2003).


2     Theories of Business Strategy and the
      Management of Firms
2.1    Business Strategy and Types of Comparative Advantages
   Recent models of firm heterogeneity in industrial organization, international trade, and
macroeconomics emphasize persistent performance differences within narrowly defined
industries. These performance differences are typically due to cost advantages, quality
advantages, or novel products, and they have different implications for the sources of
     4                             YANG, KUENG AND HONG


profitability across firms.
    A very popular class of models are constant elasticity models such as Lucas (1978)
and Melitz (2003). The most basic version of these models implies that higher firm
productivity is reflected in lower marginal costs, which in turn imply a lower price and a
higher market share. Since in constant elasticity models markups are constant, low-cost
firms are more profitable overall. These models therefore imply that market shares across
firms are uncorrelated with markups, while market shares are negatively correlated with
marginal costs. In contrast, cost advantages in models of endogenous markups—such as
Bernard et al. (2003), Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) and Foster et al. (2008)—imply that
low-cost firms also generate higher markups.
    A second popular class of models generates performance differences across firms using
quality differences in products and services. These models are capable of explaining indus-
tries with differentiated goods in which higher-quality products exhibit high market shares
despite selling at higher prices. A simple variant of these models is a reinterpretation of
the setup in Melitz (2003) in which more productive firms charge lower quality-adjusted
prices, but charge higher prices without quality adjustment. These higher prices reflect
firms’ higher marginal costs of producing high quality products, as in Johnson (2012) and
Kugler and Verhoogen (2012). Note that since these models are based on CES preferences
with monopolistic competition, markups are again constant across firms so that the higher
profitability of high-quality firms is due to their higher market shares despite charging
higher prices. In contrast, in models of quality competition, such as Shaked and Sutton
(1982) and Sutton (2012), high-quality firms are able to reduce price competition through
higher quality, i.e., using product differentiation. As a result, in these models, markups
are higher for high-quality firms.
    While product differentiation in these models works through firms offering marginally
better qualities of existing products, in models of endogenous innovation novel products
generate monopoly rents for innovating firms, either through new varieties as in Romer
(1990) or by offering drastically better-quality products as in Aghion and Howitt (1992),
Klette and Kortum (2004), Akcigit and Kerr (2010) or Acemoglu et al. (2014). In these
models, comparative advantages are driven by successful innovation. Several of these
models, such as Klette and Kortum (2004) and Acemoglu et al. (2014), generate perfor-
mance differences by assuming exogenous differences in the ability to innovate. However,
what drives these differences in innovation ability is still an open empirical and theoretical
question.
    Based on this brief survey of popular applied models, we are most interested in the
three types of business strategies that emphasize lower costs, higher quality, or newer
products than competitors. Our theory discussion also foreshadows our analysis of the
correlations of business strategy and measures of performance such as markups, market
shares, and profits.
                                BUSINESS STRATEGY                                    5


2.2    Business Strategy and Management Practices
    While the models of firm heterogeneity discussed so far are useful in understanding
what types of comparative advantages firms pursue with their business strategies, these
models are silent on how firms organize to achieve these competitive advantages. In other
words, these models do not explain the specific mechanisms through which some firms are
able to maintain persistently higher quality, lower cost, or more novel products.
    Research on the “fit” between strategy and management practices has been limited
in scope, as emphasized by Roberts and Saloner (2013). Notable exceptions include
Porter (1980), Rotemberg and Saloner (1994), and Milgrom and Roberts (1995). Porter
(1980) provides a categorization of business strategies into “cost leadership,” “product
differentiation,” and “focus” on niche markets, which is in many respects similar to our
categorizations. In this context, Porter (1980) conjectures that a simultaneous pursuit
of a low-cost strategy and a high-quality strategy implies organizational contradictions
that lower firm performance. While this “stuck in the middle” hypothesis is supported
in Porter (1980) mainly by anecdotal evidence, Rotemberg and Saloner (1994) provide a
possible micro-foundation of the mechanism by pointing out that narrow business strate-
gies can have motivating effects on effort investment by employees in incomplete contract
environments. Milgrom and Roberts (1995) extensively discuss the idea of strategy and
organizational fit in the context of a case study of the Lincoln Electric Company. Ac-
cording to Milgrom and Roberts (1995), Lincoln Electric pursued a low-cost strategy,
supported by various management practices such as performance pay, high job security,
and extensive job training. While this case is suggestive and insightful, there seems to be
a clear need for more comprehensive evidence on business strategy and firm organization.
Our study can be seen as a starting point in the endeavor to better understand the link
between strategy and management practices link empirically and conceptually.


3     Measurement and Validation of Business
      Strategies
3.1    Data
    The source of our data is the Workplace and Employee Survey (WES), which is a ran-
dom stratified sample of establishments with the universe of Canadian firms as the target
population and is conducted by Statistics Canada. The survey has a cross-sectional di-
mension of approximately 6,500 firms over the time period 1999 to 2006, with a low overall
attrition rate of around 20% cumulatively. Of these 6,500 firms, we focus on the sample
of around 5,500 for-profit business firms. As in other government-sponsored surveys, re-
sponse to the WES was mandatory, so that the overall response rate was typically close
to 90%. The WES survey tool provides us with detailed information on business strategy,
the internal organization of firms, and their innovative activity. Additionally, in coopera-
tion with Statistics Canada and with support from Industry Canada, we linked the WES
      6                            YANG, KUENG AND HONG


to balance sheet data from administrative tax records. The administrative tax data based
on the General Index of Financial Information (GIFI) provides balance sheet information
that is the basis for the calculation of profit taxes. We therefore create a comprehensive
data set not only of firms’ management practices but also of their performance as re-
ported to tax authorities. We use this auxiliary data, based on administrative records, to
validate our measures of business strategy that are based on the survey responses. There
are several advantages of this data compared to other existing micro-level data on man-
agement practices and internal firm organization. First, the WES has a comprehensive
sectoral coverage, in contrast to either more narrow industry studies such as Ichniowski,
Shaw and Prennushi (1997) or manufacturing-based studies such as Bloom, Brynjolfsson,
Jarmin, Saporta and Van Reenen (2014a). Second, since the target population is the
universe of business firms, the WES is not biased towards certain size classes as is the
World Management Survey Data by Bloom and Van Reenen (2007).


3.2       Measurement Issues
    The WES reports detailed information on business strategy every other year between
1999 and 2006. The raw information on business strategy in the WES survey comes
in the form of Likert-score responses to the question “Please rate the following factors
with respect to their relative importance in your workplace general business strategy.”
Responses vary from “not applicable,” scored at 1, and “not important,” scored at 2, to
“very important” and “crucial,” scored at 5 and 6, respectively.
    In extracting information about business strategy, we face two conceptual challenges.
First, there are a variety of factors that can be rated, only some of which can be categorized
as reflecting business strategies, while other factors are related to a firm’s operations.
Second, the survey does not reveal any objective numerical information.
    To address the first issue, we follow the popular theories of firm heterogeneity surveyed
in section 2, according to which firms generate higher profits if they provide products at
lower cost than competitors, or if they offer higher value to customers than competitors
do. The latter can typically be achieved either by offering a novel product or service or by
offering a product or service of higher quality. We therefore concentrate on those strategy
scores that relate to a firm’s intention to reduce costs, provide higher quality, or supply
new products or services. The two factors underlying what we categorize as cost-based
strategy are “reducing labor costs” and “reducing other operating costs.” In contrast,
the categorization of a quality-based strategy is based on the two factors “total quality
management” and “improving product or service quality.” The third business strategy is
a focus on the development of a novel product or service. We therefore categorize firms
as following a novelty-based strategy, based on the factors “undertaking research and
development” and “developing new products/services.” Although we categorized these
factors based on economic reasoning, we also verify that the pairwise correlations between
the factors we selected was the highest among all possible factors listed in the business
strategy section.
                                   BUSINESS STRATEGY                                          7


    The second issue is the problem of interpreting the cardinality in the reported Likert
scores. As Bloom and Van Reenen (2010) note, the problem is that Likert scores are
inherently subjective, because a score like “important” could mean different things to
different respondents. For instance, one respondent might be anchored around a score
of 3, as she thinks that strategy is on average only “slightly important.” In contrast, a
second respondent might be anchored around a score of 5, as he considers strategy to be
“very important” on average. In short, we are concerned about unobserved differences
in the mean Likert scores that are unrelated to the firm’s actual evaluation of strategy.
Bloom and Van Reenen (2010) succinctly summarize the issue: “Since these responses are
not even comparable across respondents, they are certainly not comparable across firms.”
    To enable cross-sectional comparisons of firms’ attitudes toward business strategies,
we therefore focus on extracting information on the relative priorities of different business
strategies. This completely avoids dealing with the cardinality of the Likert scores, in-
stead exploiting the ordinal information in the data. Specifically, for the three mentioned
basic measures of business strategy—low-cost strategy, high-quality strategy, and novelty
strategy—we infer that the firm assigns a top priority to this strategy if the respondent’s
numerical ranking of the factors associated with this strategy is highest. For example, a
firm that ranks “reducing labor costs” with a response of 5 but all other strategies with a
response of 4 will be classified as having low-costs as its top strategic priority. Similarly,
if a firm ranks “reducing labor costs” with a response of 5 but also rates “total quality
management” with a response of 5 and gives all other factors a response of 4, this firm will
be classified as both a low-cost and a high-quality firm. Note that we therefore explicitly
allow firms to have more than one strategic priority. To establish a comparison group
with respect to all three strategic priorities, we do not assign any strategic priority to a
firm if the highest rating is a 3, which means that the respondent rates all factors as being
at most “slightly important.” Hence, in order to be assigned a strategic priority, at least
one factor needs to be rated as “important.” The resulting variables measuring business
strategies are indicator variables, which are 1 if a particular business strategy is a top
priority, and are called I(novelty), I(hig-quality), and I(low-cost), respectively.
    While we focus on these measures of business strategy priorities for cross-sectional
comparisons, we also report several estimations that use establishment fixed effects and
for which the mentioned respondent-specific mean problem is less of an issue. In these
establishment fixed effect regressions, we estimate the within-firm change in the subjective
importance of a strategic factor, which avoids making cross-firm comparisons1 . Whenever
we use establishment fixed effects, we therefore use a normalized average response of the
factors underlying a strategy category. For example, for low-cost strategy, it is an average
of responses to “reducing labor costs” and “reducing other operating costs,” with mean
zero and standard deviation of one.

  1
     Note that this assumes that respondents at a specific firm are typically not changing over time.
To the extent that respondents change over time, one would expect attenuation bias to arise in our
within-firm effects due to measurement error.
       8                                  YANG, KUENG AND HONG


3.3        Business Strategies across Sectors
    We begin by reporting the distributions of business strategy priorities across broad
sectors. We separate out the largest sectors of business activity in the Canadian economy,
which include manufacturing, wholesale trade, retail trade,and service sectors such as
finance and insurance as well as business services. These sectors differ in the importance
of technological factors such as returns to scale as well as in the relative importance of
local compared to national and international competition. It is therefore instructive to
compare the relative frequencies of strategic priorities across sectors. This is done in the
first three columns of table 2.
    Several notable features emerge from these cross-sectoral comparisons. First, only a
minority of firms report novelty as a top strategic priority, while the majority of firms
have high quality as a top priority. This is true for individual sectors as well as for the
economy as a whole, as shown in the last row of table 2. Second, the relative proportion
of firms with different strategic priorities varies across sectors. For instance, novelty is
much more likely to be a top priority in manufacturing than in service sectors such as
finance and insurance. On the other hand, high-quality seems to be more frequently a
top strategic priority outside of manufacturing.
    Our simple measures of strategic priorities do not differentiate between long-term
business strategies and short-term strategic decisions. A firm might, for instance, respond
to a temporary negative profit shock by emphasizing cost reduction, although its long-
term strategic priority is the development of new services. To capture these long-term,
persistent strategic priorities, we focus on strategic priorities that a firm had for at least
two consecutive survey rounds, or for a time horizon of at least 2-3 years. The results
are reported in the last three columns of table 2. Overall, the fraction of firms with a
specific strategic priority falls significantly, indicating that a large part of business strategy
priorities are temporary rather than permanent2 . On the other hand, the persistent
strategy results mostly preserve the relative popularity ranking of the different strategies.
For instance, novelty is still the least popular strategic priority, while high quality is the
most popular priority, and low cost is in between. Similarly, differences in the sectoral
rankings are mostly unchanged. While manufacturing has the highest fraction of novelty
firms (13%), novelty is much less important for the typical service sector, for which high-
quality is a relatively more important strategy.


3.4        Validation using Administrative Records
    In this section, we validate of our business strategy measures by analyzing the corre-
lation of business strategy with performance measures, mostly based on administrative
records. In particular, we correlate business strategies with current performance mea-
sures such as profits, markups, TFP, and ROA. For these current performance measures,
about half of the variables are based on data that is not provided in the WES survey, but
  2
      This pattern is also likely to reflect measurement error.
                                 BUSINESS STRATEGY                                     9


that firms report on their official tax forms in the GIFI database. For performance data
taken from the WES, such as sales revenue or wage bill, we cross-validated the reported
values with the balance sheet information from GIFI. Note that, unless otherwise noted,
all performance measures are log values.
    It is helpful to emphasize what kind of validation this section seeks to provide in con-
trast to the rest of the paper. There are two main concerns with measures of business
strategy based on survey data. First, respondents might have no incentive to correctly
answer survey questions, so survey evidence might primarily reflect measurement error. It
is this issue that we address in this section by reporting correlations of business strategy
measures with outcomes such as profitability and market shares from sources other than
the survey itself. Second, respondents might have an incentive to misreport their actual
business strategies in an attempt to safeguard trade secrets. The most important reason
why this seems implausible is that government surveys are filled out under a legal guaran-
tee of non-disclosure, with severe punishments even in cases of accidental disclosure of the
respondents’ identities. Furthermore, our comprehensive empirical analysis along several
dimensions of firm performance and organization can be seen as an indirect plausibility
check on our measures of strategic priorities.


3.4.1   Pooled Estimation

    In this section, we pool all data on firm performance from all four survey waves,
spanning an eight-year time horizon. Our approach to evaluating the validity of our
measures is to regress measures of firm performance or closely related variables such as
markups on our proxies for strategic priorities and various control variables. All pooled
regressions control for 4-digit NAICS industry fixed effects as well as time fixed effects. We
also include self-reported measures of the intensity of competition as control variables, to
avoid confounding the correlation of strategy with firm performance with the correlation
with competition.
    We start with measures of market shares and profitability to validate our strategy
measures. Our measure of market share is the revenue share of a firm within a 4-digit
NAICS industry. Firms pursuing current comparative advantages such as low-costs or
high-quality might be expected to have systematically higher market shares than their
competitors. As the first column in table 3 shows, this is indeed the case. Note that the
specification reported in the first column of table 3 is very conservative as it includes a
control for firm size as measured by the number of employees, which should be highly
correlated with firm revenues. These results show that even when controlling for size,
reported strategic priorities indeed translate into systematic advantages in market shares
for low-cost and high-quality firms.
    In terms of profitability, we use log operating margin, defined as the log of operating
revenue over operating costs. Operating costs do include overhead costs of operation,
so that the operating margin variable captures overall net profits of the firm. As an
alternative measure of profitability, we use ROA, defined as ratio of operating income
      10                              YANG, KUENG AND HONG


divided by the book value of assets3 . Again, we find that business strategy priorities are
significantly correlated with profitability, as shown in the second and third columns of
table 3. However, in contrast to the market share results, low-cost and high-quality firms
exhibit opposite signs. In other words, low-cost firms tend to have systematically lower
profitability than firms without strategic priorities, while high-quality firms exhibit higher
profitability. These results might be taken as an indication for the following plausible
mechanism through which profitability determines business strategy instead of the other
way around: low-profit firms might rationally focus on cost cutting, while high-profit firms
can “afford” to offer better-quality services.
    To explore whether firm-level productivity supports this interpretation, we analyze
two popular measures of firm-level total factor productivity (TFP). Both measures are
based on the GMM estimator of factor shares developed by Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer
(2006) and are calculated at the 4-digit NAICS level. The first measure is simple revenue-
based TFP, or TFP-R, which uses revenues as measure of output. For the second measure,
we follow Klette and Grilliches (1996) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and impose a CES
demand system with an elasticity of substitution of 3 to recover real output from revenue.
This measure is reported as TFP-Q. The results for these measures of TFP are displayed
in columns four and five of table 3. If the reverse causality mechanism drives most of
the correlation between strategy and profitability, one would expect that low-cost firms
have systematically lower TFP than firms without strategy priorities, while high-quality
firms have higher TFP than firms without strategy priorities. In fact, while it is true that
high-quality firms have higher TFP, so do low-cost firms.
    To summarize, our measures of business strategy priorities are strongly and signifi-
cantly correlated with current firm performance data, suggesting that the variation in our
strategy measures does not just reflect measurement error.


3.4.2      Within-Firm Effects

    The previous sections established that our measures of business strategy are signifi-
cantly correlated with measures of firm performance. It is important to emphasize that
these correlations suggest that strategy and performance are related, but these correlations
are not causal. Establishing a causal link between business strategy and firm performance
is beyond the scope of this study. One can, however, ask whether the strategy-performance
correlations are exclusively driven by reverse causality. For instance, we reported that
low-cost priorities are systematically correlated with negative profit margins, while high-
quality priorities are positively correlated with profits. Reverse causality could occur, for
example, if firms which forecast negative profit shocks respond by cutting costs today,
while firms which expect positive profit shocks can afford to spend money on improving
quality. A simple econometric model illustrates the associated biases. Suppose that the
  3
     Note that ROA is not logged, since it is by construction a percentage and can also take negative
values.
                                  BUSINESS STRATEGY                                       11


true model is given by

                               yi,t+1 = θA ai,t+1 + θS si,t + εi,t+1
                                  si,t = γEi,t [ai,t+1 ]

where yi,t+1 denotes profits of firm i in t + 1, ai,t+1 is an unobserved profit shock in t + 1,
si,t is the firm’s strategy set at t, and εi,t+1 is an error. For simplicity, assume that a firm’s
current strategy is a function of the firm’s expected future profit shock ai,t+1 . Neither
this shock nor the firm’s expectation of the shock is observed by the econometrician.
For the case that the strategy variable si,t is a low-cost strategy, γ < 0, since negative
expected productivity will make the adoption of a low-cost strategy more likely. Since
the econometrician can only observe outcomes and strategies, the estimated model is

                                     yi,t+1 = βsi,t + ui,t+1 ,

with the OLS estimator given by
                                              Cov(si,t , ai,t+1 )
                                  β̂ = θS +                       .
                                                V ar[si,t ]
As this example shows, the simple OLS estimate of performance on strategy might be
biased depending on the correlation between strategy and the unobserved profit shock.
In the case of γ < 0, this term will be negative and could potentially explain why the
regression coefficients on low-cost strategies are negative in the pooled regressions. Simi-
larly, if γ > 0 holds for high-quality strategies, this could explain why quality is positively
correlated with performance.
    In order to gauge whether reverse causality drives all the performance results, we run
the following variant of our performance regressions. To control for any cross-sectional
differences, and especially potential respondent differences discussed before, we include a
full set of establishment fixed effects. Furthermore, to address the reverse causality issue
in a simple way, we follow in spirit Petrin and Levinsohn (2003) and include the log-value
of intermediates usage, such as materials, electricity, and other intermediate inputs. The
logic is that these intermediates are usually acquired in spot markets and are therefore
not subject to any adjustment frictions. Consequently, they respond contemporaneously
to any unobserved profit shocks ai,t and can therefore be used to control for the effect of
these unobserved profit shocks.
    Table 4 shows that even in this very conservative specification with firm fixed effects
and intermediates usage to control for unobserved shocks, strategy is systematically cor-
related with firm performance. Note in particular that operating margin as basic measure
of profitability remains strongly positively correlated with high-quality strategies and neg-
atively correlated with low-cost strategies. We conclude from this that although reverse
causality from expected performance to strategy potentially plays an important role (as
it should), the data suggests that it is far from being the only driver of the systematic
correlation between strategy and firm performance.
      12                           YANG, KUENG AND HONG


    The fixed effects regressions also show that in many specifications, the correlations
between strategy and performance become insignificant. We take this as an indication
that much of the systematic variation between strategy and performance is driven by the
cross-sectional variation. This is a result we would expect if the relationship between
strategy and performance is very persistent. Moreover, one would not expect to see
frequent changes in strategy, which are typically decided by the business owner or the
board of directors, particularly compared to management practices that usually capture
business operations decisions.


4       Empirical Relation between Strategy and
        Comparative Advantages
    We now turn to the empirical analysis of firm performance in the context of recent
applied models of firm heterogeneity. We split this discussion into two parts. In the
first part, we reconsider the correlations of strategic priorities with current performance,
this time through the lens of static equilibrium models of firm heterogeneity. In the sec-
ond part, we document stylized facts centering around business strategy and innovation.
These moments will be most interesting for current theories of endogenous growth with
incumbent innovation.


4.1     Current Performance and Static Firm Heterogeneity
        Models
    A particularly informative empirical variable to distinguish different models of firm
heterogeneity are markups. Since reliable information on markups is hard to obtain, we
report two alternative measures of markups. First, we follow Ackerberg et al. (2006) and
De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) and estimate markups by taking the ratio of the revenue
share of labor to the output-elasticity of labor. As in these studies, the latter elasticity
is calculated using the panel dimension of the data and exploiting timing differences
between intermediate input and capital usage in a GMM estimation. The second measure
of markups are gross margins, calculated as the ratio of operating revenue relative to cost
of goods sold (COGS). The COGS variable is directly reported in the GIFI balance sheet
data and does not include any overhead costs of operation. The gross margin measure of
markups relies less on a specific econometric model but is available only for a subset of
the firms in the data. Both markup measures are logged values.

4.1.1      Models of Low-Cost Competition
   In principle, firms with low-costs as their strategic priority could target lower marginal
costs, lower fixed costs, or a combination of the two goals. Most models of firm hetero-
geneity aim to describe firm size distributions within narrow industries. As a consequence,
                                BUSINESS STRATEGY                                    13


marginal cost differences play a prominent role, since fixed cost differences impact only
profitability, not market shares and firm size. The first column of table 3 shows that low-
cost firms have systematically larger market shares compared to firms with no strategic
priority. This is compatible with models where marginal costs drive differences in prices
across firms, such as Melitz (2003), Bernard et al. (2003), Melitz and Ottaviano (2008),
and Foster et al. (2008). In these models, more efficient firms exhibit lower marginal costs,
which translate into lower prices. This interpretation of the data is tentatively supported
by data on firm-level TFP estimates, as displayed in columns four and five of table 3. If
one follows Hsieh and Klenow (2009) in their interpretation of TFP-R and TFP-Q, then
TFP-Q primarily reflects efficiency differences across firms, while TFP-R captures firm-
level “distortions,” such as markups or financial frictions. The TFP-Q results therefore
indicate that low-cost firms tend to be more efficient, compatible with models such as
Melitz (2003).
    Although models of cost competition such as Melitz (2003) and Melitz and Ottaviano
(2008) have similar implications for prices and therefore market shares, they differ with
respect to the predictions about markups. While markups are constant in Melitz (2003),
firms with lower marginal costs might optimally charge higher markups, either due to non-
constant demand elasticities as in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) or due to limit pricing as
in Bernard et al. (2003). The last two columns of table 3 report the correlations of our two
alternative measures of markups with business strategy priorities. There is no evidence
for systematically higher markups at low-cost firms using either measure of markups, or
even using TFP-R as a measure of firm-level distortions. If anything, the data seems
to suggest that markups tend to be lower at low-cost firms, as is evident in the gross
margin measure. This possibility is supported by direct measures of profitability, such as
operating margin and ROA. As discussed before, low-cost firms tend to be less profitable
than firms with no strategic priority. This lower profitability in turn is inconsistent with
models of constant or even increasing markups.
    One possible way to reconcile our results on market shares, firm efficiency, and prof-
itability with models of low-cost competition would be to have low-cost firms charge lower
instead of higher markups. We are currently not aware of any prominent model of firm
heterogeneity which pursues this direction, but we see it as a promising avenue for further
theory development.


4.1.2   Models of high-quality Competition

    Models of quality competition are often constructed to match evidence on differentiated-
goods industries, where some firms are able to charge higher prices while exhibiting larger
market shares than competitors. Quality is therefore often modeled as a demand-shifter,
enabling firms either to sell the same quantity at higher prices or to sell a higher quantity
at the same price. In other words, firms pursuing higher quality create more customer
value, which is reflected in higher market shares. The evidence reported in table 3 is
consistent with such models. High-quality firms exhibit not only higher market shares
      14                           YANG, KUENG AND HONG


than firms without strategic priorities, but also higher market shares than low-cost firms.
Furthermore, as was shown by Hsieh and Klenow (2009), measures of TFP-Q reflect not
only process efficiency but also product quality, which is consistent with the evidence that
TFP-Q is systematically higher for high-quality firms.
    Despite sharing a number of common features, models of quality competition differ
in their predictions of what drives price differences across competitors. In models such
as Johnson (2012) and Kugler and Verhoogen (2012), high-quality firms charge higher
prices since their marginal costs are higher, for example due to the use of higher-quality
inputs. At the same time, markups across firms with high and low quality are constant.
In contrast, in models such as Shaked and Sutton (1982) and Sutton (2012), high-quality
firms are able to charge higher markups. The data supports such a quality competition
model with endogenous markups: markups tend to be systematically higher at high-
quality firms, as shown in the last two columns of table 3. The evidence of higher markups
in our two alternative markup measures is supported by our measures of TFP-R and
profitability. As Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and Peters (2012) note, markup differences can
show up in TFP-R differences. Furthermore, measures of profitability such as operating
margin and ROA are significantly higher at high-quality firms than at any other type
of firm. This is compatible with the fact that high-quality firms exhibit both higher
market shares and higher markups. In this context, we note that in models of quality
competition, not all firms pursue a high-quality strategy due to the fact that high-quality
also implies higher fixed costs. Our evidence on higher market shares and markups for
high-quality firms can therefore be generated by equilibrium models, where firms trade
off higher quality with higher fixed costs, such as in Sutton (2012). It is therefore also
consistent with heterogeneous firm models in which fixed costs increase with the level of
technology, such as in Bollard, Klenow and Li (2014).


4.2    Innovation and Endogenous Growth Models
    We use self-reported measures of innovation and technology adoption from the WES.
We validate these innovation measures in Hong, Kueng and Yang (2014b), by showing
that the measures of innovation are significantly correlated with firm growth and that
innovation by other firms in the industry significantly depresses growth at non-innovating
firms.
    Table 3 shows that the adoption of a novelty strategy is not systematically positively
correlated with current measures of firm performance. Yet, as shown in table 2, a signifi-
cant number of firms still adopt novelty as a strategic priority. An obvious explanation for
the absence of any significant correlation of novelty strategy and current firm performance
is that developing new products and services generates innovations, which imply higher
future instead of current profits.
    We therefore move to the analysis of the correlation of strategic priorities and four
types of innovation: (i) new products or services, (ii) new business processes, (iii) im-
proved products or services, and (iv) improved business services. The advantage of our
                                    BUSINESS STRATEGY                                          15


innovation data is that it allows us to roughly differentiate between incremental and radi-
cal innovations, as has been highlighted by endogenous growth models such as Klette and
Kortum (2004), Akcigit and Kerr (2010), and Acemoglu et al. (2014). A subset of these
theories—namely the studies by Klette and Kortum (2004) and Acemoglu et al. (2014)—
highlight differences in innovation abilities across firms, to generate different degrees of
radical innovations. The key difference is that in the model of Akcigit and Kerr (2010),
firm size is the main driver behind a firm’s pursuit of radical, exploratory innovations,
since large firms run into diminishing returns that increase the incentive to focus on incre-
mental, exploitative innovations. In contrast, in the models of Klette and Kortum (2004)
and Acemoglu et al. (2014), there is an additional factor that determines the comparative
advantage of radical innovations. In other words, in these models, there is an additional
determinant of the innovativeness of firms, even controlling for firm size. We argue that
business strategy mirrors this additional “innovation ability” factor in the data.
    Table 5 reports our baseline innovation results. For each type of innovation, the
dependent variable is a dummy that is 1 if an innovation is reported. We estimate the
regressions with probit models, but results are very similar when using logits or linear
probability models4 .
    There are main results from the innovation regressions. First, firms with any type of
business strategy priority are systematically more likely to innovate than firms without
any strategic priority, in particular novelty and high-quality firms. This follows from the
fact that all strategy measures are significantly positive in at least one of the four types of
innovation, even after including firm size and age as the most important control variables
as suggested by theory.
    Second, across all specifications, novelty is most strongly correlated with innovation,
and firms with a high-quality strategy are also significantly more likely to innovate across
all four types of innovations than firms without strategic priorities. To establish whether
one can rank the extent of the correlation of different strategies with innovation, we
report Wald-tests of the equality of the coefficients in the bottom rows. Novelty is by
far the strongest strategy predictor for the innovation of new products and processes. In
contrast, the Wald test cannot reject the hypothesis that the regression coefficients on
novelty and high-quality strategies are the same for improvements in products or services
and for improvements in business processes. Hence, firms that rank novelty as their top
strategic priority systematically innovate more than firms with high product quality as
a priority, especially with respect to the development of new products or services and
business processes. In this sense, firms with a novelty strategy correspond to firms with
high innovation ability in models of Klette and Kortum (2004) and Acemoglu et al. (2014).
Note also that firms with low-cost strategies typically do not innovate more than firms
without strategic priorities, except in the area of improvement of business processes.
    A closely related issue to innovation is the adoption of existing technologies. The
   4
    The innovation regressions control for a host of other potential determinants of innovation, such as
spending on technology adoption described below, the percentage of workers with a college degree, and
a number of organizational measures.
     16                            YANG, KUENG AND HONG


WES provides extensive information on both the number of new technologies adopted as
well as expenditures on technology adoption. Which we use this information to derive two
measures of technology adoption. First, an indicator for whether a firm reported adopting
at least one new technology in the past year. Second, a measure of intensity of technology
spending, defined as expenditure on new technology in the past year as a fraction of
annual revenues. The results are reported in the last two columns of table 5. Firms with
a high-quality strategy are as likely to adopt a new technology as firms pursuing a novelty
strategy. However, novelty firms systematically spend more on technology adoption than
high-quality firms. Furthermore, firms following a low-cost strategy systematically spend
less on technology adoption, as the last column shows.


5    Strategy, Management Practices and
     Organizational Design
    The WES panel also provides comprehensive data on management practices and orga-
nizational design, similar in scope to, but different in focus from, the World Management
Survey by Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) aggregate the
information in the World Management Survey into a single score of “good management”
in order to characterize both differences in levels and cross-firm dispersions distributional
in management practices across countries. There are at least two good reasons why Bloom
and Van Reenen (2007) aggregate their measured management practices into an overall
score. First, nearly all of their questions focus on areas where a ranking in terms of bench-
mark management practices can be established. In other words, these questions can be
ranked such that higher scores capture “better management,” and their “double blind”
survey protocol ensures accurate measurement. Second, many benchmark management
practices in the World Management Survey are strongly correlated so that the consolida-
tion into a single overall score captures at least the dominant underlying factor of “good
management.”
    In our analysis of management practices and internal organization, we deviate from
the strategy in Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) and do not aggregate management practices
into a single overall score. The main reason is that many of the management practices
and organizational choices we analyze often cannot be ranked according to which practices
reflect “better management.” What is more, our measures of management practices are
much less strongly correlated. Therefore, instead of aggregating our results into a single
management score, we report results for three broad categories of a firm’s organizational
design and management practices.
    Our empirical approach is motivated by the two key organizational trade-offs high-
lighted in Roberts and Saloner (2013). First, firms are trading off employee initiative
against employee coordination. We are interested in the degree to which firms allow their
employees discretion and encourage them to make decisions based on decentral informa-
tion, rather than explicitly controlling and coordinating decisions. For this purpose, we
                                   BUSINESS STRATEGY                                   17


start out with an analysis of organizational design practices which focus on the allocation
of decision authority within the organization as well as special job design features for non-
managerial employees, such the use of problem-solving teams. Second, firms are trading off
the exploration of new business opportunities against the exploitation of existing sources
of rent, as in March (1991). A firm’s decisions about employee compensation and hiring
is an area of management which is strongly affected by this trade-off. First, compensa-
tion policies are not only important to encourage employee initiative, but are also crucial
for inducing exploratory activities, which can be beneficial for long-run performance. As
Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) show in the context of a principal-agent analysis with
multitasking, high-powered incentives that mainly focus on current performance can be
detrimental to long-run productivity. As a result, the design of performance pay systems
is at the heart of the exploration-exploitation trade-off. Second, a firm’s relative priorities
for employee initiative and exploration of new business areas are reflected in the intensity
with which internal resources are allocated towards hiring and training scientists who ex-
plore new business ideas. We therefore also analyze the occupational composition as well
as job-training programs used by firms with different strategic priorities. At the end of
this empirical analysis, we supplement our results in these broad areas with information
about the operation of firms and the likelihood of specific organizational changes.


5.1      Decision Authority and Non-Management Job Design
5.1.1     Decision Authority and Decision Layers
    The measurement of decentralization requires a credible approach to quantifying deci-
sion authority by organizational layer.5 To understand the potential measurement issues
involved, take for example measures of formal decision authority based on occupational
titles or organizational charts. As indicated by Aghion and Tirole (1997), managers higher
up the hierarchy often only “rubberstamp” decisions actually made by non-managerial
employees. Therefore, an increased range of formal responsibilities and reporting rela-
tions can imply either increased control or alternatively an even more limited attention
to certain decisions and thus and a de facto reduction in control.
    In contrast to measures based on organizational charts, the WES includes detailed
information regarding real decisions on 12 tasks across five layers in the organizational
hierarchy. The survey questions are similar to the ones designed to measure worker auton-
omy, such as those used by Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002) or Bloom, Garicano,
Sadun and Van Reenen (2013b), in that they allow us to measure the degree to which prin-
cipals or agents are making decisions across 12 potential tasks. Specifically, the survey asks
“Who normally makes decisions with respect to the following activities?” The respondent
is then given a choice of 12 possible activities ranging from “daily planning of individual
work” or “quality control” to “product and service development.” There are five possible
responses to the question of who makes decisions, which we call organizational layers: (i)
  5
      This section draws heavily on Hong, Kueng and Yang (2014a).
       18                                 YANG, KUENG AND HONG


non-managerial employees, (iii) work supervisors, (iv) senior managers, (v) individuals or
groups outside the workplace—typically headquarters for multi-establishment firms, and
(vi) business owners6 .
    A particular advantage of the WES survey format is that it allows us to clearly separate
principals from agents. Principals are defined as residual claimants of profit flows from
the firm. In particular, since most firms are single-establishment entities, the separation
between professional senior managers and business owners is important for identifying
principals. Furthermore, for multi-unit firms, decision-makers outside the establishment
are typically headquarters, so that we identify the principal with the headquarters in such
cases. On the other hand, agents are defined as any type of employee, including managers
and non-managerial employees.
    Since the data on the allocation of tasks to organizational layers is multi-dimensional,
we use three functions that map to the real line, each providing different information
about the decentralization of real decision authority. For the precise definition of our
three measures of the degree of decentralization, let us begin by defining the following
sets: DPrincipal is the set of activities or tasks that principals are involved in, DManager
the set of activities that management is involved in, DNonManager the set of tasks that non-
managerial employees are involved in, and DAgent = DManager ∪ DNonManager the set of tasks
that agents—that is, managerial or non-managerial employees—are involved in. Our three
measures of the allocation of decision control within the firm are then defined as follows:7
                                 12
                                 X
                     Principal
           Controlit           =    1{d ∈ DitPrincipal \DitAgent }
                                   d=1
                                   X12
                               =         1{d ∈ DitPrincipal \(DitManager ∪ DitNonManager )},
                                   d=1
                                   X12
              ControlManager
                     it      =           1{d ∈ DitManager \(DitPrincipal ∪ DitNonManager )}, and
                                   d=1
                                   12
                                   X
            ControlNonManager
                   it         =          1{d ∈ DitNonManager \(DitPrincipal ∪ DitManager )}.
                                   d=1

The indicator function 1{d ∈ X} equals 1 if condition X is satisfied by d. ControlPrincipal
                                                                                   it
counts the number of tasks that are exclusively carried out by the principal—i.e., business
owner or headquarters—and is thus a measure of centralization of real decision author-
ity. In contrast, the measures ControlManager
                                       it      and ControlNonManager
                                                            it        count the number of
   6
     In principle there is a sixth layer, the “work group” which we ignore since it is unclear whether to
assign it to principals or agents.
   7
                                                                                              P12
      We also analyzed the aggregate measure of tasks exclusively carried out by agents,        d=1 1{d ∈
  Agent   Principal
Dit     \Dit        }. The results were similar to ControlPrincipal
                                                          it        , but with opposite sign, hence we do
not report it here separately. Moreover, since in the data the concept of the “agent” is much more
ambiguous than that of the “principal,” we focus on the two disaggregated agent measures of managers
and non-managers.
                                   BUSINESS STRATEGY                                   19


tasks exclusively allocated to agents, either managers (i.e., worker supervisors and senior
management) or non-managers (i.e., non-managerial employees), respectively. Hence, the
latter two variables measure the degree of decentralization of control.
    The survey allows tasks to be decided by multiple layers. For the sake of completeness,
we also report two types of shared decision structures: (i) the number of joint decisions
taken by both principals and managerial employees, and (ii) the number of joint decisions
taken by managerial and non-managerial employees,
                                       12
                                       X
                     shared  P&M
                                   =         1{d ∈ DitPrincipal ∪ DitManager } and
                                       d=1
                                       X12
                     sharedM&N =             1{d ∈ DitManager ∪ DitNonManager }.
                                       d=1

These joint decision structures can be thought of as capturing, for instance, what Gibbons,
Matouschek and Roberts (2013) call “decentralization with coordinated control,” where a
higher-ranked employee leaves lower-ranked employees some discretionary space to make
optimal decisions; see also Alonso and Matouschek (2008).
    In addition to these five measures of the allocation of decision tasks across layers in the
organization, we also construct a measure of the overall number of decision layers present
in the organization. In this context, we are motivated by models of the endogenous forma-
tion of hierarchical layers as a response to the optimal division of labor among employees of
different problem-solving skills; see Garicano (2000) and Garicano and Van Zandt (2013).
In these models, a higher number of organizational layers is indicative of a larger degree
of gains of specialization from the division of labor among employees. We construct this
measure in the following manner: for each possible decision layer, we check whether the
firm has assigned any of the 12 decision tasks to this layer. If it has done so, we infer
that this layer exists; otherwise, we presume that the firm does not use this layer in
decision-making problems and hence we ignore it.
    Table 6 reports the results of regressing these measures of decision authority and deci-
sion layers on our measures of business strategy priorities and a set of controls, including
industry and year fixed effects. Both novelty and high-quality strategies share a system-
atic tendency to having more decision layers. Additionally, the Wald tests show that
firms with high-quality strategies exhibit the highest number of decision layers. What
does the distribution of decision tasks tell us about firms’ trade-offs between employee
initiative and coordination? Here, the clearest contrast can be drawn between low-cost
and high-quality strategies. Firms with low-cost strategies tend to concentrate decision
control at the level of professional management. Although this is in principle a form of
decentralization, since it is not the business owner or the headquarters who makes most
of the decisions, it does speak to the need to coordinate employees from a relatively high
rank in the organizational hierarchy. In contrast, firms pursuing a high-quality strategy
not only tend to decentralize decisions from principals to employees; they also actively
promote joint decision-making by both principals and managerial employees as well as by
     20                           YANG, KUENG AND HONG


managerial and non-managerial employees. That is, there seems to be a greater emphasis
on employee initiative in high-quality firms compared to low-cost firms.

5.1.2     Non-Management Job Design
    Our baseline measures of real decision authority provide a useful starting point to
evaluate the degree to which firms with different strategies focus on employee initiative
vs. coordination. Yet, they also provide a somewhat incomplete picture of organizational
design choices that firms might pursue to encourage employee initiative, for at least two
reasons. First, firms might be able to benefit from employee information through other
means than employees making decisions within the organizational hierarchy. One example
would be communication of ideas by employees. A second way firms might benefit from
employee initiative is by using problem-solving teams in which employees make important
decisions, but which operate outside of standard organizational hierarchies.
    Fortunately, the WES includes a number of survey questions that attempt to provide
broader coverage of these issues. Specifically, the WES survey asks: “For non-managerial
employees, which of the following practices exist on a formal basis in your workplace?”
Among the possible responses are:

   • Employee suggestion programs

   • Flexible job design, which includes “job rotation, job redesign (broadened job defi-
     nitions), job enrichment (increased skills, variety or autonomy of work).”

   • Information sharing with employees, which is defined as informing employees about
     the “firm’s performance, colleagues’ wages, technological or organizational changes.
     This implies that employees can provide feedback on policies.”

   • Problem-solving teams, which are defined as teams that are “limited to specific areas
     such as quality or work flow.”

   • Joint labor-management committees, which are defined as “task teams that gener-
     ally cover a broad range of issues, yet tend to be consultative in nature.”

These special non-managerial work practices provide additional margins along which firms
can benefit from non-managerial employee initiative by either eliciting information or
giving non-managerial employees the opportunity to participate through problem-solving
teams.
    Table 7 reports the results of regressing the adoption of these special non-managerial
work practices on measures of strategic priorities using a probit model. Although novelty
firms do not systematically decentralize decisions to non-managerial employees within the
organizational hierarchy, as shown in table 6, they do tend to use nearly all types of spe-
cial work practices to encourage non-managerial employee initiative. Especially notable is
the use of problem-solving teams, which novelty firms are most likely to adopt, compared
                                BUSINESS STRATEGY                                    21


to either high-quality or low-cost firms. In contrast, low-cost firms are systematically less
likely to use problem-solving teams. This result is compatible with the view that low-cost
firms emphasize employee coordination much more than employee initiative, especially for
non-managerial employees. It is also consistent with the previous results on the concen-
tration of control on the managerial level. Furthermore, both implementation of employee
suggestion programs and information-sharing practices in novelty firms point toward the
importance of inspiring employees to acquire and communicate information.

5.2     Employee Compensation and Skills
5.2.1   Performance Pay
  Our data includes detailed information on the adoption of different types of perfor-
mance pay, by occupation. There are five different types of performance pay:
   • Individual incentive systems: “such as bonuses, piece-rate and commissions are
     systems that reward individuals on the basis of individual output or performance.”

   • Group incentive systems: “such as productivity/quality gain-sharing systems are
     systems that reward individuals on the basis of group output or performance.”

   • Profit sharing systems: “any plan, by which employees receive a share of the profits
     from the workplace.”

   • Merit pay or skill-based pay: “a reward or honor given for superior qualities, great
     abilities or expertise that come from training, practice, etc.”

   • Employee stock plans: “employee stock purchase plans, ownership plans or stock
     options.”
Although the data provides information on the adoption of all of these types of per-
formance pay systems by occupation, most firms do not differentiate performance pay
options by occupation, conditional on adopting a specific compensation practice.
    Table 8 shows the baseline results of regressing the adoption of performance pay sys-
tems on our measures of business strategy. Reassuringly, both novelty and high-quality
firms make extensive use of performance pay systems. This is compatible with the ear-
lier evidence of the importance of employee initiative for novelty and high-quality firms.
Note that, in this context, low-cost firms do not seem to make use of any type of perfor-
mance pay system, which is consistent with the interpretation that low-cost strategies are
associated with more employee coordination and control instead of employee initiative.
    Regarding the trade-off of exploration and exploitation, it should be highlighted that
only novelty firms systematically adopt stock compensation programs for employees. This
evidence could reflect the notion that novelty firms use these stock compensation programs
to balance other more short-run performance pay programs as would be predicted by mul-
titasking principal-agent models such as Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991). A closely related
      22                           YANG, KUENG AND HONG


argument has been developed by Manso (2011), who shows that stock compensation can
be a key component in motivating the exploration of uncertain ideas.


5.2.2      Occupational Composition and Job Training

    We now turn to the question of whether a firm’s priorities over employee initiative
vs. coordination and exploration vs. exploitation are also reflected in the skill level of
its employees. In this context, there are two related dimensions. First, we look at the
occupational composition of a firm’s workforce using the fraction of employees in a certain
occupational category as the dependent variable. To account for the fact that firms can
have zero employees in an occupational category, we estimate Tobit models. Table 9
reports results for five different types of broad occupational categories: (i) managers, (ii)
production workers, (iii) professionals, (iv) administrative staff, and (v) sales workers. The
WES defines professionals as workers with a college degree. The results show that novelty
firms systematically hire more professionals than firms with no strategic priority. This
result could reflect the novelty firms’ need to hire scientists who then explore new product
and service opportunities and innovate. The Wald tests indeed show that the coefficient
on novelty is significantly larger than the coefficient on high-quality strategies. Hence,
although high-quality firms are active in all types of innovations, they do systematically
hire fewer skilled workers than novelty firms. This supports the notion that in their pursuit
of new products and processes, novelty firms allocate an over-proportional amount of their
resources to exploration rather than exploitation.
    Second, we analyze job-training programs to get a sense for what types of human
capital accumulation firms with different strategies encourage. We focus in particular on
the adoption of six types of job training programs: (i) orientation for new employees,
(ii) managerial training, (iii) professionals training, (iv) sales worker training, (v) group
decision training, and (vi) leadership training. Table 10 reports probit regressions of an
indicator of the adoption of these programs on our measures of business strategy. A result
that stands out is that only novelty firms are systematically more likely to adopt training
programs for professionals than firms without strategic priorities. There are two additional
results that help to contrast business strategies. First, both novelty and high-quality
firms are likely to adopt group decision and leadership training programs. This might be
driven by the need to facilitate joint decision-making and teamwork, since both types of
strategies rely more on employee initiative than on direct managerial coordination and
control. Second, both low-cost and high-quality firms systematically invest in employee
orientation. In contrast to professionals training, orientation training is much more short-
run in nature. Its emphasis is therefore much more focused on current performance than
on long-run exploration.


5.3        Operations and Organizational Change
                                BUSINESS STRATEGY                                   23


5.3.1   Operations
    To broaden our overview of management practices beyond the specific features of
organizational design discussed so far, we turn to the way firms run their operations.
Data on operations is also based on the business strategy section of the WES, but it
does not refer to the product market orientation of the firm. We provide evidence on six
factors which are informative regarding firms’ operating decisions. Specifically, firms rate
the importance of the following factors on a scale from 1 to 5:

  1. reorganization of the work process,

  2. improving coordination with customers and suppliers, i.e., the value chain,

  3. enhancing labor-management cooperation,

  4. increasing employees’ involvement or participation,

  5. improving measures of performance, and

  6. improving employee skills.

    In order to avoid the issues of interpreting the cardinality of the Likert scores, we
use ordered probits to estimate the correlation between these factors and our measures
of strategic priorities. Table 11 shows that both novelty and high-quality strategies are
strongly correlated with an emphasis on employee involvement and participation. This is
compatible with both strategies putting a large weight on employee initiative. But the
results on operations also show where high-quality and novelty strategies diverge. Notice
especially that high-quality firms place special emphasis on improving measures of per-
formance, while novelty firms have no such emphasis. In contrast, both high-quality and
low-cost strategies put emphasis on improving current measures of performance in their
overall operations. What is more, both of these strategies are likely to put a high priority
on improving coordination among firms along their value chain. These results therefore
support the notion that both quality and cost strategies are much more oriented toward
exploitation of current rent sources than on the exploration of new business opportunities.

5.3.2   Organizational Change
    We finish our analysis of the cross-sectional relation of strategy and the management
of firms by reporting empirical results on organizational change. This analysis serves two
important purposes. First, it reinforces some results we obtained in our prior analysis
on strategy and organizational design. Second, it is an important starting point for the
subsequent analysis of strategic change.
    The WES provides information on 14 different types of organizational changes and a
residual category for “other organizational changes.” We focus here on the seven categories
of organizational changes that reveal information on how firms with different strategies
      24                           YANG, KUENG AND HONG


tend either to restructure internal business processes or pursue changes in firm boundaries.
Specifically, the seven organizational changes we analyze are:

  1. functional integration: “Greater integration among different functional areas,”

  2. delayering: “Reduction in the number of managerial levels,”

  3. downsizing: “reducing the number of employees on payroll to reduce expenses, it is
     part of a reorganization in the workplace and not simply a response to a drop in
     demand,”

  4. re-engineering: “redesigning processes to improve performance and cost,”

  5. job rotation: “greater reliance on job rotation, multi-skilling,”

  6. outsourcing: “greater reliance on external suppliers of products or services,” and

  7. inter-firm R&D: “greater inter-firm collaboration in R&D, production or market-
     ing.”

    Results in table 12 indicate that when analyzing organizational changes, the biggest
differences among business strategies relate to delayering and downsizing. Both of these
organizational changes are pursued exclusively by firms with low-cost as top strategic pri-
ority. The results on downsizing provide another confirmation that our low-cost strategy
measure indeed captures firms that pursue a low-cost strategy. Furthermore, the result
that low-cost firms are more likely to pursue delayering of managerial hierarchies is com-
patible with the view that these firms use professional management to directly coordinate
employees rather than implementing widespread division of labor between management
and non-management. In this sense, the evidence is consistent with the view that low-cost
firms emphasize employee coordination more than either high-quality or novelty firms.
    Another notable result that emerges from table 12 is that both novelty and high-quality
firms are very active in cooperating across firm boundaries. They are both systematically
more likely to pursue both more outsourcing and more inter-firm cooperation in R&D
than firms without any strategic priorities. It should also be noted that novelty firms are
far more likely to adopt inter-firm R&D cooperation than high-quality firms, while both
of those types of strategies are about equally likely to pursue outsourcing. This result
might be expected if exploration is more important for novelty firms than for high-quality
firms, while outsourcing is important to improve current performance.

5.4        Summary
   In this section, we offer a unifying interpretation of our results on business strategy
and performance as well as our results on strategy and the management of firms. We
caution the reader that none of the results in this paper are causal. For instance, the fact
that certain management practices and business strategies are correlated could be driven
                                BUSINESS STRATEGY                                   25


by the fact that there exist a complementarity between some management practices and
specific strategies, or it could mean that an unobservable factor, like CEO style, might
determine both management practice and strategic priority. This identification issue,
however, does not diminish the value of the stylized facts we provide, as they can be
interpreted as capturing different managerial styles.
    An organizing framework of our results is summarized in figure 1, which displays the
two key organizational trade-offs along which we framed the discussion of our empirical
results: first, the trade-off between employee initiative and coordination, and second,
the trade-off between exploration and exploitation. Firms with different priorities in
business strategies seem to emphasize different ends of these two trade-offs. The majority
of empirical results indicate that firms pursing novelty as top strategic priority focus
on employee initiative and the exploration of new business opportunities. Novelty firms
make extensive use of special non-management work practices such as problem-solving
teams, employee suggestion programs, and employee information-sharing programs to
benefit from employee initiative. At the same time, while novelty firms do not exhibit
systematically better current performance than firms without strategic priorities, they do
innovate far more than any other type of firm. This points towards a greater importance
of exploration of new business opportunities rather than the exploitation of existing rent
sources. Compatible with this view is the fact that only novelty firms provide stock
compensation, which can potentially be used to reward long-run rather than just short-
run performance.
    In contrast, firms that report providing high-quality products or services as their top
strategic priority seem to place a much greater emphasis on current performance, as shown
throughout section 4. This is also reflected in the strong correlation of those high-quality
firms with measures of current profitability such as market share, markups, and profits,
documented in section 3. Although high-quality firms are also active in innovation, they
are far less invested in generating new products or services and processes as opposed to
improved products and processes. Both of these results indicate that quality firms focus
more on the exploitation of existing rent sources than on the exploration of future business
opportunities. However, high-quality firms share with novelty firms an emphasis on the
importance of employee initiative. High-quality firms use a wide range of performance
pay systems to reward employee initiative and structure decision authority within the
standard organizational hierarchy to include even non-managerial employees in decision
processes. Firms with high quality as top strategic priority are therefore associated with
management practices that emphasize both employee initiative and exploitation of current
profit options.
    Firms with low-cost strategies differ from both novelty and high-quality firms in that
they mostly do not emphasize initiative by non-managerial employees. As reported in
section 4, these firms tend to concentrate decision control at the level of managerial
employees and are systematically less likely to use problem-solving teams than any other
firm type. Additionally, low-cost firms do not use any type of performance pay, nor do
they invest in job training programs beyond initial employee orientation. Low-cost firms
     26                            YANG, KUENG AND HONG


therefore seem to place a much larger emphasis on the coordination of non-managerial
employees via managers. On the other hand, low-cost firms do place emphasis on current
performance targets. This is consistent with evidence in section 3 that low-cost firms also
have systematically higher market shares and TFP-Q than firms without any strategic
priority. To summarize, low-cost firms can be characterized as exhibiting a combination of
management practices that emphasize employee coordination and exploitation of current
profit sources.



6    Conclusion
    While neglected for a long time by economists, we argue that the analysis of busi-
ness strategy is an important area of research for analyzing the sources of performance
differences across firms and their implications for aggregate productivity. We see three
particularly promising areas for ongoing and future research.
    First, our empirical results highlight the need for new heterogeneous-firm models with
an endogenous choice of business strategies, where low-cost, high-quality, and novelty firms
compete in the same product market. Yang (2014) develops such a model and traces out
its implications for reallocation and aggregate productivity. Alternative novel theoretical
frontiers suggested by our research are new models of endogenous innovation combining
business strategy choice with the adoption of managerial practices. These models could,
for instance, combine organizational exploration vs. exploitation trade-offs as in Manso
(2011) with endogenous growth models such as Klette and Kortum (2004) or Acemoglu,
Akcigit, Bloom, Kerr and Van Reenen (2013).
    Second, the analysis of types of competition differing by business strategy is a matter
of growing interest for the literature in international trade. This idea is best exemplified
by Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2012), who analyze the impact of an exogenous shift in
low-cost competition from China on innovative activities of European firms. The related
theoretical model in Bloom, Romer, Terry and Van Reenen (2014b) offers an explanation
of these results based on the idea that labor is stuck in firms hit by low-cost competition,
so firms internally reallocate their workers to R&D. A complementary channel would be
that firms with low-cost strategies switch to either novelty or quality strategies to avoid
competing with the factor price advantages of Chinese competitors. In Kueng, Li and
Yang (2014), we empirically explore this idea with data on business strategies of Canadian
firms during the aftermath of China’s entry into the WTO.
    Third, further empirical work is needed to separate the role of unobserved “managerial
style” from complementarity between strategy and organizational design. Such empirical
work could show whether the patterns we document represent potentially transferable,
disembodied knowledge, or whether they require managers with certain abilities to suc-
cessfully implement strategies.
                                 BUSINESS STRATEGY                                      27


References
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, N. Bloom, W. Kerr, and J. Van Reenen, “Innovation, reallocation
  and growth,” mimeo, Stanford University, 2013.
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and Murat Celik, “Young, Restless and Creative: Openess to
  Disruption and Creative Innovations,” mimeo, MIT, 2014.
Ackerberg, Daniel, Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer, “The Structural Identification of Production
  Functions,” mimeo UCLA, 2006.
Aghion, P. and J. Tirole, “Formal and real authority in organizations,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 1997.
   and P. Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,” Econometrica, 1992, 60
  (2), 323–51.
Akcigit, U. and W. Kerr, “Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations,” NBER Working Paper,
  2010.
Alonso, Ricardo and Niko Matouschek, “Optimal Delegation,” Review of Economic Studies,
  2008.
Athey, S. and S. Stern, “An empirical framework for testing ttheorie about complementarity in
  ororganization design,” NBER Working Paper, 1998.
Bernard, Andrew, Johnathan Eaton, Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, “Plants and Pro-
  ductivity in International Trade,” American Economic Review, 2003.
Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, “Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on
  Firm Policies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms
  and Countries,” Quarterly Jounral of Economics, 2007.
  , B. Eifert, D. McKenzie, A. Mahajan, and J. Roberts, “Does management matter: evidence
  from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013.
  , L. Brynjolfsson E.and Foster, R. Jarmin, I. Saporta, and J. Van Reenen, “Management and
  IT in America,” Working Paper, Stanford University, 2014.
  , L. Garicano, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, “The distinct effects of information technology
  and communication technology on firm organization,” Management Science, 2013.
  , R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, “Management as Technology?,” mimeo, Stanford University,
  2013.
Bloom, Nicolas and John Van Reenen, “New Approaches to Surveying Organizations,” American
  Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2010.
  , Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen, “Trade Induced Technical Change: The Impact of
  Chinese Imports on Innovation, Diffusion and Productivity,” mimeo Stanford University, 2012.
  , Paul Romer, Stephen Terry, and John Van Reenen, “Trapped factors and China’s impact
  on global growth,” mimeo Stanford University, 2014.
Bollard, Albert, Pete Klenow, and Huiyu Li, “Entry Costs Rise with Development,” mimeo
  Stanford University, 2014.
Bresnahan, T., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. Hitt, “Information technology, workplace organization
  and the demand for skilled labor: firm-level evidence,” Quarterly Jounral of Economics, 2002.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Effi-
  ciency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability ?,” American Economic Review, 2008.
Garicano, L., “Hierachies and the organization of knowledge in production,” Journal of Political
     28                            YANG, KUENG AND HONG


   Economy, 2000.
Garicano, Luis and Timonthy Van Zandt, Hierarchies and the Division of Labor, Princeton
   University Press, 2013.
Gibbons, R., N. Matouschek, and J. Roberts, “Decisions in Organizations,” Handbook of Orga-
   nizational Economics, 2013.
Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom, “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts,
   Asset Ownership and Job Design,” Jounral of Law, Economics and Organization, 1991.
Hong, Bryan, Lorenz Kueng, and Mu-Jeung Yang, “Estimating Management Practice Comple-
   mentarity between Decentralization and Performance Pay,” mimeo, University of Washington,
   2014.
   , , and , “Managing Innovation,” mimeo, University of Washington, 2014.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
   India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009.
Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw, and G. Prennushi, “The effects of human resource management prac-
   tices on productivity: a study of steel finishing lines,” American Economic Review, 1997.
Johnson, Robert, “Trade and Prices with Heterogeneous Firms,” Journal of International Eco-
   nomics, 2012.
Klette, T. and S. Kortum, “Innovating firms and aggregate innovation,” Journal of Political
   Economy, 2004.
Klette, Tor Jacob and Zvi Grilliches, “The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators When
   Output Prices Are Unobserved and Endogenous,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 1996.
Kueng, Lorenz, Nicholas Li, and Mu-Jeung Yang, “The Strategic Response of Firms to Interna-
   tional Competition: Evidence from Canada,” in progress, 2014.
Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen, “Prices, Plant Size and Product Quality,” Review of
   Economic Studies, 2012.
Loecker, Jan De and Frederic Warzynski, “Markups and Firm-level Export Status,” American
   Economic Review, 2012.
Lucas, Robert E., “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics,
   1978.
Manso, Gustavo, “Motivating Innovation,” Journal of Finance, 2011.
March, James, “Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning,” Organization Sci-
   ence, 1991.
Melitz, Marc and Giancarlo Ottaviano, “Market Size, Trade and Productivity,” Review of Eco-
   nomic Studies, 2008.
Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
   Productivity,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695 – 1725.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, “Complementarities and fit strategy, structure, and organiza-
   tional change in manufacturing,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 1995.
Peters, Michael, “Heterogeneous Mark-Ups and Endogenous Misallocation,” mimeo MIT, 2012.
Petrin, Amil and James Levinsohn, “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control
   for Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 2003.
Porter, Michael, Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors,
   Free Press, 1980.
Roberts, John and Garth Saloner, Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton University
   Press, 2013.
                                BUSINESS STRATEGY                                    29


Romer, P., “Endogenous Technical Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98 (5), 71–102.
Rotemberg, Julio and Garth Saloner, “Benefits of Narrow Business Strategies,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 1994.
Shaked, Avner and John Sutton, “Relaxing Price Competition through Product Differentiation,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 1982.
Sutton, John, Competing in Capabilities: The Globalization Process, Oxford University Press,
  2012.
Yang, Mu-Jeung, “Business Strategy, Competition and Aggregate Productivity,” in progress,
  University of Washington, 2014.
                                                                                                                                            30
                                                Table 2: Strategy across Sectors

                                                                                                    persistent priorities
Top priority bus. strategy:       I(novelty)      I(low-cost)       I(high-qual)       I(novelty)      I(low-cost)      I(high-qual)

Sectors:




                                                                                                                                            YANG, KUENG AND HONG
  Manufacturing                      0.3343           0.6233            0.6710           0.1327           0.3286             0.4208
  Wholesale trade                    0.2832           0.6146            0.6420           0.0513           0.2522             0.3249
  Retail trade                       0.1848           0.5206            0.6621           0.0286           0.2090             0.4557
  Finance and insurance              0.2508           0.4137            0.8203           0.0669           0.1313             0.6061
  Business services                  0.2185           0.3691            0.6739           0.0302           0.1131             0.3459
  Construction                       0.1785           0.5326            0.7125           0.0424           0.2945             0.3538
  Transport and wareh.               0.0979           0.4878            0.5761           0.0000           0.2166             0.3031

  All sectors                        0.2360           0.500             0.6900           0.0352           0.2039             0.3539
Notes: The first three columns report uncorrected strategic priority measures. The last three columns report the fraction of firms
that have same strategic priority over at least two years and are therefore called “persistent priorities;” see text for details. Summary
statistics use sampling weights.
                                  BUSINESS STRATEGY                                         31




                                 Table 3: Strategy and Performance

                      market      operating                                                          gross
Dependent var.:       share        margin         ROA        TFP-R        TFP-Q        markup       margin

Strategy priority:
    I(novelty)          0.012       -0.005      -0.024**       0.019       0.064        -0.001       0.025
                      (0.021)       (0.016)      (0.011)      (0.020)     (0.080)      (0.017)      (0.032)
    I(low-cost)       0.046**      -0.021**     -0.026**       0.042      0.172**       0.026       -0.049**
                      (0.020)       (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.026)     (0.087)      (0.019)       (0.019)
    I(high-qual.)     0.101***     0.038***     0.023***     0.099**     0.357***     0.082***      0.034*
                       (0.025)      (0.014)      (0.009)     (0.041)      (0.109)      (0.026)      (0.020)
Firm characteristics:
 I(multi-unit)        0.153*       0.078***       0.016      -0.379**    1.428***      0.245**       -0.032
                      (0.078)       (0.029)      (0.013)      (0.172)     (0.386)      (0.103)      (0.054)
 log(age)             0.081***       0.020        -0.005     -0.027*     0.374***       0.012        0.002
                       (0.018)      (0.013)      (0.006)     (0.016)      (0.063)      (0.018)      (0.017)
 I(exporter)          0.139***       -0.017       0.001        0.088     0.819***      0.126**       0.017
                       (0.037)      (0.023)      (0.012)      (0.062)     (0.211)      (0.050)      (0.031)
 log(employ.)         1.084***    -0.027***      0.012**       0.089     0.572***     -0.165***     -0.039**
                       (0.027)     (0.010)       (0.005)      (0.059)     (0.132)      (0.026)       (0.017)
Wald tests:
    novel = l-cost      1.58          0.83         0.01        0.49         0.72         1.01         4.87
    novel = h-qual      6.17         4.88          9.54        3.81         4.52         9.49         0.05
    l-cost = h-qual     3.04         14.47        12.81        1.88         2.46         3.07         6.79
    joint all zero      7.33          5.1          6.29        2.36         4.34         3.98         3.02
N                      22,135       22,135       18,770       16,880      16,880        22,046       12,199
Notes: Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Additional controls, not reported are measures
of perceived competition from local, Canadian, US and other international competition. Standard errors are
clustered by sampling strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. All regressions use sampling
weights.
                      Table 4: Strategy and Performance: Within-Firm Effects




                                                                                                                  32
                                         gross     operating      market
Dependent var.:           markup        margin      margin        share        ROA        TFP-R         TFP-Q

Strategy priority:
 I(novelty)                 -0.014       -0.001       -0.013       0.007       -0.013      -0.017        -0.024
                           (0.018)      (0.019)      (0.013)      (0.021)     (0.013)     (0.026)       (0.074)
 I(high-qual.)             0.033*        0.005      0.039***       0.032       0.011      0.049*       0.170**
                           (0.017)      (0.011)      (0.012)      (0.021)     (0.013)     (0.026)      (0.080)




                                                                                                                  YANG, KUENG AND HONG
 I(low-cost)              -0.025**       -0.003    -0.035***       -0.031      0.006      -0.039**      -0.115*
                           (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.011)       (0.020)     (0.008)      (0.017)      (0.065)
Intermediates usage:
 log(intermediates)       0.175***     -0.049**     0.118***     0.383***      -0.014    0.172***      0.660***
                           (0.024)      (0.019)      (0.018)      (0.032)     (0.011)     (0.028)       (0.087)
Firm characteristics:
 I(multi-unit)              -0.125       -0.017       -0.025       -0.078      -0.063      -0.109        -0.072
                           (0.186)      (0.032)      (0.068)      (0.168)     (0.047)     (0.199)       (0.480)
 log(age)                   -0.013       -0.024       0.045        0.044      -0.051*      -0.008        0.204
                           (0.052)      (0.028)      (0.046)      (0.045)     (0.027)     (0.058)       (0.155)
 I(exporter)                0.062        0.032        -0.012       0.041       0.012       0.030         0.106
                           (0.049)      (0.045)      (0.024)      (0.040)     (0.022)     (0.045)       (0.133)
 log(employ.)            -0.387***       0.011      -0.110**     0.370***      0.034     -0.256***     0.765***
                          (0.060)       (0.033)      (0.046)      (0.069)     (0.027)     (0.070)       (0.172)
Industry FE                 YES          YES          YES          YES         YES          YES          YES
N                          22,018       12,178       22,018       22,018      18,688       16,972       16,972
Notes: Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Standard errors are clustered by sampling strata,
which are broad industry-size-region categories. All regressions use sampling weights.
                                   BUSINESS STRATEGY                                           33


                                 Table 5: Strategy and Innovation


                            I(new)                   I(improved)                  technology
Dependent var.:       products processes         products processes         I(adoption) intensity

Strategy priority:
 I(novelty)           0.476***      0.423***     0.372***      0.350***      0.1501***       0.4536***
                       (0.054)       (0.051)      (0.051)       (0.051)       (0.0457)        (0.0382)
 I(low-cost)            0.046         0.051        0.044       0.100**         -0.0616       -0.251***
                       (0.055)       (0.051)      (0.050)      (0.050)        (0.0491)        (0.0746)
 I(high-qual.)        0.202***      0.260***     0.242***      0.258***      0.1491***        0.363***
                       (0.053)       (0.055)      (0.050)       (0.055)       (0.0361)        (0.0682)
Firm characteristics:
 log(employ.)           0.045         0.034        0.057         0.041       0.1914***       0.5008***
                       (0.039)       (0.040)      (0.038)       (0.038)       (0.0235)        (0.0289)
 log(age)              -0.053*      -0.071**     -0.055**      -0.064**      -0.0688***     -0.1724***
                       (0.029)       (0.029)      (0.027)       (0.029)        (0.024)       (0.0358)
 I(multi-unit)          0.051         0.015        -0.146        -0.037        0.0147        0.3728***
                       (0.100)       (0.098)      (0.108)       (0.106)       (0.0717)        (0.0316)
 I(exporter)            0.095       0.126**       0.159**      0.131**          0.018          -0.096
                       (0.067)      (0.058)       (0.062)      (0.056)        (0.0532)        (0.0598)
 Tech. intensity      3.187***      6.445***     5.118***      5.739***
                       (1.024)       (0.971)      (1.104)       (0.994)
 Frac. high-skill       0.017         -0.066       0.002         0.091
                       (0.115)       (0.121)      (0.113)       (0.132)
Wald tests:
 novel = l-cost         28.16         27.24        20.86         12.72           9.79          282.25
 novel = h-qual         13.52          4.55         3.29          1.42           0.00           7.43
 l-cost = h-qual         3.92          8.32          7.6          4.64          9.33           234.5
 joint all zero         31.51         31.54        26.17         25.71          19.63           1110
Industry FE             YES           YES          YES           YES            YES             YES
N                      22,064        22,034       22,061        22,040         22,285          22,135
Notes: Additional unreported control variables are task scope, measures of centralization, indicator
variable for individual, group, and profit sharing incentive systems adoption. Industry fixed effects are
at the 4-digit NAICS level. Technology intesity is expenditure on new technology in the past year as a
fraction of annual revenues. Standard errors are clustered by sampling strata, which are broad
industry-size-region categories. All regressions use sampling weights.
   34                                YANG, KUENG AND HONG




                         Table 6: Strategy and Real Decision Authority

                        # of              # of tasks controlled by                   shared task
Dependent var.:      dec. layers     principal    manager     non-mgr              P&M        M&N

Strategy priority:
 I(novelty)           0.1023**        -0.0304        0.0617        -0.0116        0.0565         -0.0333
                      (0.0446)        (0.061)       (0.0616)      (0.0668)       (0.0684)       (0.0752)
 I(low-cost)            -0.0152        -0.0097      0.211***      -0.1024*        -0.0705        0.0376
                       (0.0327)       (0.0541)      (0.0598)       (0.058)        (0.057)       (0.0614)
 I(high-qual.)        0.2166***     -0.2396***       0.0613        0.0119       0.2647***      0.1907***
                       (0.037)       (0.0594)       (0.0713)       (0.062)       (0.0621)       (0.0677)
Firm characteristics:
 log(employ.)         0.4611***     -0.5089***       0.3964        0.0239       0.2955***      0.5527***
                       (0.0175)      (0.0303)        (0.026)      (0.0314)       (0.0258)       (0.0284)
 log(age)               -0.0155        0.0382        0.0001        0.0298         -0.0512        0.0423
                       (0.0187)       (0.0322)      (0.0365)      (0.0362)       (0.0326)       (0.0332)
 I(multi-unit)          -0.0561      -0.1909**       -0.1161     -0.3165***     -0.3498***       0.12
                       (0.0907)       (0.0835)      (0.0927)      (0.0894)       (0.0968)       (0.075)
 I(exporter)             0.063         0.1376      -0.1566**       0.0881         -0.0262        0.0941
                       (0.0484)       (0.0778)      (0.074)       (0.0717)       (0.0757)       (0.0752)
Wald tests:
 novel = l-cost          4.25           0.06          2.96           1.02           1.87          0.58
 novel = h-qual          3.94           5.91            0            0.06          4.74           4.91
 l-cost = h-qual        18.84           8.07          2.31           1.85          14.35          2.58
 joint all zero         13.22           5.57          5.15           1.07          6.65           2.98
Industry FE              YES            YES           YES            YES            YES           YES
N                       22285          11684         11684          11684          11684         11684
Notes: Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Standard errors are clustered by sampling
strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. All regressions use sampling weights.
                                 BUSINESS STRATEGY                                         35




          Table 7: Strategy and Special Non-Management Work Design

                      employee       flex. job     inform.     prob.-solv.    labor-mgmt
    Adoption of:     suggestions       design      sharing       teams        committees

Strategy priority:
 I(novelty)            0.196***      0.269***     0.212***      0.336***          -0.019
                        (0.070)       (0.084)      (0.072)       (0.085)         (0.071)
 I(low-cost)             -0.040        -0.017       -0.036      -0.152**         0.110*
                        (0.068)       (0.064)      (0.063)       (0.070)         (0.063)
 I(high-qual.)           0.103         0.121        0.072         0.096           0.057
                        (0.085)       (0.077)      (0.071)       (0.084)         (0.080)
Firm characteristics:
 log(employ.)            -0.052        -0.043       -0.036        -0.013          0.015
                        (0.041)       (0.042)      (0.037)       (0.042)         (0.037)
 log(age)               0.231**        -0.142     0.272***       0.204**          0.090
                        (0.090)       (0.093)      (0.081)       (0.091)         (0.076)
 I(multi-unit)           -0.063        -0.087       -0.059        -0.001          0.003
                        (0.084)       (0.086)      (0.067)       (0.080)         (0.072)
 I(exporter)           0.186***        0.002      0.178***      0.220***        0.450***
                        (0.036)       (0.042)      (0.035)       (0.039)         (0.033)
Wald tests:
 novel = l-cost           5.84          7.62         6.14         19.01           1.97
 novel = h-qual           0.63          1.66         1.92         4.19            0.53
 l-cost = h-qual          1.33          1.83         1.38          5.11           0.25
 joint all zero           3.48          4.35         3.27         6.93            1.29
Industry FE              YES            YES         YES           YES             YES
N                       14,708         14,563      14,712        14,684          14,629
Notes: Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Standard errors are clustered by
sampling strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. All regressions use sampling
weights.
   36                                YANG, KUENG AND HONG




                  Table 8: Strategy, Performance Pay and Compensation

                     individual   group             profit      merit-        stock       avg annual
    Adoption of:     incentives incentives         sharing      based         comp.         salary

Strategy priority:
 I(novelty)            0.128**       0.138*       0.160**       0.119*       0.207***       1.198**
                       (0.055)       (0.074)      (0.069)       (0.062)       (0.075)       (0.580)
 I(low-cost)            0.030         -0.090        0.027        0.054         -0.076        -0.675
                       (0.049)       (0.062)       (0.059)      (0.050)       (0.067)       (0.467)
 I(high-qual.)        0.280***      0.269***      0.156**       0.111**        0.015         0.477
                       (0.056)       (0.079)      (0.066)       (0.056)       (0.095)       (0.532)
Firm characteristics:
 log(employ.)          -0.051*        -0.030        -0.009    -0.093***     -0.166***      1.266***
                       (0.029)       (0.036)       (0.031)     (0.029)       (0.048)        (0.288)
 log(age)             0.376***      0.427***      0.276***     0.448***      1.169***      4.708***
                       (0.084)       (0.129)       (0.099)      (0.086)       (0.108)       (1.461)
 I(multi-unit)         0.155**       -0.199**       0.017        0.036         0.148       1.697***
                       (0.061)        (0.087)      (0.067)      (0.071)       (0.101)       (0.331)
 I(exporter)          0.405***      0.415***      0.350***     0.331***      0.385***      2.204***
                       (0.026)       (0.028)       (0.027)      (0.025)       (0.039)       (0.798)
Wald tests:
 novel = l-cost         1.58          6.11          1.95          0.69         7.61           6.15
 novel = h-qual          3.44          1.43           0           0.01         2.49           0.78
 l-cost = h-qual        9.51          12.19         2.18          0.57         0.66           2.74
 joint all zero         12.14          5.78         4.51          2.9          2.89           2.46
Industry FE              YES           YES          YES          YES           YES           YES
N                       22,166        21,990       21,691       22,153        15,290        22,285
Notes: Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Standard errors are clustered by sampling
strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. All regressions use sampling weights.
                            BUSINESS STRATEGY                                            37




              Table 9: Strategy and Occupational Composition

                                   production                    admin.        sales
     Fraction of:     managers      workers         profess.      staff       workers

Strategy priority:
 I(novelty)             0.005          -0.033       0.068**       -0.014      0.053**
                       (0.013)        (0.031)       (0.034)      (0.017)      (0.026)
 I(low-cost)            0.001          0.001         0.005        0.012         -0.029
                       (0.012)        (0.025)       (0.027)      (0.015)       (0.023)
 I(high-qual.)          0.014          -0.031        -0.032       0.004       0.086***
                       (0.013)        (0.028)       (0.031)      (0.018)       (0.029)
Firm characteristics:
 log(employ.)           -0.004        0.028*         -0.017      0.016*       -0.030**
                       (0.007)        (0.015)       (0.014)      (0.009)       (0.015)
 log(age)             -0.037***        -0.029        0.017      -0.107***       0.024
                       (0.013)        (0.049)       (0.040)      (0.025)       (0.039)
 I(multi-unit)          -0.002       0.156***      0.145***     0.057***      0.135***
                       (0.007)        (0.014)       (0.013)      (0.009)       (0.014)
 I(exporter)            -0.001         0.004       0.134***       0.008         0.016
                       (0.016)        (0.036)       (0.040)      (0.020)       (0.035)
Wald tests:
 novel = l-cost          0.04          0.79           2.05         1.28          4.92
 novel = h-qual          0.24            0            4.59         0.58          0.65
 l-cost = h-qual         0.62          0.78           0.89         0.11         10.91
 joint all zero          0.49          0.83           1.7          0.47          5.26
Industry FE             YES            YES           YES           YES          YES
N                      22,285         22,285        22,285        22,285       22,285
Notes: Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Standard errors are
clustered by sampling strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. All
regressions use sampling weights.
   38                                YANG, KUENG AND HONG




                             Table 10: Strategy and Job Training


                                                           training
Dependent var.:      new empl      managers      profess.     sales reps.   group dec.     leadership

Strategy priority:
 I(novelty)            0.103*        0.105       0.247***      0.191***       0.190**       0.262***
                       (0.058)      (0.067)       (0.062)       (0.063)       (0.077)        (0.067)
 I(low-cost)          0.095**        -0.041        -0.057        -0.070        -0.018         -0.037
                      (0.047)       (0.055)       (0.053)       (0.059)       (0.071)        (0.057)
 I(high-qual.)        0.231***       0.087         0.028       0.168***      0.262***       0.260***
                       (0.053)      (0.065)       (0.058)       (0.058)       (0.070)        (0.067)
Firm characteristics:
 log(employ.)        -0.075***       -0.021        0.008       -0.107***       -0.019         0.004
                      (0.028)       (0.033)       (0.030)       (0.038)       (0.038)        (0.037)
 log(age)               0.100       0.436***       0.138       0.294***      0.299***       0.273***
                       (0.099)       (0.088)      (0.091)       (0.085)       (0.091)        (0.089)
 I(multi-unit)          -0.025      -0.151**       0.095         -0.064        0.081          0.020
                       (0.064)       (0.066)      (0.069)       (0.076)       (0.077)        (0.074)
 I(exporter)          0.633***      0.579***     0.362***      0.450***      0.327***       0.450***
                       (0.028)       (0.029)      (0.025)       (0.029)       (0.028)        (0.029)
Wald tests:
 novel = l-cost         0.01          2.67         12.89         8.76           3.45          9.85
 novel = h-qual         2.42          0.04         6.72          0.07           0.45            0
 l-cost = h-qual        3.63          2.26          1.01         7.45           7.14          11.27
 joint all zero         9.68          1.54         5.57          6.73           7.17          10.5
Industry FE             YES           YES          YES           YES           YES            YES
N                      22,225        22,191       22,067        21,941        21,881         22,056
Notes: Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Standard errors are clustered by sampling
strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. All regressions use sampling weights.
                                  BUSINESS STRATEGY                                         39




                                Table 11: Strategy and Operations


                                                        improving or enhancing
                     work proc.        value         labor       employee      perform.      employee
Dependent var.:      reorganiz.        chain         mgmt         involv.      measures        skills

Strategy priority:
 I(novelty)           0.1445***       0.025       0.1766***      0.0925**       -0.0362        0.0406
                       (0.0405)      (0.0415)      (0.0416)      (0.0453)      (0.0421)       (0.0441)
 I(low-cost)          0.1262***     0.1474***       0.0224        0.0421       0.2225***     0.1394***
                       (0.0341)      (0.0363)      (0.0434)      (0.0358)       (0.0343)      (0.0363)
 I(high-qual.)        -0.102***     0.3956***     0.1834***     0.3861***      0.3864***     0.4108***
                       (0.038)       (0.0395)      (0.0388)      (0.0393)       (0.0413)      (0.0415)
Firm characteristics:
 log(employ.)           0.0399        -0.0121     0.1222***     0.1155***      0.0727***     0.1002***
                       (0.0173)      (0.0167)       (0.02)       (0.0168)       (0.0177)      (0.0175)
 log(age)               -0.0165       -0.0274       -0.0058       -0.0284      -0.0417**       0.0153
                       (0.0192)      (0.0199)      (0.0229)      (0.0191)       (0.0187)       (0.02)
 I(multi-unit)          0.1006        0.0167        -0.0506       0.0068        0.0594         0.0826
                       (0.0802)      (0.0589)      (0.0769)      (0.0497)      (0.0605)       (0.0807)
 I(exporter)            0.0281        0.0799        -0.0532       -0.0256       0.0532         0.0085
                       (0.0478)      (0.0476)      (0.0531)      (0.0508)      (0.0542)       (0.0483)
Wald Tests
 novel = l-cost          0.11           4.5           6.34          0.76         21.78            2.89
 novel = h-qual         17.88          35.82          0.01         21.57         43.28           38.98
 l-cost = h-qual        17.65          17.55          5.59         37.86         8.28            21.29
 joint all zero         10.62          50.82          18.2         37.16         49.84           42.12
Industry FE              YES            YES           YES           YES           YES             YES
N                       22285          22285         22285         22285         22285           22285

Notes: Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Standard errors are clustered by sampling
strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. All regressions use sampling weights.
                               Table 12: Strategy and Organizational Change




                                                                                                                        40
                           functional                                                                      inter-firm
Type of org. change:      integration     delayer     downsize     re-engin.     job rot.     outsource      R&D

Strategy priority:
 I(novelty)                0.198***        0.040        0.046      0.234***     0.179***      0.294***      0.407***
                            (0.065)       (0.091)      (0.068)      (0.065)      (0.065)       (0.077)       (0.072)
 I(low-cost)                 -0.018      0.227***     0.225***      0.105*        0.075         0.085        -0.117*
                            (0.055)       (0.083)      (0.061)      (0.054)      (0.053)       (0.068)       (0.062)




                                                                                                                        YANG, KUENG AND HONG
 I(high-qual.)              0.122**        0.018        -0.068     0.195***      0.149**       0.149**       0.150**
                            (0.060)       (0.088)      (0.066)      (0.067)      (0.064)       (0.069)       (0.071)
Firm characteristics:
 log(employ.)              -0.081***       0.023        -0.033     -0.064**     -0.115***       -0.051     -0.125***
                            (0.030)       (0.038)      (0.032)      (0.031)      (0.034)       (0.036)      (0.037)
 log(age)                   0.322**      0.261***      0.142*        0.103        0.097         -0.007        0.169
                            (0.138)       (0.098)      (0.073)      (0.080)      (0.145)       (0.087)       (0.105)
 I(multi-unit)             0.343***      0.243***     0.127***     0.330***     0.313***      0.173***      0.328***
                            (0.026)       (0.032)      (0.030)      (0.026)      (0.024)       (0.027)       (0.028)
 I(exporter)               0.180***        0.059       0.161**     0.237***      0.180**      0.358***      0.467***
                            (0.066)       (0.100)      (0.075)      (0.071)      (0.074)       (0.079)       (0.082)
Wald tests:
 novel = l-cost               5.67          1.86          3.6         2.13         1.38          3.67         25.97
 novel = h-qual               0.64          0.04         1.33         0.17         0.1           1.97         6.07
 l-cost = h-qual              2.89          2.54         9.52         0.92         0.79          0.36         6.61
 joint all zero               5.37           3.1          4.9         10.1         6.16          8.23         12.54
Industry FE                   YES           YES          YES         YES           YES          YES           YES
N                            22,023        21,261       21,868      22,088        22,042       21,820        21,809
Notes: Industry fixed effects are at the 4-digit NAICS level. Standard errors are clustered by sampling strata, which
are broad industry-size-region categories. All regressions use sampling weights.
