NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

KNOWLEDGE, HUMAN CAPITAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM THE BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION, 1750-1930
B. Zorina Khan
Working Paper 20853
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20853
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015

I am grateful for comments and discussions with Robert Allen, Stanley Engerman, Robert Fox, Claudia
Goldin, Larry Katz, Naomi Lamoreaux, Frank Lewis, Christine MacLeod, David Mitch, Joel Mokyr,
Tom Nicholas, Alessandro Nuvolari, and participants in seminars at the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the University of California at Berkeley, and the Economic History Association Meetings.
This project was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by B. Zorina Khan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Knowledge, Human Capital and Economic Development: Evidence from the British Industrial
Revolution, 1750-1930
B. Zorina Khan
NBER Working Paper No. 20853
January 2015
JEL No. J24,N13,O14,O3,O31,O34
ABSTRACT
Endogenous growth models raise fundamental questions about the nature of human creativity, and
the sorts of resources, skills, and knowledge inputs that shift the frontier of technology and production
possibilities. Many argue that the nature of early British industrialization supports the thesis that economic
advances depend on specialized scientific training or the acquisition of costly human capital. This
paper examines the contributions of different types of knowledge to British industrialization, by assessing
the backgrounds, education and inventive activity of the major contributors to technological advances
in Britain during the crucial period between 1750 and 1930. The results indicate that scientists, engineers
or technicians were not well-represented among the British great inventors until very late in the nineteenth
century. Instead, important discoveries and British industrial advances were achieved by individuals
who exercised commonplace skills and entrepreneurial abilities to resolve perceived industrial problems.
For developing countries today, the implications are that costly investments in specialized human
capital resources might be less important than incentives for creativity, flexibility, and the ability to
make incremental adjustments that can transform existing technologies into inventions that are appropriate
for prevailing domestic conditions.
B. Zorina Khan
9700 College Station
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011
and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Endogenous growth models are based on the premise that knowledge and ideas comprise a
significant source of economic progress. These models raise fundamental questions about the
nature of human creativity, what sorts of resources, skills, and other personal characteristics are
conducive to extraordinary achievements, and how those factors vary over time and with the field
of endeavour. They imply that our understanding of early economic progress requires an
assessment of the types of knowledge inputs which were in elastic supply, and were responsive to
economic incentives. Walt Rostow, for instance, contended that one of the preconditions for
economic and social advance is additions to scientific knowledge and technical applications, inputs
which typically are scarce in many developing countries.1 Nathan Rosenberg similarly highlights
the determining role of science and the growth of specialized knowledge.2 Others regard scientists
as disinterested individuals who are motivated by intangible rewards such as enhanced reputations
and honour, the desire to benefit mankind, or the pursuit of timeless truths, rather than material
benefits. If highly specialized skills and scientific knowledge are prerequisites for generating
productivity gains, but such inputs are in scarce or inelastic supply, this has important implications
for development policy measures. These issues bear on the general question of whether creativity
is induced by expansions in market demand, or depends on the acquisition of costly human capital
that are largely unresponsive to perceived need.
These concerns have been widely debated, especially in the context of industrialization in
Britain and explanations for its subsequent loss of competitiveness. Still, little consensus has
emerged from the plethora of contributions to this topic, in part because of a lack of systematic
evidence. According to some, the theoretical elitist biases of the European scientific establishment
1

W.W. Rostow, The Stages of Economic Growth, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1960.
Rosenberg emphasizes that if we wish to understand economic progress "we must pay close attention to a special
supply side variable: the growing stock of useful knowledge," and further states that "a large part of the economic
history of the past 200 years" was due to science and specialized knowledge. Nathan Rosenberg, "Science, Invention
and Economic Growth," Economic Journal, vol. 84 (333) 1974: 90-108 (p. 98, 104).

2

3

help to explain why Britain and not (say) France, was the first industrial nation. They point to
anecdotal examples of formal and informal links between scientific discoveries and technological
change, and conclude that Britain's industrial lead depended on its scientific standing.3 A classic
but contested example of such ties is the influence of scientist Joseph Black on James Watt's
improvement on the steam engine.4 Similarly, John Roebuck and Charles Tennant applied
chemical knowledge to produce sulphuric acid through a lead-chamber process that increased
output and reduced prices, and improved inputs into textile bleaching.5 The eighteenth-century
Lunar Society is consistently cited as proof-by-association of the relationship between natural
philosophy and practical discoveries that increased industrial productivity.6 Related institutions in
the nineteenth century included the Surrey and London Institutions, as well as the "X-Club," a
small number of influential scientists who attended social and professional monthly dinners.7
More general enthusiasm for scientific studies was manifested in the rapid growth of less-eminent
scientific and natural philosophy societies, whose number increased from fewer than fifty at the
end of the eighteenth century, to over 1000 by the 1880s.8 Extreme versions of the "science

3

“Contrary to long accepted ideas, the Industrial Revolution was not simply a product of illiterate practical craftsmen,
devoid of scientific training. In the development of steam power, in the growth of the chemical industry, and in various
other industries, scientists made important contributions and industrialists with scientifically trained minds also
utilised applied science in their manufacturing processes.” A.E Musson and E. Robinson, Science and Technology in
the Industrial Revolution, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1969.
4
See Robinson, Eric, and Douglas McKie (eds.), Partners in Science: the letters of James Watt & Joseph Black,
Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1970.
5
See A. Clow and N. Clow, 1958.
6
This Society consisted of monthly dinners in the Midlands that included Erasmus Darwin, Matthew Boulton, Josiah
Wedgwood, James Keir, Joseph Priestley, and James Watt, among others. See Robert Schofield, The Lunar Society
Of Birmingham: A Social History of Provincial Science and Industry, Oxford: Clarendon, 1963.
7
The members included Sir Joseph Hooker, Thomas Huxley, Sir Edward Frankland, John Tyndall, Herbert Spencer,
and Thomas Hirst, among others, and three of them would become Presidents of the Royal Society. "Anti-societies"
such as the Red Lions rebelled against the "donnishness" of the British scientific establishment, and sought members
among the "dregs of scientific society." Roy M. MacLeod, "The X-Club a Social Network of Science in Late-Victorian
England," Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 24, No. 2. (Apr., 1970), pp. 305-322.
8
Ian Inkster, Science and Technology in History: An Approach to Industrial Development. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press, 1991.

4

matters" thesis go so far as to propose that "virtually all" inventors in Britain during the industrial
revolution were influenced by scientific advances.9
David Landes is the most prominent proponent of the opposing thesis that science did not
influence early British advances in technology, and researchers in this tradition concur that the
industrial revolution "owed virtually nothing to science."10 British innovations toward the end of
the eighteenth century and at the start of the nineteenth century were largely produced by artisans
with little formal education, who benefited from apprenticeships and on-the-job learning.
Significant problems such as the mechanical measurement of longitude at sea were resolved by
relatively uneducated artisans, rather than through the application of abstract or formal scientific
observation. A number of other studies highlight the reciprocal nature of interactions between
industry and academic science.11 For instance, Neil McKendrick's guarded conclusion was that
science "played a necessary but not sufficient role."12 Many such researchers emphasize that until
the middle of the nineteenth century even the frontier of science and engineering was closer to
organized intuition. More formal scientific endeavours of the day owed to skittish dons or
aristocratic amateurs, whose efforts were directed to impractical pursuits and general principles in
astronomy, magnetism, mathematics, botany and chemistry, rather than to useful knowledge that

9

Clifford Bekar and Richard Lipsey, “Science Institutions and the Industrial Revolution,” Journal of European
Economic History, 33 (3) Winter 2004, 709-753.
10
See A.R and M.B Hall, A Brief History of Science, Signet Library Books, 1964, p. 219: “The beginnings of modern
technology in the so-called Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth and early nineteenth century owed virtually nothing
to science, and everything to the fruition of the tradition of craft invention.”
11
Donald Cardwell, The Development of Science and Technology in Britain, p. 483, refers to "the two-way
relationship between science and technology," but implies that science benefited more from prior flows of technical
insights. Paul Elliot, "The Birth of Public Science in the English Provinces: Natural Philosophy in Derby, c. 16901760," Annals of Science, Vol. 57 Issue 1, 2000: 61-100, considers such Derby luminaries as John Whitehurst FRS,
Thomas Simpson FRS and Benjamin Parker. He concluded that their experience pointed to the possibility that
technology likely influenced scientific discovery and education as much as the reverse.
12
“The major pull came from the demand side of the economy rather than from the push of scientifically induced
advance on the supply side. Indeed, in the hierarchy of causal significance, science would not rank very high, but that
does not mean that it would not rank at all as a dependent variable, the latent potential of which was released by more
commanding variable, it played a necessary but not sufficient role in easing the path of industrial success and
economic progress.” N. McKendrick, "The Role of Science in the Industrial Revolution," p. 319.

5

could enhance technological productivity.13 Joel Mokyr, for instance, highlights the impact of the
rational scientific revolution in the seventeenth century, but his emphasis is on the general
influence of the intellectual and methodological developments of Bacon, Hooke and Newton,
rather than on specific applications of their scientific results to industry.14 Such proposals are
largely untestable, but a recent study of French industrialization uses the proxy of book
subscriptions to measure “upper tail knowledge,” and concludes that their results indicate that
human capital and scientific education were critical for growth during industrialization.15 As these
diverse propositions suggest, significant aspects of the relationship between knowledge, science
and technology in the industrial revolution still remain unresolved.
This paper focuses on the role of different types of knowledge in British industrialization,
and offers a systematic estimation that defines scientific inputs specifically in terms of individuals
with demonstrable scientific credentials. Clearly this approach has its drawbacks, but it also
allows us to present empirical patterns, which can be compared to the more detailed and anecdotal
historical accounts. The analysis is based on a sample of "great inventors" who were included in
biographical dictionaries because of their contributions to technological progress. I traced the
inventors who received formal training in science and engineering, as well as wider dimensions of
achievement such as membership in the Royal Society, scientific eminence, publications, and the
receipt of prizes and nonmonetary rewards. The variables from the biographical entries were
further supplemented with information from patent records on the numbers of patents filed over
13

According to William Ashworth, An Economic History of England, 1870-1939, 1960, p. 27, "heroic inventions"
were predominantly made by craftsmen, and the alleged scientists were "enthusiastic amateurs with, at best, a very
modest knowledge of scientific theory."
14
Joel Mokyr, The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2002, argues that the Industrial Revolution was due to an "Industrial Enlightenment." According to
this perspective, those who focus simply on pure scientific discoveries miss much of the point, since valuable
knowledge was drawn from a combination of tatonnement and conscious insight. However, Mokyr would likely agree
that ultimately developments in science and engineering on the European continent led to advances in chemicals, steel,
electricity, whereas the scientific and technical backwardness of British institutions and education contributed to its
relative decline.
15
Squicciarini, Mara P. and Nico Voigtländer, “Human capital and industrialization : evidence from the age of
enlightenment,” NBER working paper series No. 20219, 2014.

6

the individual's lifetime, the length of the inventor's patenting career, the industry in which he was
active, and the degree of specialization at invention.16 This approach allows us to examine the
backgrounds, education and inventive activity of the major contributors to technological advances
in Britain during the crucial period between 1750 and 1930, and to determine the extent to which
such advances owed to specialized human capital and knowledge. More generally, the results have
the potential to enhance our understanding of the determinants of shifts in the frontiers of
technology during early economic development.

II.THE GREAT INVENTORS SAMPLE
The sample of "great inventors" was compiled from biographical dictionaries, including the 2004
Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (DNB), and the Biographical Dictionary of the History
of Technology (BD), among others.17 The objective was to compile a sample of individuals who
had made significant contributions to technological products and productivity. This accorded
more with the intent of the BD, whose contributing authors were specialists in the particular
technological field that they examined. The DNB's objective was somewhat different, for its
editors intended to incorporate "not just the great and good, but people who have left a mark for
any reason, good, bad, or bizarre."18 The volume employed inconsistent terminology in the
occupational titles of its biographies, and the mention of inventors or inventions either in the title
or text did not necessarily imply that the person in question had made a significant contribution to

16

The discussion of broad scientific culture is informative and yields insights into the role of social capital in
economic development. However, I chose to focus here on the evolution of contributions to useful knowledge, which
are defined as additions to the social information set that have the potential to directly expand the production
possibility frontier. Patent counts are used as a proxy for advances in such knowledge. Patents have well-known
flaws that suggest that results should be interpreted with a sensitivity to their drawbacks, but they do offer the
opportunity to adopt a more systematic approach to the relationship between science and technology in British
economic growth.
17
See the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online, September 2004), and Lance Day and Ian McNeil,
Biographical Dictionary of the History of Technology, New York: Routledge, 1996.
18
This statement is included in the description of the online subscription-restricted database.

7

the course of technical change.19 A number of inventors are variously described as pioneers,
developers, promoters or designers, and Edward Sonsadt is omitted altogether although elsewhere
he is regarded as an "inventive genius."20 I therefore supplemented these two volumes with other
biographical compilations, and numerous books that were based on the life of a specific inventor.21
Although a few of the entries in any such sample would undoubtedly be debatable, this
triangulation of sources minimizes the possibility of egregious error.22
One way to determine the extent of systematic sample bias is to estimate the probability
that an inventor drawn from a particular biographical source (e.g. the DNB) was selected on
different criteria relative to inventors from other sources. I computed a simple logistic regression
model where the dependent variable was the probability that an inventor from our sample was
included in the DNB, and the independent variables included all characteristics that we intended to
investigate in this study, such as birth cohort, occupation, education, science background, patenting
and publications records, and so on. The response function Y| Xi (Xi= X1, X2, ... Xn) is assumed to
have the form E(Y|Xi) = exp(ß0 + ß1x + ...) / (1 + exp( ß0 + ß1x + ...)), where ßi are regression
coefficients that represent the intercept and slopes with respect to the particular independent
variable. The resulting function is linear in the log of the odds, loge(p / 1 - p). Maximum
likelihood methods were used to estimate the parameters. We can reject the hypothesis of bias for

19

For instance, their listings included Walter Wingfield ("inventor of lawn tennis"); Rowland Emett (cartoonist and
"inventor of whimsical creations"); as well as the inventors of Plasticine, Pimm's cocktail, self-rising flour and
Meccano play sets. At the same time, Henry Bessemer is described as a steel manufacturer, Henry Fourdrinier as a
paper manufacturer, and Lord Kelvin as a mathematician and physicist. A large fraction of the technological inventors
are featured in the DNB as engineers even though the majority had no formal training.
20
Ian McNeil (ed), Encyclopaedia of the History of Technology, London: Routledge, 1990, p. 113.
21
These include the Encyclopaedia Britannica; David Abbott (ed), Biographical Dictionary of Scientists: Engineers
and Inventors, London: Blond Educational, 1985; Dictionnaire des Inventeurs et Inventions, Larousse: Paris, 1996;
and other compilations. Approximately 15 percent of the sample from these sources were missing altogether from the
DNB.
22
The entries from the DNB were significantly more likely to have earned prizes, and their residence at time of
invention was more likely to have been in London and outside England. However, since this finding is not
inconsistent with the secondary literature, the overall results from these regressions bolster one's confidence in the
representativeness of the great inventors' sample.

8

almost all variables of interest, including time of first invention, educational status, science
background, and occupation.
The resulting British great inventors sample is comparable to the data set Kenneth Sokoloff
and I compiled of important inventors and their patenting activity in the United States during the
same period.23 The current British sample is based on 434 men and one woman who made
significant contributions to technological products and productivity, and who produced at least one
invention between 1790 and 1930. These British inventors include such well-known icons as Sir
Humphry Davy, Sherard Osborn Cowper-Coles, John Dunlop, Charles Macintosh, Charles
Babbage, Edmund Cartwright, Lord Kelvin, Guglielmo Marconi and George Stephenson. The
lone woman inventor, Henrietta Vansittart (1833-1883), is referenced in the DNB as an engineer
whose educational background is unknown.24 She improved upon her father's screw propeller
invention, for which she obtained two British patents and awards from a number of countries.
As Table 1 shows, the majority of great inventors were born in the South of England, and
London stands out especially as the birthplace of a fairly constant share of the scientist inventors
who were born in the nineteenth century. The birth cohort before 1780 contributed to the onset of
industrialization, and it is striking that almost a quarter of the great inventors during this critical
23

See B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and Technological Innovation During Early Economic
Growth: Evidence from the Great Inventors of the United States, 1790-1930,” in Institutions and Economic Growth,
(eds) Theo Eicher and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa, MIT Press (forthcoming 2005); B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L.
Sokoloff, “Institutions and Democratic Invention in 19 th Century America,” American Economic Review, vol. 94
(May, Pap. And Proc.) 2004: 395-401; B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Lives of Invention: Patenting and
Productivity among Great Inventors in the United States, 1790-1930,” Les Archives D’Invention (ed) Liliane HilairePerez (2005); B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "`Schemes of Practical Utility': Entrepreneurship and
Innovation among `Great Inventors' During Early American Industrialization, 1790-1865," Journal of Economic
History, vol. 53 (2) 1993: 289-307. Other economic historians have used biographical information to explore the
patterns and sources of important and exceptional innovation. For example, in his studies of painters, novelists and
Nobel prize winners in economics, David Galenson has proposed a life cycle approach to creativity, and discerns two
different types of innovators : "conceptual artists" or theorists who primarily make their most significant discoveries
early in their careers ; whereas "experimental artists" or empiricists are those whose "genius" emerges later in the lifecycle after a long gestation period during which they accumulate the skills and knowledge to realize better and better
contributions or creations.
24
A potential second candidate is Eleanor Coade (1733-1821), who is listed as the owner of an innovative stonemaking factory. However, her status as an inventor is completely speculative: there is no evidence that she was
responsible for the innovations her factory produced, and they might well have been the product of her employees.

9

period originated from Scotland and other locations outside of England. For instance, Sir Isaac
Holden, a prominent contributor to wool-combing technology, was born in 1807 near Glasgow,
Scotland. Other noted inventors who were born in other areas outside England include Lord
Kelvin (Ireland), Richard Roberts (Wales), and Warren de la Rue (Guernsey). The famous Marc
Isambard Brunel was born in Normandy, France, and such foreign-born inventors increased among
the birth cohorts after 1820, including Gugliemo Marconi, Gisbert Johann Kapp, and Sir John
Gustav Jarmay. It is noticeable that inventors who were born outside of England tended to be
disproportionately trained in science, as indicated by the fraction of scientists (approximately 37
percent) relative to nonscientists (26 percent.)
Table 2 presents the distribution of inventors in terms of their science background and
indicates the changes over the course of industrialization. There is some ambiguity about what a
"scientist" connotes, so the table examines three alternative measures of scientific orientation:
formal education; eminence as gauged by listing in biographical dictionaries of scientists; and
membership in the Royal Society. Approximately 20 percent of the great inventors were educated
at the post-secondary level in the sciences, mathematics or medicine. Similarly, 16.6 percent could
be considered as eminent scientists. A significant number (20.7 percent of all inventors) were
Fellows of the Royal Society. The data suggest that a change in the nature of important
technological innovations occurred after 1870, since scientists accounted for a significantly higher
proportion of inventors after this period. For instance, the percentage of inventors with formal
scientific training increased from 20 percent in 1852-1870 to 33.3 percent between 1871-1890.
These patterns are even more marked for great inventors with formal education in engineering,
who comprised 11.1 percent of all inventors. Inventors with formal engineering qualifications
increased from a mere 1 percent before 1820, to 25.4 percent of all great inventors by 1871-1890.
Since part of our concern is with the contribution of this sort of specialized knowledge to
10

innovation, the following section further explores the extent of formal training among the great
inventors, and the role of education in science and engineering over the course of industrialization.

III. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE GREAT INVENTORS
Economic studies have shown the importance of appropriate institutions in promoting selfsustaining growth, and imply that the rate and direction of useful knowledge could be hampered, if
not retarded, by flaws and inefficiencies in key institutions. As Sir Henry Sumner Maine
suggests, Britain long remained an oligarchic society that was convinced that merit was causally
related to inherited social class.25 The United States arguably was able to assume economic
leadership in part because institutions such as its educational and political systems offered
inducements to all classes of society to contribute to the growth process, and allocated rewards that
were commensurate with an individual's productivity rather than his social provenance. The
British educational system, in particular, failed to match up to institutes of higher learning in
Germany and the United States and has been portrayed as a hindrance to economic advancement. 26
However, the costs of such policies are a function of the degree to which productive economic
activities depended on the acquisition of these sorts of human capital.
Figure 1 examines the distributions of great inventors by birth cohort in terms of their
educational background. The great inventors were more educated than the general population, but
these data make it is clear that formal training was not a prerequisite for important invention in the

25

According to Maine, “All that has made England famous, and all that has made England wealthy, has been the work
of minorities, sometimes very small ones. It seems to me quite certain that, if for four centuries there had been a very
widely extended franchise ... the threshing machine, the power loom, the spinning jenny, and possibly the steamengine, would have been prohibited,” Sir Henry Maine, Popular Government: Four Essays, London: J. Murray, 1886,
p. 98.
26
David Landes (1969) supports this position. The 1870 Elementary Education Act extended state support for
education if private school funds were insufficient. Compulsory education was introduced in 1880 and limited free
public education was made available in 1891. For an excellent study of the role of the state in promoting literacy, see
David Mitch, The Rise of Popular Literacy in Victorian England: The Influence of Private Choice and Public Policy,
Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia Press, 1992.

11

early period of industrialization. The majority of great inventors had no formal education beyond
the primary or secondary school levels, even as late as the 1821-1845 birth cohort. Thus, these
patterns refute the claim that "virtually all of the inventors" had exposure to scientific training, and
is more consistent with the notion that the industrial revolution drew on traditional institutions that
enhanced individual abilities such as apprenticeships and on the job training.27 The route of
apprenticeship was taken by an impressive roster of great inventors, including some who came
from quite privileged backgrounds. Apprenticeship was a flexible source of human capital
acquisition, which did not preclude social mobility or further education. The skills that the
inventor obtained could be combined with night-school or attendance at lectures offered by
mechanics' institutes, or even a university degree later in life. Sir Joseph Wilson Swan was
apprenticed at 14 to a pharmacy store, but attended lectures at the Athenaeum in Sunderland that
helped him to become a prominent chemist and electrical inventor. Both the Fairbairn brothers
(Sir Peter Fairbairn (1799-1861) and Sir William Fairbairn (1789-1874)) were apprenticed as
millwrights in a colliery at an early age, but were able to achieve distinction in a number of arenas.
William Fairbairn, in particular, although he was self-taught, was appointed a member of the
Academy of Science in France, a Fellow of the Royal Society, and President of the British
Association. The military academies also allowed inventors to combine apprenticeships with more
formal but somewhat diffuse training.
A fairly constant fraction of the great inventors obtained college degrees in general subjects
such as divinity or the arts, which were unlikely to have contributed to their technological
productivity. Over time, the importance of further education in science steadily increased.
Engineering proficiency was more discontinuous, and was associated with a jump in the technical
orientation of 1821-1845 birth cohort; and 60 percent of all 27 inventors who received further
27

According to Cronin (2001), p. 241, "throughout much of the 19th-century the craft-apprenticeship mode of training
was the only form of technical education."

12

education in engineering first produced inventions between 1871 and 1890. This is consistent with
the earlier finding that scientific and technical invention became more prevalent after 1870. By the
beginning of the twentieth century, a science or technical educational background was typical of
the majority of great inventors and many even received advanced doctoral degrees in science.
However, it is not clear whether university attendance or degrees in science and engineering
prevailed among inventors because such qualifications enhanced their skill at invention, or because
a college degree was correlated with other arbitrary factors that gave these individuals preferment.
Donald Cardwell claimed that there were few institutional obstacles to innovation in
England, for it was "a remarkably open society," and many of the inventive "heroes" in both
science and technology were from humble origins.28 Our data suggest otherwise. Table 3 shows
that the common perception that the heroes of the British industrial revolution were primarily from
modest backgrounds is somewhat overstated. Instead, an examination of the family backgrounds
of the great inventors is more consistent with the notion that in the area of technological
achievement elites were over-represented relative to the population. A third of the inventors did
indeed come from farming, low-skilled or undistinguished (likely most of the unknown category)
backgrounds. However, the majority of the great inventors were born to families headed by skilled
artisans, manufacturers, white collar workers, or well-off families in the elite and professional
classes. A striking feature of the table is that the inventors with science training were twice as
likely to belong to these elite and professional families, and this pattern is invariant over the entire
period.29

28

Cardwell, The Development of Science and Technology in Nineteenth-Century Britain, Ashgate: Variorum, 2003.
These specific claims are made in essays IV, p. 474; and VII, pp. 40-41.
29
Employers were averse to hiring college-educated workers. As the Times opined in 1897, "technical education is
not needed for the masses of people. Indeed they are better without it ... [it] only teaches the workman to think that he
is as good as his master" (cited in Cronin, p. 222). Another perspective on this finding is to compare the social
backgrounds of great inventors who attended college, across the two leading industrial nations of Britain and America.
If it were true that elites prevailed because their privileged background and subsequent advantages in obtaining a
college degree gave them an objective edge in technological creativity, we might expect little difference across

13

An increasing fraction of inventors were educated at elite schools such as Oxford or
Cambridge (Table 4), institutions which were unlikely to offer much in the way of knowledge or
skills that would add to either scientific or technological prowess. Advancement at these
institutions primarily depended on excellence in liberal classical subjects, and the engineer John
Perry even declared that "Oxford fears and hates natural science."30 Cambridge had offered the
Natural Science Tripos since 1848, but for much of the nineteenth century the impact was
nominal.31 The anti-pragmatism of Oxbridge was reflected even in the "red-brick" institutions that
were established toward the end of the nineteenth century to remedy the lapses in the scientific and
technical curricula of the older schools.32 It is not surprising that serious British students of
science and technology chose to pursue graduate studies in the German academies which were
acknowledged as the world leaders in higher education in such fields as chemistry, physics and
countries. In the period before 1820 college attendees in both countries predominantly belonged to elite families.
However, after 1820 the share of elites shrinks noticeably in the United States, and the vast majority of graduates come
from nonelite backgrounds, whereas the pattern in Britain remains for the most part unchanged. The United States had
sent in place policies that facilitated human capital acquisition among the working class and led to social mobility
through educational institutions, such as the Land Grant Act that subsidized universities. In Britain, and in England in
particular, until the middle of the nineteenth century access to higher education was primarily available to the wealthy
and those who adhered to the religious standards of the Establishment. Even though Dissenters were allowed to read
for Oxbridge degrees after the 1850s, until 1873 they were precluded from holding fellowships at Cambridge.
30
See Janet Howarth, "Science Education in Late-Victorian Oxford: A Curious Case of Failure?" The English
Historical Review, Vol. 102, No. 403. (Apr., 1987), pp. 334-371. R. H. Tawney (Equality, 1931) wryly commented
that the English "frisk into polite obsolescence on the playing fields of Eton." Along the same lines, Margaret Gowing
(1978, p. 9) characterized English efforts at reforming its educational institutions at the end of the 19 th century as "too
little and too late." She attributes this to inadequate funding, the influence of social class and the Church, and poor
administration.
31
For an interesting analysis, see Roy Macleod and Russell Moseley, "The 'Naturals' and Victorian Cambridge:
Reflections on the Anatomy of an Elite, 1851-1914," Oxford Review of Education, vol. 6 (2) 1980: 177-195. As late as
1880 only 4 percent of Cambridge undergraduates read for the NSTs and most were destined for occupations such as
the clergy and medicine. The method of teaching eschewed practical laboratory work; and there was a general disdain
among the Dons for the notion that science should be directed toward professional training; so it is not surprising that
only 4 percent of the NST graduates entered industry. Students who did take the NSTs tended to perform poorly
because of improper preparation and indifferent teaching, especially in colleges other than Trinity, Caius and St.
John's. Chairs in Engineering were created in Cambridge in 1875 and in Oxford in 1907, whereas MIT alone had
seven engineering professors in 1891.
32
Sarah V. Barnes, "England's Civic Universities and the Triumph of the Oxbridge Ideal," History of Education
Quarterly, Vol. 36, No. 3. (Autumn, 1996), pp. 271-305, finds a tendency for the red-brick universities to be regarded
as second-rate, and for the classical Oxbridge approach to be regarded as a superior model in a "triumph of tradition."
Part of the problem was financial, since most professors had to pay for their research expenditures out of their meagre
salaries. Even at the Scottish universities, which were widely regarded as leaders in science education in Britain, few
nonmedical students had the opportunity to participate in laboratories or research. See Report of the Royal
Commissioners appointed to enquire into the Universities of Scotland: Returns and Documents, Parliamentary Papers
xxxv (1878): 336-340.

14

engineering. However, it might be expected that opportunities for a foreign education were also
correlated with a secure social and financial background.
Table 4 shows that the rather privileged background of many of the British great inventors
is reflected in other dimensions of elite standing. Twenty nine percent of the inventors who were
active before 1820 had families who were connected to those in power or who were otherwise
distinguished. An interesting facet of the relationship between privilege, science, and
technological achievement in Britain is reflected in the ninety great inventors who were also
appointed as Fellows the Royal Society. The Royal Society was founded in 1660 as an "invisible
college" of natural philosophers who included Isaac Newton, Christopher Wren, Robert Hooke and
Robert Boyle. Fellows of the Society were elected and many of the members consisted of
individuals who were not professional scientists but who were wealthy or well-connected.33
Although the Royal Society was associated with the foremost advances in science, many of its
projects were absurd and impractical.34 The Royal Society was widely criticized for its elitist and
unmeritocratic policies.35 Great inventors Charles Babbage, William Sturgeon and William
Robert Grove were representative of those who publicly assailed the nepotism and corruption of
scientific institutions in the nineteenth century, and Babbage attributed a large part of the failure of
British science to the Royal Society.36 The Society long retained the character of a gentleman's
33

Sir Joseph Banks, the president during the critical years between 1778 and 1820, supported the election of wealthy
patrons who might be persuaded to finance research efforts. See Marie Boas Hall, All Scientists Now: The Royal
Society in the nineteenth century, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984; and Michael Hunter, The Royal
Society and its Fellows, 1669-1700, the morphology of an early scientific institution, Oxford: British Society for the
History of Science, 1994.
34
In Gulliver's Travels, Jonathan Swift satirized the Royal Society and some of its fantastical endeavours, as the
"Grand Academy of Projectors" in the kingdom of Laputa.
Charles Babbage, Reflections on the Decline of Science in England, and on Some of Its Causes, London : B.
Fellowes, 1830. Babbage noted that "those who are ambitious of scientific distinction, may, according to their fancy,
render their name a kind of comet, carrying with it a tail of upwards of forty letters, at the average cost of 10₤. 9s. 9d.
per letter. It should be observed, that all members contribute equally, and that the sum now required is fifty pounds ...
The amount of this subscription is so large, that it is calculated to prevent many men of real science from entering the
Society, and is a very severe tax on those who do so."
36
Babbage regretted that "in England, particularly with respect to the more difficult and abstract sciences, we are
much below other nations, not merely of equal rank, but below several even of inferior power. That a country,
35

15

club and, despite a series of reforms, did not become a genuine professional scientific organization
until after the 1870s. Even in 1860 more than 66 percent of its membership consisted of
nonscientists and medical practitioners, whose inclusion was not altogether merited on the basis of
their scientific contributions.37 In short, scarce human capital was not a significant factor in
important inventive activity during the period of early industrialization. Moreover, it is also
possible that the prevalence of professional backgrounds at the start of the twentieth century might
owe to the role of elites in British society, rather than to the contributions that specialized
knowledge made to technological innovation.

IV. PATENTS, PRODUCTIVITY AND MARKET INCENTIVES
Rostow had proposed the hypothesis that prospects for growth depended on specialized knowledge
inputs that were inelastic and in scarce supply. The data set of great inventors instead suggests that
science was only weakly related to technology in early industrialization. A more speculative
conclusion is that an elite background might have played some role in promoting distinction
among scientist-inventors in British society, with the possibility that such training did not
necessarily increase productivity at invention relative to other great inventors. Some researchers
further suggest that, especially during the early stages of industrialization, scientists were not
sensitive to market factors, which would imply that they would tend to respond inelastically to
economic conditions. This section therefore uses patent records through 1890 to compare

eminently distinguished for its mechanical and manufacturing ingenuity, should be indifferent to the progress of
inquiries which form the highest departments of that knowledge on whose more elementary truths its wealth and rank
depend, is a fact which is well deserving the attention of those who shall inquire into the causes that influence the
progress of nations." In 1831 disillusioned scientists founded the British Association for the Advancement of Science
as a more open alternative to the Royal Society.
37
According to Dorothy Stimson, Scientists and Amateurs: A History of the Royal Society, New York: H. Schuman,
1948, p. 236: "The change came by evolution rather than by revolution and took a good many years to become fully
effective. As late as 1860 there were 330 Fellows who were scientists and 300 who were not. Also, in 1860, 117 of
that group of 330 scientist Fellows were physicians and surgeons, an overwhelming proportion of medical men which
had been characteristic of the Society's membership from the first."

16

productivity at invention among scientists and nonscientists, and the extent to which scientist
inventors were responsive to market incentives.
Patent records have well-known flaws as a gauge of invention, but they have still proved to
be valuable in identifying the sources of variation over time and place in the rate, organization, and
direction of inventive activity.38 Table 5 shows that approximately 87 percent of the British
sample of great inventors were patentees. Charles Wheatstone reported that "some thought it not
quite consistent with the habits of a scientific man to be concerned in a patent," but it is noticeable
that the proportion of patentees is similar across all science classes, whether proxied by
educational background, scientific eminence, or membership in the premier Royal Society. 39 In
the case of the United States, where patent institutions were extremely favourable to inventors of
all classes, almost all (97 percent) great inventors chose to obtain patent protection for their
inventions. The British great inventors overall exhibit a somewhat lower propensity to patent, but
this seems more related to institutional factors that affected all inventors, rather than to scientific
disdain for material returns.
In particular, there is a marked increase in the propensity to patent after 1851. This period
stands out because in 1852 the British patent laws were reformed in the direction of the American
system in ways that increased access to patent institutions, and strengthened the security of
property rights in patents. Significant aspects of the institutional overhaul included lower patent
38

For a pioneering study see Jacob Schmookler, Invention and Economic Growth, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1966. Zvi Griliches, “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol. 28, No. 4 (December 1990) :1661–1707, discusses the costs and benefits of analyzing patents. The
major problems with patent statistics as a measure of inventive activity and technological change are that not all
inventions are patented or can be patented; the propensity to patent differs across time, industries and activities;
patents vary in terms of intrinsic and commercial value; patents might not be directly comparable across countries or
time because of differences in institutional features and enforcement; and patents are a better gauge of inputs than
productivity or output. Griliches concludes (p. 43) that “In spite of all the difficulties, patent statistics remain a unique
resource for the analysis of the process of technical change. Nothing else even comes close in the quantity of available
data, accessibility, and the potential industrial, organizational, and technological detail.” For an excellent example of
the way in which patent records can be adjusted to yield economically meaningful information, see Adam B. Jaffe and
Manuel Trajtenberg, Patents, Citations and Innovations: a Window on the Knowledge Economy, Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press (2002).
39
See William F. Cooke, The Electrical Telegraph: was it invented by Professor Wheatstone, p. 29 (II) London, 1857.

17

fees, the administration was rationalized, and measures were undertaken to enhance the provision
and dissemination of information. In 1883, further improvements in the rules and standards were
introduced and the fees fell again. The reforms provide a natural experiment to determine the
extent of supply elasticity of great inventions and their variation across knowledge inputs. If great
inventors in general, and scientists in particular, differed from ordinary patentees in terms of their
responsiveness or commercial orientation, then we would expect their patterns of patenting to be
largely unaffected by these institutional changes. Instead, Figure 3 supports the view that the great
inventors -- scientists and nonscientists alike -- responded to the decrease in monetary and
transactions costs (and potential rise in net expected returns) by increasing their investments in
patented invention.
The patent records also enable us to examine whether a science background increased
productivity at invention. Again, the patterns are consistent with the notion that at least until 1870
a background in science did not add a great deal to inventive productivity. If scientific knowledge
gave inventors a marked advantage, it might be expected that they would demonstrate greater
creativity at an earlier age than those without such human capital. Inventor scientists were
marginally younger than nonscientists, but both classes of inventors were primarily close to middle
age by the time they obtained their first invention (and note that this variable tracks inventions
rather than patents). Productivity in terms of average patents filed and career length are also
similar among all great inventors irrespective of their scientific orientation. Thus, the kind of
knowledge and ideas that produced significant technological contributions during British
industrialization seem to have been rather general and available to all creative individuals,
regardless of their scientific training.
Tables 7 and 8 show the relationship between inventive activity and different instruments for
specialized human capital. Table 7 examines variation in industrial specialization, or the fraction
18

of an inventor’s patents that were filed in a particular industry. The results show that
specialization was higher in the Northern counties such as Yorkshire, but this was largely because
of the concentration of industries. Technical education, or training in engineering and technology,
was associated with higher sectoral specialization. However, elite degrees from Oxford or
Cambridge, degrees in science, or publications of books and articles, all indicated lower tendencies
for specialization, and all of these variables added little to the overall explanatory power of the
model. These results are bolstered by the finding that such industries as agriculture and
construction were less likely to be specialized, whereas patents for textiles and the electrical
industries, as might be expected, went to inventors who were more specialized.
Total career patents comprise another measure of human capital in inventive activity, since
inventors with greater numbers of patents would be more likely to have accumulated larger stocks
of knowledge through learning by doing. Career patents were higher in the South of England,
where markets were more extensive. The results for the patentee’s science and technology
knowledge are consistent with those for industrial specialization. Elite education, science degrees,
or research and development did not lead to higher patenting over an inventor’s career. Career
patents were higher for inventors who had engineering degrees but, as the descriptive statistics
indicated, engineering qualifications were prevalent only later in the century.
The overall empirical findings together suggest that, by focusing their efforts in a particular
industry, relatively uneducated inventors were able to acquire sufficient knowledge that allowed
them to make valuable additions to the available technology set. After 1820, as the market
expanded and created incentives to move out of traditional industries such as textiles and engines,
both scientists and nonscientists responded by decreasing their specialization. The patent reforms
in 1852 encouraged the nonscience-oriented inventors to increase their investments in sectoral
specialization, but industrial specialization among the scientists lagged significantly. This is
19

consistent with the arguments of such scholars as Joel Mokyr, who argued that any comparative
advantage from familiarity with science was likely based on broad unfocused capabilities such as
rational methods of analysis that applied across all industries. The time path of specialization is
especially informative in terms of electrical and telecommunications technology, which required
more technical knowledge inputs than traditional areas such as textiles. Electrical innovation was
also heavily specialized across region, and two thirds of all related patented inventions were filed
by residents of London. The expansion in this industry after the 1870s was associated with a
greater marginal return for those with formal education, and this likely induced the substantive
specialization in this industry among scientist-inventors, as well as college-educated engineers.40
The experience of the British great inventors also shed light on the reward systems that are
frequently recommended as substitutes for patents.41 Prizes and medals, in particular, might be
more effective inducements than patents if scientists were motivated by the desire simply for the
recognition of their peers and not by financial incentives. Between1826 to 1914 the Royal Society,
for example, awarded 173 medals, 67 of which were given for work in mathematics, astronomy
and experimental physics, and only two to engineers.42 However, many were disillusioned with
this award system, attributing outcomes to arbitrary factors such as personal influence, the
persistence of one's recommenders, or the self-interest of the institution making the award. The
timing also seemed ineffective, since the majority of premia were made later in life to those who
had already attained eminence. The likelihood that an inventor had received prizes and medals
40

The Society of Telegraph Engineers (later the Institution of Electrical Engineers) was founded in London in 1871 by
eight men, and rapidly became one of the largest societies in Britain. Its membership rose from 352 in 1871 (8.5
percent of all enrollment in engineering institutions) to 2100 (14.0 percent) in 1890 and 4000 (17.2 percent) in 1910.
Even these professional institutions resisted formal education, and apprenticeships remained the favoured mode of
human capital acquisition among the engineering class examinations until the end of the 19 th century. See Buchanan,
1985.
41
See B. Zorina Khan, “Premium Inventions: Patents and Prizes as Incentive Mechanisms in Britain and the United
States, 1750-1930” in Dora L. Costa and Naomi R. Lamoreaux (eds), Understanding Long-Run Economic Growth:
Geography, Institutions, and the Knowledge Economy, NBER and University of Chicago (2011): 205-234.
42
Roy M. MacLeod, "Of Medals and Men: A Reward System in Victorian Science, 1826-1914,"
Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 26, No. 1. (Jun., 1971), pp. 81-105.

20

was higher for unspecialized scientific men, moreso for those who had gained recognition as
famous scientists or Fellows of the Royal Society, or who had influential connections. Prizes and
medals tended to be awarded to the same individuals who had already received patents and,
indeed, prizes were associated with higher numbers of patents. The incremental value of these
awards was therefore likely to be somewhat low – not because scientists were unresponsive to
incentives, but because their response was higher for financial motivations. It is not surprising that
by 1900 the Council of the Royal Society decided to change its emphasis from the allocation of
medals to the financing of research.43
V. CONCLUSIONS
The generation of new technological innovations is one of the most crucial processes of economic
growth. What was the role of science, specialized knowledge and knowledge-generating
institutions in the creation of important technological inventions during British industrialization?
The evidence from the backgrounds and patenting of the great inventors in Britain suggest that
such forms of human capital did not play a significant role in the generation of new inventive
activity. Indeed, British science entered its golden age long after the advent of industrialization
and, even as late as 1884, Francis Galton concluded that "an exhaustive list" of scientists in the
British Isles "would amount to 300, but not to more."44 Instead, during early industrialization the
evidence regarding technical knowledge of all kinds comported more with James Nasmyth's
definition of engineering as "common sense applied to the use of materials."45

43

The Council stated that its experience in the award of medals had revealed that adding to the number of such awards
would be "neither to the advantage of the Society nor in the interests of the advancement of Natural Knowledge."
Cited in Roy McLeod, 1971, p. 105.
44
See English Men of Science, London: Macmillan, 1874. Galton, p. 6, added that "Some of my readers may feel
surprise that so many as 300 persons are to be found in the United Kingdom who deserve the title of scientific men..."
According to William Ramsay, Presidential Address of the British Association for the Advancement of Science,
(Science, 34 (Sept) 1911: 289-304), "The middle of the nineteenth century will always be noted as the beginning of the
golden age of science."
45
James Naysmyth, Autobiography.

21

These patterns may have owed in part to the character of the British educational system
which largely restricted access to higher education to the privileged classes in the nineteenth
century.46 The evidence on educational institutions is particularly striking when one contrasts the
British experience to the United States. College graduates from elite universities, especially those
in science and technical fields, were generally better represented among great inventors in Britain
than in the U.S. There were stark differences in the distribution of education attainments, as well
as in the class backgrounds of those who were able to go to college, between the two countries.
College education was not so prevalent among the US inventors until quite late in the 19th century,
but graduates were drawn from a much broader range of social classes (judging from the
occupations of the fathers). Thus, it is likely that the proportion of great inventors who were
scientists in the UK actually overstate the importance of a science education for making a
significant contribution to technological knowledge. Despite the advantages that people from their
class backgrounds had at invention, scientists were not well-represented among the great British
inventors nor among patentees during the height of industrial achievements.
Economic historians of Britain have pointed out that its early economic growth was
unbalanced and productivity advances were evident in only a few key sectors. Moreover,
significant increases in total factor productivity growth were not experienced until the middle of
the nineteenth century. The reasons for these patterns have not been fully elaborated on. Here we
highlighted the generation of knowledge inputs, and the elitist institutions that hampered their full
46

Donald Cardwell, The Development of Science and Technology in Nineteenth-Century Britain, Ashgate: Variorum
2003 attributes a scarcity of scientists to failures of the educational system. Reports from a number of Royal
Commissions – including the Samuelson (1868 and 1882) and Devonshire (1878) Commissions --- outlined the
inadequacy of British science and its institutions of scientific and technical training. Enrollments in science classes at
the secondary school level were "negligible;" and university science was "seriously deficient in quantity and quality."
Despite the frequent investigations by Commissions of this sort, reform was "miserably slow." (Gowing, 1978)
Sir Eric Ashby, Technology and the Academics, p 7, considered British academic science to be "dogmatic and
dessicated" until after the middle of the nineteenth century. Peter Alter, The Reluctant Patron: Science and the State in
Britain,1850-1920, New York: Berg, 1987, points to the equally limited role of the state in encouraging science. The
state was involved in the establishment of the National Physical Laboratory, the Imperial College of Science and
Technology, and the Medical Research Committee, but a significant role for state funding awaited the first World War.

22

attainment during the critical period of industrialization. The oligarchic nature of British society
likely limited the size of the market, suppressed the acquisition of human capital through
educational institutions, and arguably encouraged rules and standards that discriminated against
the efforts of disadvantaged members of society. Technological inventiveness and progress
responded to incentives, and were likely inhibited by such factors. Whatever the underlying
reasons, the transformations that made science and technical backgrounds crucial to the creation of
important inventions were not achieved until the end of the nineteenth century.
More generally, the experience of the First Industrial Nation indicates that creativity that
enhances economic efficiency is somewhat different from additions to the most advanced technical
discoveries. The sort of creativity that led to spurts in economic and social progress comprised
insights that were motivated by perceived need and by institutional incentives. In the twenty-first
century, specialized human capital and scientific knowledge undoubtedly enhance and precipitate
economic growth in the developed economies. However, for developing countries with scarce
human capital resources, such inputs at the frontier of “high technology” might be less relevant
than the ability to make incremental adjustments that can transform existing technologies into
inventions that are appropriate for the domestic conditions. As Thomas Jefferson pointed out, a
small innovation that can improve the lives of the mass of the population might be more
economically important than a large technological discovery that benefits only the few.

23

BIBLIOGRAPHY
A Dictionary of Scientists, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Alter, Peter, The Reluctant Patron: Science and the State in Britain,1850-1920, New York: Berg,
1987.
Ashby, Sir Eric, Technology and the academics; an essay on universities and the scientific
revolution, New York: St. Martin's Press, 1963.
Babbage, Charles, Reflections on the Decline of Science in England, and on Some of Its Causes,
London : B. Fellowes, 1830.
Basalla, George, et. al. (eds.), Victorian Science, Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1970.
Bastable, Marshall J., "From Breechloaders to Monster Guns: Sir William Armstrong and the
Invention of Modern Artillery, 1854-1880," Technology and Culture, Vol. 33, No. 2. (Apr., 1992):
213-247.
Bekar, Clifford and Richard Lipsey, “Science Institutions and the Industrial Revolution,” Journal
of European Economic History, 33 (3) Winter 2004: 709-753.
Buchanan, R. A., "Institutional Proliferation in the British Engineering Profession, 1847-1914,"
Economic History Review, New Series, Vol. 38, No. 1. (Feb., 1985): 42-60.
Bullough, Vern L. and Bonnie Bullough, "Historical Sociology: Intellectual Achievement in
Eighteenth-Century Scotland," The British Journal of Sociology, Vol. 24, No. 4. (Dec., 1973):
418-430.
Cardwell, D. S. L., The Organisation of Science in England, London: Heinemann, 1957.
Cardwell, Donald, The Development of Science and Technology in Nineteenth-Century Britain,
Ashgate: Variorum, 2003.
Cardwell, Donald, "Science and Technology: The Work of James Prescott Joule," Technology and
Culture, Vol. 17, No. 4. (Oct., 1976): 674-687.
Cardwell, Donald, "Power Technologies and the Advance of Science, 1700-1825," Technology
and Culture, Vol. 6, No. 2. (Spring, 1965): 188-207.
Clow, Archibald and Nan Clow, The Chemical Revolution: A Contribution to Social Technology,
London: Batchworth Press, 1952.
Crafts, Nicholas, "Steam as a general purpose technology: A growth accounting perspective,"
Economic Journal, Vol. 114 (April) 2004: 338 .

24

Crafts, N.F.R., "Macroinventions, economic growth, and 'industrial revolution' in Britain and
France," The Economic History Review, vol 48 (3) 1995: 59I-598.
Cronin, Bernard, Technology, Industrial Conflict and the Development of Technical Education in
19th-Century England, Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001.
Crowther, James Gerald, British scientists of the nineteenth century, London: K. Paul, Trench,
Trubner & Co., 1935.
Day, Lance and Ian McNeil, Biographical Dictionary of the History of Technology, New York:
Routledge, 1996.
de Solla Price, Derek J., "Is Technology Historically Independent of Science? A Study in
Statistical Historiography," Technology and Culture, Vol. 6, No. 4. (Autumn, 1965): 553-568.
Donnelly, J. F., "Representations of Applied Science: Academics and Chemical Industry in Late
Nineteenth-Century England," Social Studies of Science, Vol. 16, No. 2. (May, 1986), pp. 195234.
Elliott, Paul, "The Birth of Public Science in the English Provinces: Natural Philosophy in Derby
c. 1690-1760," Annals of Science, Vol. 57 (1) 2000: 61-100.
Foote, George A., "Science and Its Function in Early Nineteenth Century England,"
Osiris, Vol. 11. (1954), pp. 438-454.
Galton, Francis, English Men of Science, London: Macmillan, 1874.
Gennaioli, N., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2013), “Human Capital and
Regional Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1), 105–164.
Gillispie, Charles D., ed. Dictionary of Scientific Biography. 16 vols. Scribner. 1970-1980.
Gleason, Mary Louise, The Royal Society of London: years of reform, 1827-1847, New York:
Garland, 1991.
Margaret Gowing, "Science, Technology and Education: England in 1870," Oxford Review of
Education, Vol. 4, No. 1. (1978), pp. 3-17.
Habakkuk, H. J., American and British Technology in the Nineteenth Century: The Search for
Labour-Saving Inventions, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,1962: ix.
Hahn, Roger. Bibliography of Quantitative Studies on Science & Its History, Berkeley: Univ. of
California, Office of History of Science & Technology. 1980.
Hall, Marie Boas, All scientists now: the Royal Society in the nineteenth century, Cambridge; New
York : Cambridge University Press, 1984.

25

Heilbron, J. L., The Oxford Companion to the History of Modern Science,Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2003.
Hills, Richard L., Life and Inventions of Richard Roberts, 1789–1864. Landmark Collector's
Library. Ashbourne: Landmark Publishing, 2002.
Hilts, Victor L., "A Guide to Francis Galton's English Men of Science," Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society, New Ser., Vol. 65, No. 5. (1975), pp. 1-85.
Inkster, Ian, Science and Technology in History: An Approach to Industrial Development. New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1991.
Jacob, Margaret C., Scientific Culture and the Making of the Industrial West, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1997.
Kanefsky, John and John Robey, "Steam Engines in 18th-Century Britain: A Quantitative
Assessment," Technology and Culture, Vol. 21, No. 2. (Apr., 1980): 161-186.
Kargon, Robert H., Science in Victorian Manchester: Enterprise and Expertise, Manchester:
Manchester University Press, 1978.
Konog, Wolfgang, "Science-Based Industry or Industry-Based Science? Electrical Engineering in
Germany before World War I," Technology and Culture, Vol. 37, No. 1. (Jan., 1996): 70-101.
Kuhn, Thomas S., The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1962.
Landes, David, The Unbound Prometheus, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969.
Leicester, L. M., The Historical Background of Chemistry, New York: Wiley, 1965.
Lightman, Bernard (ed.), Victorian Science in Context, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lucier, Paul, "Court and controversy: Patenting science in the nineteenth century," British Journal
for the History of Science, Vol. 29 (June) 1996: 139-154
MacLeod, Roy M., "Of Medals and Men: A Reward System in Victorian Science, 1826-1914,"
Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 26, No. 1. (Jun., 1971), pp. 81-105.
MacLeod, Roy M., "The X-Club a Social Network of Science in Late-Victorian England,"
Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 24, No. 2. (Apr., 1970), pp. 305-322.
MacLeod, Roy M. and Russell Moseley, "The 'Naturals' and Victorian Cambridge: Reflections on
the Anatomy of an Elite, 1851-1914," Oxford Review of Education, Vol. 6, No. 2. (1980), pp.
177-195.
Matthew, H. C. G. and Brian Harrison (eds), Oxford dictionary of national biography,
Oxford; New York : Oxford University Press, 2004.
26

Mathias, Peter (ed.), Science and Society, 1600-1900, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1972.
McKendrick, Neil, "The Role of Science in the Industrial Revolution: A Study of Josiah
Wedgewood as A Scientist and Industrial Chemist," in Joseph Needham, M. Teich and R. Young
(eds.), Changing Perspectives in the History of Science, London: Heinemann Educational, 1973:
274-319.
McKendrick, Neil, “The Role of Science in the Industrial Revolution,” in Science & Culture in the
Western Tradition, ed. John. G. Burke (Scottsdale, AZ: Gorsuch Scarisbrick, 1987), 157-159.
McNeil, Ian, ed. An Encyclopaedia of the History of Technology. New York: Routledge, 1990.
Mendelsohn, Everett, "The Emergence of Science as a Profession in 19th Century Europe," in Karl
Hill, The Management of Scientists (Boston, 1964)
Mitch, David, The Rise of Popular Literacy in Victorian England: The Influence of Private Choice
and Public Policy, Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia Press, 1992.
Mokyr, Joel, The Lever of Riches, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Mokyr, Joel, The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2002.
Mokyr, Joel, The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain 1700-1850, Yale
University Press, 2012.
Mollan, Charles et al., (eds.), Irish Innovators in Science and Technology, Dublin: Royal Irish
Academy, 2002.
Morrell, J.B., "Bourgeois scientific societies and industrial innovation in Britain, 1780-1850,"
Journal of European Economic History Fall 1995 vol. 24.
Morrell, Jack, Science, culture and politics in Britain, 1750-1870, Aldershot, Great
Britain: Brookfield, Vt., USA : Variorum, 1997.
Musson, A.E. and Eric Robinson, Science and Technology In the Industrial Revolution, Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1969.
Olson, Richard, Scottish Philosophy and British Physics, 1750-1870: A Study of the Foundations
of the Victorian Scientific Style, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1975.
Olson, Richard, Science Deified and Science Defied: The Historical Significance of Science in
Western Culture. Volume 2, From the Early Modern Age through the Early Romantic Era, ca.
1640 to ca. 1820, Berkeley : University of California Press, 1990.

27

Orange, A.D. , "The Origins of the British Association for the Advancement of Science," British
Journal for the History of Science, 6 (1972): 152-176 .
Robinson, Eric, "James Watt and the Law of Patents," Technology and Culture, Vol. 13, No. 2.
(Apr., 1972):115-139.
Rosenberg, Nathan and L. E. Birdzell, Jr., "The Link between Science and Wealth", How the West
Grew Rich: The Economic Transformation of the Industrial World, New York, Basic Books,
Inc.:1986: 242-268.
Reingold, Nathan. Science in Nineteenth-Century America. Octagon. 1979 .
Sanderson, Michael, "The Professor as Industrial Consultant: Oliver Arnold and the British Steel
Industry, 1900-14," Economic History Review, New Series, Vol. 31, No. 4. (Nov., 1978): 585-600.
Schofield, Robert, The Lunar Society Of Birmingham: A Social History of Provincial Science and
Industry, Oxford: Clarendon, 1963.
Shapin, Steven and Barry Barnes, "Science, Nature and Control: Interpreting Mechanics'
Institutes," Social Studies of Science, Vol. 7, No. 1. (Feb., 1977), pp. 31-74.
Sheets-Pyenson, Susan, “Popular Science Periodicals in Paris and London: The Emergence of a
Low Scientific Culture, 1820-1875,” Annals of Science, 42 (1985): 549-572.
Schneider, Joseph, "The Definition of Eminence and the Social Origins of Famous English Men of
Genius," American Sociological Review, Vol. 3, No. 6. (Dec., 1938), pp. 834-849.
Squicciarini, Mara P. and Nico Voigtländer, “Human capital and industrialization : evidence from
the age of enlightenment,” NBER working paper series No. 20219, 2014.
Stewart, Larry, "The Selling of Newton: Science and Technology in Early Eighteenth-Century
England," Journal of British Studies, Vol. 25, No. 2. (Apr., 1986): 178-192.
Williams, Trevor I., A Biographical Dictionary of Scientists. 3rd ed. Black 1982.
Wrigley, Julia, "The Division between Mental and Manual Labor: Artisan Education in Science in
Nineteenth-Century Britain," The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 88, Supplement:(1982):
S31-S51.

28

Figure 1
British Great Inventors: Education by Birth Cohort

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
pre1780

1781-1820

primary

1821-1845

secondary

1846-1870

college

Notes: For information about the sample of great inventors, see the text.

29

1871-1910

technical

12000

200
180

10000
160
140
8000
120

Total

Great Inventor, Scientists

Figure 2
Patenting by Great Inventors and by All Patentees, 1790-1890

100

6000

80
4000
60
40
2000
20
0

0

Great Inventor Patents

Total

Notes: The patent information were obtained from the Reports of the Commissioners of Patents. For the
great inventors’ sample, see the text.

30

Figure 3
Great Inventor Patents by Scientific Orientation
(3-Year Moving Average, 1790-1890)

120

80
70
60

80

50

60

40

Scientists

Nonscientists

100

30

40

20
20

10

0

0

Nonscientists

Scientists

Notes: The patent information were obtained from the Reports of the Commissioners of Patents. For the
great inventors’ sample, see the text. Scientists include great inventors who were listed in a dictionary of
scientific biography; received college training in medicine, mathematics or the natural Sciences; or were
Fellows of the Royal Society

.

31

TABLE 1: BIRTHPLACE OF THE GREAT INVENTORS,
BY BIRTH COHORT AND TECHNICAL ORIENTATION

Before 1780

BIRTH COHORT
1781-1820
1821-1845

After 1845

Total

S&T

Non

S&T

Non

S&T

Non

S&T

Non

S&T

Non

London
South
Midlands
North
Other Britain
Overseas

12.5
12.5
12.5
12.5
41.7
4.2

5.6
18.3
11.3
22.5
31.0
5.6

18.2
25.0
6.8
15.9
31.8
2.3

9.5
23.8
13.3
22.9
18.1
4.8

19.2
15.4
3.9
19.2
26.9
15.4

20.6
19.1
15.9
19.1
12.7
6.4

22.6
20.4
7.5
15.7
28.6
11.3

12.2
24.5
2.0
30.6
18.4
10.2

19.1
20.4
7.5
15.7
28.6
8.2

11.5
21.5
11.5
23.3
20.1
6.3

13.7
21.6
10.1
20.7
23.0
6.9

TOTAL
NUMBER

24

71

44

105

26

63

53

49

147

288

435

BIRTHPLACE
ALL

Notes: S&T indicates post secondary training in science and engineering or listing in a dictionary of
scientific biography; Non indicates inventors who did not have such training and were not listed.
The "Home Counties" are included in the South; London includes Middlesex; Other Britain refers to
Cornwall, Scotland, Ireland and Wales, the Isle of Wight and the Isle of Man. The "unknown"
category is not reported, so percentages will not total to one hundred.
TABLE 2: SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING BACKGROUND OF GREAT INVENTORS,
BY YEAR OF FIRST INVENTION
Science Training

Listed Scientist

Engineering Training

Year

N

%

N

%

N

%

Before 1820
1821-1851
1852-1870
1871-1890
After 1890
Total

10
21
14
21
11
78

10.0
18.8
20.0
33.3
23.4
19.8

18
24
8
14
8
75

16.8
19.5
9.6
18.2
17.0
16.6

1
3
7
16
17
44

1.0
2.7
10.0
25.4
34.7
11.1

Notes: Science training refers to post-secondary school education in the sciences, mathematics or
medicine. A great inventor who is included in biographical dictionaries of scientists is denoted as a
listed scientist. Engineering training indicates post-secondary school training in engineering.

32

TABLE 3: SOCIAL BACKGROUNDS OF THE GREAT INVENTORS,
BY BIRTH COHORT AND TECHNICAL ORIENTATION

FATHER'S
Before 1780
OCCUPATION

BIRTH COHORT
1781-1820
1821-1845

After 1845

Total ALL

S&T

Non

S&T

Non

S&T

Non

S&T

Non

S&T

Non

Elite/Professional

58.3

25.4

50.0

21.0

46.2

28.6

60.4

26.5

54.4

24.6

34.7

White Collar

4.2

8.5

4.2

7.6

11.5

----

9.5

16.3

9.5

7.6

8.3

Skilled/Manufacturer
8.3

18.3

25.0

32.4

30.8

27.0

13.2

18.4

19.1

25.4

23.2

Farmer

8.3

7.0

4.6

6.7

7.7

6.4

3.8

8.2

5.4

6.9

6.4

Low-skilled worker 8.3

9.9

2.3

3.8

----

9.5

5.7

16.3

4.1

8.7

7.1

Unknown

12.5

31.0

6.8

28.6

3.9

28.6

7.6

14.3

7.5

26.7

20.2

TOTAL

24

71

44

105

26

63

53

49

147

288

435

Notes: S&T indicates post secondary training in science and engineering or listing in a dictionary of
scientific biography; Non indicates inventors who did not have such training and were not listed.
TABLE 4: ELITE BACKGROUND OF GREAT INVENTORS, BY YEAR OF FIRST
INVENTION
Year

Family Connections

Elite Education

Fellows of the Royal Society

N

%

N

%

N

%

Before 1820
1821-1851
1852-1870
1871-1890
After 1890

31
27
15
19
6

29.0
22.0
18.3
26.0
12.8

11
13
14
18
9

10.3
10.6
16.9
24.7
19.2

21
25
17
20
7

19.6
20.3
20.5
27.4
14.9

Total

99

22.8

65

14.9

90

20.7

Notes: The percentages are within-period proportions, based on a total of 435 inventors. Family
connections imply an elite family background or other family members being listed in the Oxford
DNB. Elite education indicates the great inventor attended Oxford, Cambridge, Durham, or one of
the Royal Colleges, or obtained a postgraduate degree overseas (mainly Germany).

33

TABLE 5: THE PROPENSITY TO PATENT AMONG BRITISH GREAT INVENTORS,
BY YEAR OF FIRST INVENTION (THROUGH 1890)
Years
All Great Inventors
N
%

Before 1820

89
83.2

1821-1851

1852-1870

105
85.4

1871-1890

All

78
94.0

65
89.0

337
86.9

All Science (FRS, Science education, Eminence)
N
28
37
%
80.0
82.2

23
95.8

28
90.3

116
85.3

Fellows of the Royal Society
17
N
%
81.0

21
84.0

16
94.1

19
95.0

73
88.0

Science Education
N
%

7
70.0

17
81.0

13
92.9

19
90.5

56
83.6

Eminent Scientists
N
%

14
77.8

19
91.2

8
100.0

14
100.0

55
85.9

Notes: The figures indicate the number of inventors who had obtained at least one patent by the year
1890. For descriptions of the various categories, see the text.

34

TABLE 6: PATENTS AND PRODUCTIVITY AMONG BRITISH GREAT INVENTORS,
BY YEAR OF FIRST INVENTION (THROUGH 1890)
Years

Before 1820

Age of first invention
Average patents
Career length
No. of Inventors

35.1
4.2
18.0
72

Industrial Specialization
% of pats by specialized
Inventors
Total No. of Patents

57.5
180

1821-1851

1852-1870

Nonscientists
35.2
14.1
20.3
78

45.4
497

1871-1890

33.9
17.2
25.7
59

29.5
13.1
30.1
42

33.6
10.7
23.2
286

69.3
678

73.9
390

60.3
1776

Industrial distribution (select industries, % of patent by nonscientists)
Engines
17.9
11.7
11.2
26.9
Electric-telecoms
2.2
2.6
13.9
9.5
Textiles
25.6
19.7
6.2
11.0
Manufacturing
25.4
31.4
36.1
28.6
No. of Patents
313
1094
978
528
Age of first invention
Average patents
Career length
No. of Inventors

All Science (FRS, Science education, Eminence)
32.4
32.9
29.8
4.9
16.2
17.2
21.2
25.6
24.5
35
45
24

Industrial Specialization
% of pats by specialized
inventors
No. of Patents

63.5
113

31.0
228

All

48.7
202

Industrial distribution (select industries, % of patent by scientists)
Engines
16.3
10.6
3.6
Electric-telecoms
1.1
16.6
28.0
Textiles
15.2
3.7
4.8
Manufacturing
41.0
43.8
40.0
Total No. of Patents
178
736
415

14.4
54.6
1.1
18.2
529

13.6
7.5
14.1
31.5
2945
29.0
16.8
34.2
31

31.2
12.8
26.9
153

85.4
452

54.0
1012
11.0
28.2
4.3
35.0
1875

Notes: The patent information were obtained from the Reports of the Commissioners of Patents, and
patents were categorized according to sector of final use. For the great inventors’ sample, see the
text. Scientists include great inventors who were listed in a dictionary of scientific biography;
received college training in medicine, mathematics or the natural Sciences; or were Fellows of the
Royal Society (FRS).
35

TABLE 7: REGRESSIONS OF SPECIALIZATION AT INVENTION

Variable

Parameter

T-stat

Parameter

T-stat

Parameter

T-stat

Intercept
Before 1820
1821-1851
1852-1870
1871-1890
1891-1930
Residence
London
Northern England
Rest of Britain
Log(Number of
Patents)
S&T Background
Elite Education
Scientific Education
Technical Education
Prizewinner
Publications
Post-Patent Reforms
Industry
Agriculture
Construction
Electrical
Engines
Manufacturing
Textiles
Transportation

93.53
-16.72
-4.27
-12.42
-5.14
-2.38

98.78***
-2.16***
-3.83***
-7.32***
-6.38***
-3.34***

96.30
-17.61
-6.97
-11.97
-4.16
-3.69

88.72***
-2.37***
-5.77***
-15.5***
-4.83***
-4.74***

98.42
-18.02
-9.64
-12.79
-7.32
-2.47

49.52
-8.95***
-5.16***
-8.15***
-4.45***
-2.85***

-1.39
3.17
-2.51

-1.97*
4.13***
-2.14**

-1.25
1.38
-2.60

-1.58
1.63
-2.06*

-4.16
-1.07
-4.62

-5.29***
-1.26
-3.76***

-3.72

-7.31***

-3.80

-16.5***

-4.09

-6.76***

-2.96
-1.26
3.28
-1.55
-2.24

-3.48***
-1.64
3.66***
-2.61**
-3.87***

-3.43
-1.08
4.56
-1.28
-2.51
-2.59

-4.09***
-1.45
5.24***
-2.22*
-4.32***
-1.84

-8.01
-10.56
9.72
0.23
2.93
10.51
2.59

-4.72***
-6.1***
6.67***
0.16
2.18*
6.57***
1.76

N=4827
F=79.11
Rsq=0.13

N=4827
F=50.74
Rsq=0.14

N=4827
F=54.64
Rsq=0.22

Notes: The observations include all patents filed by the great inventors through 1930, and therefore
understates the number of patents in the final period. The dependent variable measures the highest
percentage of an inventor’s patents that were filed in a single sector. The excluded region comprises
the Southern counties of England. Prizes indicate whether or not the inventor received an award for
technological achievements. Publications include academic articles and books. Post-patent reforms
is a dummy variable for the period after 1852.

36

TABLE 8: NEGATIVE BINOMIAL REGRESSIONS OF TOTAL CAREER PATENTS
Variable

Parameter

Chi-Square

Parameter

Chi-Square

Intercept
Before 1820
1821-1851
1852-1870
1871-1890
1891-1930
Residence
London
Northern England
Rest of Britain
S&T Background
Elite Education
Scientific Education
Publications
R&D
Technical Education
Industry
Agriculture
Construction
Electrical
Engines
Manufacturing
Textiles
Transportation

3.54
-1.45
-0.98
0.24
0.50
0.35

7935.13***
487.87***
330.12***
45.36***
171.69***
86.19***

2.79
-1.39
-0.95
0.22
0.49
0.31

1817.74***
442.81***
297.31***
39.78***
156.72***
66.29***

-0.02
-0.20
-0.59

0.25
22.9***
102.01***

0.05
-0.10
-0.52

1.91
5.3*
82.51***

-0.03
-0.36
0.10
-0.06
0.25

0.59
98.72***
12.02***
2.47
35.48***

0.01
-0.36
0.05
-0.09
0.24

0.08
100.4***
3.15
4.99*
31.56***

1.06
0.66
0.84
0.67
0.70
0.69
0.65

203.64***
71.51***
179.46***
111.4***
144.66***
96.04***
102.8***

N=4827
-Log Likelihood=18843.2

N=4827
-Log Likelihood=18736.3

_________________________________________________________________________
Notes: The observations include all patents filed by the great inventors through 1930, and therefore
understates the number of patents in the final period. The dependent variable measures the total
stock of patents filed by an inventor during his lifetime. The excluded region comprises the
Southern counties of England. Prizes indicate whether or not the inventor received an award for
technological achievements. Publications include academic articles and books. Post-patent reforms
is a dummy variable for the period after 1852.

37

