                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHY DOESN'T TECHNOLOGY FLOW FROM RICH TO POOR COUNTRIES?

                                         Harold L. Cole
                                       Jeremy Greenwood
                                        Juan M. Sanchez

                                       Working Paper 20856
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20856


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2015




No funding from any source was received. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Harold L. Cole, Jeremy Greenwood, and Juan M. Sanchez. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Doesn't Technology Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?
Harold L. Cole, Jeremy Greenwood, and Juan M. Sanchez
NBER Working Paper No. 20856
January 2015
JEL No. D92,E13,G24,O11,O16

                                              ABSTRACT

What determines the technology that a country adopts? While many factors affect technological adoption,
the efficiency of the country's financial system may also play a significant role. To address this question,
a dynamic contract model is embedded into a general equilibrium setting with competitive intermediation.
The ability of an intermediary to monitor and control the cash flows of a firm plays an important role
in the technology adoption decision. Can such a theory help to explain the differences in total factor
productivity and establishment-size distributions across India, Mexico, and the United States? A quantitative
illustration suggests the answer is yes.


Harold L. Cole                                        Juan M. Sanchez
Economics Department                                  Research Department
University of Pennsylvania                            Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
3718 Locust Walk                                      One Federal Reserve Bank Plaza
160 McNeil Building                                   St. Louis, MO 63102
Philadelphia, PA 19104                                sanchez@stls.frb.org
and NBER
colehl@sas.upenn.edu

Jeremy Greenwood
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil Building, Rm 160
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
1     Introduction
Why do countries use di¤erent production technologies? Surely, all nations should adopt
best-practice technologies, which produce the highest levels of income. Yet, this does not
happen. To paraphrase Lucas (1990): Why doesn’t technology ‡ow from rich to poor coun-
tries? The premise here is that the e¢ ciency of …nancial markets plays a vital role in
technology adoption. If a country’s …nancial markets a¤ect its technology adoption, then
it is a small step to argue that they will a¤ect the nation’s total factor productivity (TFP)
and income.
    Investing in new technologies is risky. Advanced technologies require substantial funding
and the payo¤ from any investment is uncertain. Compounding the problem is the fact that
investors in a venture have more limited information than the developers of the venture.
Therefore, there is scope to misappropriate funds due to di¤erences in information. In some
countries, it may even be di¢ cult to control the use of publicly acknowledged funds due to
poor rule of law for contractual disputes.
    Financial institutions play an important role in constructing mechanisms that ensure
investments are used wisely. They do this by both monitoring …rms and implementing
reward structures that encourage …rms to truthfully reveal their pro…ts so that investors can
be fairly compensated. Monitoring …rms is expensive. E¢ cient monitoring requires sound
accounting systems, the timely release of information, the presence of …nancial analysts,
and the like. Monitoring cannot be done e¤ectively in some places. In such circumstances,
intermediaries must rely primarily on incentive schemes to ensure honesty. This restricts
the pro…tability of certain types of investment projects. The design of incentive schemes
may be severely circumscribed, however. It may not be possible for an intermediary to
exert the desirable level of control over a …rm’s publicly acknowledged revenue streams. In
some places contractual disputes may be complicated, costly, and require lengthy settlement
times. These factors circumscribe what can be e¤ectively delimited in a contract. As a
result, it may be infeasible to write a contract that can impose the reward structure required
to ensure the likelihood of a successful investment.

                                              1
1.1    Finance and Development: A Brief Literature Review

Earlier work has drawn a connection between …nance and the adoption of technologies. For
example, Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990) allow for two technologies: a primitive one with
a low, certain rate of return and an advanced one, with a higher expected but uncertain
rate of return. By pooling risks intermediaries reduce the vagaries associated with the
advanced technology. There are …xed costs associated with intermediation, so only the
wealthy choose to use this channel. Banerjee and Du‡o (2005) present a stylized model
where more advanced technologies require larger investments in terms of …xed costs. Given
the presence of borrowing constraints, countries such as India lack the wherewithal to …nance
advanced technologies. They suggest this as a potential explanation for the productivity gap
between India and the United States.
   Within the context of a two-sector model where technologies may di¤er, Buera, Kaboski,
and Shin (2011) quantitatively examine the link between …nancial development and economic
development. They emphasize the importance of borrowing and enforcement constraints.
Greenwood, Sanchez, and Wang (2010, 2013) allow for an in…nite number of technologies.
Better intermediation prunes the ones with low returns from the economy. In all of these
papers, technologies di¤er in a simple way. The prototypical setting is similar to Greenwood
and Jovanovic (1990): Better technologies have higher expected levels of productivity, are
riskier, and usually involve a higher …xed cost in terms of adoption.
   The decision to …nance a venture is likely to depend on the nature of the technology in
a more deep-rooted manner. Selling drinks on the street is much di¤erent than launching
rockets into space. The former requires a small investment that yields returns relatively
quickly and with little risk. The latter requires years of funding before any returns are
realized and there is tremendous risk associated with …nancing such ventures. To capture
this notion, technologies are given a richer representation than is conventionally assumed.
Each technology has its own nonstationary stochastic process for total factor productivity
(TFP) over its life cycle. The investments involved at each event in the life cycle may di¤er
too. A long-term project is likely to require a long-term relationship between a …rm and an

                                             2
intermediary.1 Thus, a dynamic contracting perspective is taken.
   Why is this important? First, the structure of the technology adopted and the e¤ects
of …nancial structure are likely to be inextricably linked. Consider a model where entrepre-
neurs are constrained by some initial level of wealth and can borrow only a …xed limited
amount per period on short-term markets. Intuitively, one would expect a …rm to be much
more capable of self-…nancing a project over time if the pro…le for TFP is ‡at, implying a
‡at pro…le of capital, as opposed to one where productivity perpetually grows in a convex
manner requiring ever-increasing levels of investments. Midrigan and Xu (2014) argue that
with stationary AR1 productivity shocks the capital required by a …rm can be accumulated
reasonably quickly by self-…nancing [see also Moll (2014) for an analysis of how the degree of
persistence in technology shocks and the ability to self-…nance interact]. Midrigan and Xu
(2014) conclude that the impact of intermediation on technology adoption is as important
as its impact on capital accumulation for explaining cross-country TFP di¤erences.
   Suppose alternatively that the entrepreneur has limited funding of his own but can enter
into a long-term …nancial contract with an intermediary. Long-term contracts o¤er, relative
to short-term ones, the potential to obtain e¢ cient levels of capital quickly. This can be
done by using backloading strategies, where the rewards to owners of …rms are delayed until
the desired outcomes are obtained. In fact, when productivity shocks are independently and
identically distributed over time, contracts can be designed such that the deviations from
…rst-best allocations are relatively small, as noted in Marcet and Marimon (1992). Here it is
shown that this is no longer the case when the return structure o¤ered from a technology is
generalized. Now, it may be impossible to write contracts that allow for certain technologies
to be funded. This is a potential explanation for why technologies do not ‡ow from rich
to poor countries. If an investment cannot be funded with a long-term contract, then it
cannot be funded with a sequence of short-term contracts because a long-term contract can
always be written to mimic a succession of short-term ones. Short-term contracts do not
   1
       As a factual matter, a lot of lending is long term in nature. For example, the average maturity of U.S.
corporate debt is around 13 years.



                                                       3
allow lenders to commit to extended punishment strategies, such as withholding future funds
based on a bad report, or auditing cash ‡ows over some probationary period of time and
seizing them if malfeasance is detected. For example, in Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011)
an entrepreneur who defaults gains full access to the credit market in the subsequent period.
Long-run punishment strategies are important for achieving e¢ cient contracts.
    Second, as an empirical matter, Luttmer (2011) has emphasized that it is di¢ cult for the
standard model of technology (where TFP shocks follow a stationary AR1 process) to mimic
the phenomenal growth of large …rms such as Amazon, General Motors, Microsoft, Walmart,
etc. Hsieh and Olken (2014) present evidence suggesting labor productivity increases with
employment in China, India, and Indonesia. This is inconsistent with the standard model
of production, which would predict constant labor productivity.2 As discussed later, the
fact that employment over the life cycle of plants in developed countries di¤ers so much
from lesser-developed ones re‡ects, in part, that they are operating fundamentally di¤erent
technologies.


1.2       The Theoretical Analysis

A dynamic costly state veri…cation model of venture capital is developed. The model has
multiple unique features. First, production technologies are represented in a more general
way than in the usual …nance and development literature. Entrepreneurs start new …rms
every period. There is a menu of potential technologies that can be operated. Entrepreneurs
select a blueprint from this menu of technologies, but they can start only a single venture. A
…rm’s blueprint is represented by a non-decreasing stochastic process that describes move-
ment up a productivity ladder. Some blueprints have productivity pro…les that o¤er exciting
pro…t opportunities; others are more mundane. This is operationalized by assuming there
are di¤erences in the positions of the rungs on the productivity ladders, as well as in the
   2
       With a Cobb-Douglas production function the average product of labor is proportional to the marginal
product of labor. If labor markets are competitive, then the marginal product of labor, and hence its average
product, will be equalized across …rms.



                                                     4
odds of stepping between rungs. Blueprints also di¤er in the required capital investment.
Some may require substantial investment before much information about the likely outcome
is known.
   A start-up …rm will ask an intermediary to underwrite its venture. The …nancial contract
between the new …rm and intermediary is long term in duration, unlike most of literature
which assumes short term contracts. A contract speci…es a state-contingent plan over the
life cycle of the project, outlining the advancement of funds from the intermediary to the
…rm and the payments from the …rm back to the intermediary. A …rm’s position on a
productivity ladder is private information. Since the ‡ow of funds depends on reports by
the …rm to the intermediary, there is an incentive for the …rm to misrepresent its position
to the intermediary. Intermediaries can audit the returns of a …rm, as in the prototypical
costly state veri…cation paradigms of Townsend (1979) and Williamson (1986).
   A distinguishing feature of the contracting framework is that the intermediary can pick
the odds of a successful audit. The cost of auditing is increasing and convex in these odds.
This cost is also decreasing in the productivity of a country’s …nancial sector. Another
unique feature of the analysis is the notion of poor cash-‡ow control. Speci…cally, it is
assumed that some fraction of a …rm’s cash ‡ow can never be secured by the intermediary
via contractual means due to a poor rule of law in a country. The analysis allows for a new
…rm to self-…nance some of the start-up costs of the venture at the time of writing a contract.
   Several propositions are proved. It is established that in general the intermediary pays
the …rm its rewards only if it reaches the top of the productivity ladder. Additionally, the
intermediary will audit all reports of a failure to move up the ladder. Auditing reduces the
incentive to lie. When there is poor cash-‡ow control, the intermediary will also have to
provide rewards even when the …rm fails to move up the ladder. This reduces its ability to
backload. The nature of the blueprint, a country’s input prices, and the state of its …nancial
system will determine the pro…tability of a project. For certain blueprints it may not be
feasible for any intermediary to o¤er a lending contract that will make the project pro…table.
This situation can arise because given the structure of the technology ladder: (i) Input prices


                                              5
are too high, (ii) the level of monitoring needed to make the project viable is simply too
expensive given the e¢ ciency of the …nancial system, or (iii) poor cash-‡ow control makes
it impossible to implement enough backloading. It is shown that an entrepreneur starting
a new venture should commit all of his available funds to the project. When the …rm self-
…nances some of the start-up costs, there is less incentive to cheat on the contract in an
attempt to avoid paying some of the …xed costs. Not surprisingly, if the new …rm’s funds
are large enough, then the project will be …nanced in the …rst-best manner. Interestingly, if
there is a distribution of internal funds across new …rms in a country, then there may be a
corresponding distribution over the technologies adopted by these …rms. Thus, the state of
a nation’s …nancial system will have an impact on the type of ventures that will be …nanced.
Financial sector e¢ ciency will a¤ect a nation’s income and TFP. Therefore, a link between
…nance and development is established.


1.3       The Quantitative Illustration

While the analysis is primarily theoretical in nature, the potential of the …nancial mechanism
developed here to explain cross-country di¤erences in income is illustrated. The quantitative
illustration is not intended as a formal empirical assessment of the theory outlined here or as
a means to discriminate between this and other …nancial mechanisms.3 The applied analysis
focuses on three countries at very di¤erent levels of development and wealth: India, Mexico,
and the United States. Hsieh and Klenow (2014) document some interesting facts about
di¤erences in establishments across these three countries. The average establishment size
is much smaller in Mexico than in the United States, and is much smaller in India than in
Mexico, as Table 1 shows. (All data sources are discussed in Appendix 14.) In addition, the
   3
       For example, Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011) and Midrigan and Xi (2014) focus on the importance
of borrowing constraints. Limited investor protection is emphasized by Antunes, Cavalcanti, and Villamil
(2008) and Castro, Clementi, and MacDonald (2009). Greenwood, Sanchez, and Wang (2013) apply the
static contract model of Greenwood Sanchez, and Wang (2010) to the international data. The role of
…nancial intermediaries in producing ex ante information about investment projects is stressed by Townsend
and Ueda’s (2010) work on Thailand.


                                                    6
             Stylized Facts: India, Mexico, and the United States
                        Statistics        U.S. Mexico India
             Output per worker            1.00 0.33   0.12
             TFP                          1.00 0.46   0.24
             Average establishment size   1.00 0.55   0.11
             Employment share, age 10 yr. 0.25 0.52   0.51
             ln(TFPage>35 ) ln(TFPage<5 ) 2.23 0.51   0.30

                         Table 1: See Appendix 14 for all sources.

level of labor productivity follows a similar pattern. The share of employment contributed by
younger (older) establishments is also much larger (smaller) in India and Mexico than in the
United States. These facts suggest that these countries are using very di¤erent technologies.
   One interpretation of these stylized facts is that the United States uses technologies with
a higher level of TFP than does Mexico. This leads to larger establishments in the United
States than in Mexico. Mexico, in turn, uses technologies that are more productive than
those chosen in India, implying that Mexican establishments are larger than Indian ones.
Additionally, TFP in a U.S. establishment increases faster with age than in a Mexican one.
This results in an employment pro…le that rises more steeply with age in the United States
than in Mexico. The same story applies when comparing Mexico with India. Some facts
supporting this story are presented in Table 1.
   To undertake the quantitative illustration, a stylized version of the model is used where
there are only three production technologies available: advanced, intermediate, and entry
level. Each project has a di¤erent blueprint. The advanced technology promises high returns.
When the project is successful, the time path of productivity has a convex shape. This
implies that growth in output and pro…ts materialize toward the end of the project’s life
cycle. The project requires large up-front investment. The entry-level technology has a lower
expected return. Output and pro…ts follow a concave time path. The project’s returns are
therefore more immediate. It requires less start-up investment. The intermediate technology
lies between these two. To put some discipline on the analysis, factor prices are chosen to
match the Indian, Mexican, and U.S. economies. Labor is much less expensive in India


                                              7
than in Mexico, which in turn is less expensive than in the United States. Thus, on …rst
appearance, the advanced technology should be more pro…table in India than in Mexico
and more pro…table in Mexico than in the United States. The question is this: Can an
equilibrium be constructed where the United States will use the …rst technology, Mexico the
second, and India the third? And can such a structure match the above stylized facts about
the Indian, Mexican, and U.S. economies, including the observations on establishment-size
distributions?
    The answer is yes. The advanced and intermediate technologies cannot be implemented
when monitoring is not e¢ cient and/or when there is a signi…cant cash-‡ow problem. Are
these two factors important? Some cross-country regression evidence is presented suggesting
that they are. Additionally, the quantitative illustration is consistent with an assumption
that a …rm’s start-up wealth is zero. Even so, the framework predicts that the ratio of private
debt to GDP will rise with GDP. Why is this important? The observed concordance of this
ratio with GDP is often interpreted as indicating …rms in poor countries rely more on internal
start-up funds than those in rich nations. The current analysis suggests that this arises, in
part, because of di¤erences across countries in the pattern of …rms’ cash ‡ows related to
variations in the patterns of technology adoption. These di¤erences in technology adoption
arise, to some extent, from variations in …nancial structures. Finally, …nancial development
plays a very important role in economic development. It explains a signi…cant portion of the
di¤erences in cross-country income, primarily through the technology adoption channel and
not through capital deepening. Still, it does not explain the majority of the di¤erences in
incomes among India, Mexico and the United States.



2     The Environment
At the heart of the analysis is the interplay between …rms and …nancial intermediaries.
This interaction is studied in steady-state general equilibrium. Firms produce output in
the economy. They do so using capital and labor. New …rms are started by entrepreneurs.


                                              8
The entrepreneur selects a blueprint for his …rm from a portfolio of plans. He can operate
only one type of project. Implementing this blueprint requires working capital. While an
entrepreneur may have some personal funds, in general this working capital is obtained from
…nancial intermediaries. Projects di¤er by the payo¤ structures they promise. For example,
some projects may o¤er low returns but are ones that will materialize quickly with reasonable
certainty and without much investment. Others may promise high returns. These projects
may be risky in the sense that the odds are high that the returns are unlikely to materialize,
plus the ventures may require extended periods of …nance. Intermediaries borrow funds from
consumers/workers in the economy at a …xed rate of return. Intermediation is competitive.
The structure of a …nancial contract o¤ered by an intermediary will depend on the type
of venture being funded, the fraction of the start-up costs of the project the entrepreneur
can self-…nance, input prices, and the state of the …nancial system. Of course, an entre-
preneur will choose the most pro…table blueprint to implement. For certain blueprints it
is sometimes not possible for an intermediary to o¤er a …nancial contract that will gener-
ate positive pro…ts. Finally, in addition to supplying intermediaries with working capital,
consumer/workers provide …rms with labor. Consumer/workers own the intermediaries. In
equilibrium, intermediaries will earn zero pro…ts. Since consumer/workers play an ancillary
role in the analysis, they are relegated to the background.4



3        Ventures
The theory of entrepreneurship here is simple. Each period there is a …xed amount of risk-
neutral entrepreneurs that can potentially start new …rms. Entrepreneurs di¤er by type,
t 2 T , and in the amount of funds they have, f 2 F                 [0; f ]. Let the (non-normalized) dis-
tribution for potential type-t entrepreneurs over funds be represented by                   t (f )   : F ! [0; 1].
Projects also di¤er by type,          2 T . A type-t entrepreneur can start up and run a project of
    4
        It also does not matter whether the analysis is considered as modeling (i) a closed economy in a steady
state where the real interest rate rate earned by savers is equal to the rate of time preference or (ii) a small,
open economy where savers can borrow or lend at some …xed real interest rate.


                                                        9
type        t. Think about higher levels of          as corresponding to more advanced technologies.
Thus, an entrepreneur that can run technology                    2 T can also operate any simpler one
  < . The entrepreneur faces a disutility cost, " , measured in terms of consumption, con-
nected with operating technology . Envision " as representing the disutility of acquiring
the skills necessary for operating a technology or as the disutility associated with running
it.5 An entrepreneur can only operate one …rm at a time.
    A new …rm started by an entrepreneur can potentially produce for T periods, indexed
by t = 1; 2;       ; T . There is a setup period denoted by t = 0. Here the …rm must incur a
…xed cost connected with entry that is represented by . Associated with each new …rm is a
productivity ladder f 0 ;     1 ; :::; S g,   where S    T . As mentioned earlier, the …rm’s blueprint
or type is denoted by . This indexes the vector f 0 ;                 1 ; :::; S ;   g. An entrepreneur selects
the type of the blueprint for his …rm, , from a portfolio of available plans, T . Again, only
one plan can be implemented. The …rm enters a period at some step on the productivity
ladder from the previous period, denoted by             s 1.   With probability          it moves up the ladder
to the next step,      s.   At time s         1 the …rm can invest in new capital for period s. This
investment is made before it is known whether                  s 1   will move up in period s to       s.   With
probability 1        the project stalls at the previous step            s 1,   implying that the move up the
ladder was unsuccessful. If a stall occurs, then the project remains at the previous level,
 s 1,   forever after.6 Capital then becomes locked in place and cannot be changed. At the end
   5
       The determination of who becomes an entrepreneur is of secondary importance for the analysis un-
dertaken here. Interested readers are referred to the work of Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011) and Guner,
Ventura, and Xu (2008) to see how such a consideration could be appended onto the current analysis.
Abstracting from this factor allows the current work to focus on the novel aspects of the analysis.
   6
     This assumption avoids the persistence private information analyzed in Fernandez and Phelan (2000).
By extending the analysis undertaken in Appendix 13.1, it can also be deduced that in the current setting
productivity can actually follow any deterministic process subsequent to a failure to move up the ladder. A
similar insight is exploited in Golosov and Tsyvinski’s (2006) work on disability insurance. In their analysis,
with no real productive activity, a person is either able or disabled according to a two-state Markov chain.
Disability is an absorbing state. The similarity with the current analysis ends there. Their work lies in the
realm of new public …nance rather than dynamic contracting (there is no contract): In their analysis there



                                                        10
             Figure 1: Possible productivity paths for a venture over its lifetime.

of each period, the …rm faces a survival probability of . Assume that an entrepreneur dies
with his …rm. Figure 1 illustrates potential productivity paths for a …rm over its lifetime.
The ladder is somewhat reminiscent of Aghion and Howitt (1992).
    In the tth period of its life, the …rm will produce output, ot , according to the diminishing-
returns-to-scale production function

                              ot =      e!
                                     s [kt (   lt )1   !
                                                           ] ; with 0 < ; ! < 1;

where e
      kt and lt are, respectively, the inputs of physical capital and labor that it employs.
Here    is a …xed factor re‡ecting the productivity of labor in a country; this factor will prove
useful for calibrating the model. Denote the rental rate for physical capital by r and the
wage for labor by w. The …rm …nances the input bundle, (e
                                                        kt ; lt ), that it will hire in period
t using working capital provided by the intermediary in period t                      1.
    Focus on the amalgamated input, kt                 e
                                                       kt! lt1   !
                                                                     . The minimum cost of purchasing k units
is no productivity ladder, no investment in capital, no monitoring, no cash-‡ow control problem, no start-up
funding, no technology adoption decision, and so forth.




                                                           11
of the amalgamated input will be

           w !                      w ! 1
      [(        )   !   ! 1
                              w+(        )       !   ! 1
                                                           r]k = minfre
                                                                      k + wl : e
                                                                               k ! ( l)1          !
                                                                                                      = kg:   (P1)
           r1 !                     r1 !                             e
                                                                     kt ,lt

Thus, the cost of purchasing one unit of the amalgam, q, is given by

                                    w !      !       ! 1         w ! 1             !   ! 1
                              q=(        )                 w+(        )                      r:                (1)
                                    r1 !                         r1 !

The cost of the intermediary providing k units of the amalgamated input is then qk. This
represents the working capital, qk, provided by the intermediary to the …rm. In what follows,
k is referred to as the working capital for the …rm, even though strictly speaking it should
be multiplied by q. The rental rate, r, consists of the interest and depreciation linked with
the physical capital. It is exogenous in the analysis: In a steady state, the interest rate will
be pinned down by savers’rate of time preference, modulo country-speci…c distortions such
as import duties on physical capital. The wage rate, w, will also have an interest component
built into it. The wage will be endogenously determined. Hence, the cost of purchasing one
unit of the amalgam, q, will be dictated by the equilibrium wage rate, w, via (1).
    Finally, it is also easy to deduce that the quantities of physical capital and labor required
to make k units of the amalgam are given by

                                       e   w ! 1                 !     ! 1
                                       k=(      )                              k                               (2)
                                           r1 !

and
                                              w !               !    ! 1
                                        l=(        )                          k:                               (3)
                                              r1 !


4     Intermediaries
Intermediation is a competitive industry. An intermediary borrows from consumers/workers
and enters into …nancial contracts with new …rms to supply working capital for the latters’
ventures. The entrepreneur starting a new …rm may have some personal funds of his own, f .
He can choose to use some or all of its funds to …nance part of the venture. At the time of the


                                                           12
contract, the intermediary knows the …rm’s productivity ladder, f 0 ;                        1 ; :::; S g,   and its …xed
cost, . The contract speci…es, among other things, the funds that the intermediary will
invest in the …rm over the course of its lifetime and the payments that the …rm will make to
the intermediary. These investments and payments are contingent on reports that the …rm
makes to the intermediary about its position on the productivity ladder. The intermediary
cannot observe without cost the …rm’s position on the productivity ladder. Speci…cally, in
any period t of the …rm’s life, it cannot see ot or                       s.

   Now, suppose that in period t the …rm reports that its productivity level is                              r,   which may
                                                7
di¤er from the true level                     s.    The intermediary can choose whether it wants to monitor the
…rm’s report. The success of an audit in detecting an untruthful report is a random event.
The intermediary can choose the odds, p, of a successful audit. Write the cost function for
monitoring as follows:
                                                                      k     1
                                                    C(k; p; q; z) = q( )2 (           1)p.                              (4)
                                                                      z 1 p
   This cost function has four noteworthy properties. First, it is increasing and convex in
the odds, p, of a successful audit. When p = 0, both C(k; 0; q; z) = 0 and C1 (0; p; q; z) =
C2 (k; 0; q; z) = 0; as p ! 1, both C(k; p; q; z) ! 1 and C2 (k; p; q; z) ! 1. Second, the
marginal and total costs of monitoring are increasing in the price of the amalgam, q; that
is, C3 (k; p; q; z) > 0 and C23 (k; p; q; z) > 0. This is a desirable property if the amalgamated
input must be used for monitoring. Third, the cost is increasing and convex in the size
of the project as measured by the amalgamated input k; that is, C1 (k; p; q; z) > 0 and
C11 (k; p; q; z) > 0. A larger scale implies there are more transactions to monitor. Detecting
fraud will be harder. Fourth, the cost of monitoring is decreasing in the productivity of
the …nancial sector, which is represented here by z. (The dependence of C on q and z is
suppressed when not needed to simplify the notation.)
   7
       It is assumed that the …rm shows to the intermediary a level of output that would correspond to the
report    r.   If   r   <   s,   then the intermediary must hide some of its output. Note that it is not feasible to
make a report where              r   >   s.   Footnote 8 continues this discussion.




                                                                    13
5     The Contract Problem
The contract problem between an entrepreneur and an intermediary is now formulated. In
preparation, note that the probability distribution for the …rm surviving until date t with a
productivity level s is given by
                                                    8
                                                    >
                                                    >     s s 1
                                                                        ;                   if s = t;
                                                    >
                                                    <
                                   Pr(s; t) =             s                     t 1                                          (5)
                                                              (1            )         ;     if s < t;
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    >
                                                    : 0;                                    if s > t:

The discount factor for both …rms and intermediaries is denoted by .
    A …nancial contract between an entrepreneur and intermediary will stipulate the following
for each step/date pair, (s; t): (i) the quantities of working capital to be supplied by the
intermediary to the …rm, k(s; t); (ii) a schedule of payments by the …rm to the intermediary,
x(s; t); and (iii) audit detection probabilities, p(s; t). The contract also speci…es the amount
of funding, fe, that the entrepreneur will invest in the project. Take the entrepreneur as
turning over these funds to the intermediary at the start of the project. Because a large
number of competitive intermediaries are seeking to lend to each …rm, the optimal contract
will maximize the expected payo¤ of the …rm, subject to an expected non-negative pro…t
constraint for the intermediary. The problem is formulated as the truth-telling equilibrium
of a direct mechanism because the revelation principle applies. When a …rm is found to have
misrepresented its productivity, the intermediary imposes the harshest possible punishment:
It shuts the …rm down. Since the …rm has limited liability, it cannot be asked to pay out
more than its output in any period. The contract problem between the entrepreneur and
intermediary can be expressed as
                                              T minft;Sg
                                              X  X
             v=            max                                     t
                                                                       [ s k(s; t)           x(s; t)] Pr (s; t) + f   fe;   (P2)
                  fk(s;t);x(s;t);p(s;t);feg   t=1   s=0

subject to
                     s k(s; t)       x(s; t)        0; for s = f0;                        ; minft; Sgg and all t;            (6)



                                                                       14
  T min(t;Sg
  X  X
                t
                    [ s k(s; t)         x(s; t)] Pr (s; t)
  t=u   s=u
              T minft;Sg
              X  X                                                            Y
                                                                              t
                                  t
                                      [ s k(u     1; t)       x(u    1; t)]         [1    p (u   1; n)] Pr (s; t) ;
               t=u     s=u                                                    n=u

                                                                                                 for all u 2 f1; :::; Sg ;

                                                                                                                        (7)

                                          k(t; t) = k(t        1; t); for all t          S;                             (8)

                       k(s        1; t) = k(s        1; s);     for 1     s < S and t            s + 1;
                                                                                                                        (9)
                       k(S; t) = k(S; S);                       for t > S,
and
          T minft;Sg
          X  X
                             t
                                 [x(s; t)       C (p(s; t); k(s; t))      qk(s; t)] Pr (s; t)         + fe     0;      (10)
          t=1        s=0

                                                          f     fe   0:                                                (11)

   The objective function in (P2) represents the expected present value of the pro…ts for
the …rm. This is simply the expected present value of the gross returns on working capital
investments, minus the payments that the …rm must make to the intermediary. The maxi-
mized value of this is denoted by v, which represents the value of a newly formed …rm. The
value of running the …rm to an entrepreneur, v, will be a function of: the amount of funds
the entrepreneur possesses, f ; the price of inputs, q; the state of the …nancial system,                              and
z; and the type of technology that is being operated,                               (note that      has been suppressed
in the above contracting problem to ease notation). Equation (6) is the limited liability
constraint for the …rm. The intermediary cannot take more than the …rm produces at the
step/date combination (s; t).
   The incentive constraint for a …rm is speci…ed by (7). This constraint is imposed on the
…rm only at each state/date combination where there is a new productivity draw. Since no
information is revealed at dates and states where there is not a new productivity draw, the
…rm can be treated as not making a report and hence as not having an incentive constraint


                                                               15
at such nodes. The validity of this is established in Appendix 13.1. There a more general
problem is formulated where reports are allowed at all dates and times. These reports are
general in nature and can be inconsistent over time or infeasible; for example, the …rm can
make a report that implies that it lied in the past. This general problem has a single time-1
incentive constraint that requires the expected present value to the …rm from adopting a
truth-telling strategy to be at least as good as the expected present value to the …rm from any
other reporting strategy. It is shown that any contract that is feasible for this more general
formulation is also feasible for the restricted problem presented above and vice versa. This
establishes the validity of imposing S stepwise incentive constraints along the diagonal of
Figure 1.8
    The left-hand side of the constraint shows the value to the …rm when it truthfully reports
that it currently has the step/date pair (u; u), for all u 2 f1; :::; Sg. The right-hand side
denotes the value from lying and reporting that the pair is (u                          1; u) or that a stall has
occurred. Suppose that the …rm lies at time u and reports that its productivity is u                               1.
Then, in period t          u the …rm will keep the cash ‡ow             s k(u   1; t)      x(u    1; t), provided
that it is not caught cheating. The odds of the intermediary not detecting this fraud are
          Q
given by tn=u [1 p (u 1; n)], since the intermediary will engage in auditing from time
u to t. One would expect that in (7) the probabilities for arriving at an (s; t) pair should
be conditioned on starting from the step/date combination (u; u). This is true; however,
note that the initial odds of landing at (u; u) are embodied in a multiplicative manner in
the Pr (s; t) terms and these will cancel out on both sides of (7). Thus, the unconditional
   8
       Do incentive constaints need to be imposed to prevent the …rm from “lying upward?” The answer is
no. To see this, suppose that the …rm stalls at time u and therefore …nds itself at the node (u       1; u). Would
it have an incentive to lie upward and claim that it did not stall? By reporting that it was at node (u; u) the
…rm might hope to receive a higher level of working capital, k(u + 1; u + 1) > k(u; u) from the intermediary.
In the current setting, this is impossible because the intermediary could simply demand that the …rm shows
output in the amount      u k(u; u).   This is greater than what the …rm can actually produce at its current node,
 u 1 k(u; u).   Alternatively, the intermediary could ask for a payment, x(u; u), larger than     u 1 k(u; u).   This
discussion is continued in footnotes 9 and 11.



                                                          16
                  Figure 2: The information and irreversibility constraints.

probabilities, or the Pr (s; t)’s, can be used in (7).
   Note that in each period t      1, when there is not a stall, the contract will specify a level
of working capital for the next period, t. This is done before it is known whether there will
be a stall in the next period. Therefore, the value of the working capital in the state where
productivity grows, k(t + 1; t), will equal the value in the state where it does not, k(t; t).
This explains equation (8).
   The information constraint is portrayed in Figure 2 by the vertical boxes de…ned by the
solid lines. The two working capitals within each vertical box must have the same value.
Equation (9) is an irreversibility constraint on working capital. Speci…cally, if a productivity
stall occurs in period s, working capital becomes locked in at its current level, k(s       1; s).
The irreversibility constraint is illustrated by the horizontal boxes drawn with the dashed-
dotted lines in Figure 2. All working capitals within a horizontal box take the same value.
Envision a plant as having a putty-clay structure: In the event of a stall, all inputs become
locked in.
   The penultimate constraint (10) stipulates that the intermediary expects to earn positive



                                                17
pro…ts from its loan contract. For an (s; t) combination the intermediary will earn x(s; t)
C (p(s; t); k(s; t)) qk(s; t) in pro…ts after netting out both the cost of monitoring and raising
the funds for the working capital investment. The intermediary must also …nance the up-
front …xed cost for the project. This is represented by the term        in (10). Finally, equation
(11) is the self-…nancing constraint. It simply states that the new …rm cannot invest more
in the venture than it has.
   The contract between the entrepreneur and the intermediary speci…es a plan for invest-
ment, monitoring, and payments such that the …rm always truthfully reports productivity.
This plan generally leads to a suboptimal level of investment due to the need to provide
incentives so that the …rm will always report the true state of productivity. Intuitively, one
might think that this incentive problem will be reduced if the entrepreneur uses some of
his own money to start up the …rm. In fact, the entrepreneur should invest everything in
his project. This yields an expected gross return on investment at least as great as the
1= that the entrepreneur can earn from depositing his funds in a savings account with an
intermediary.

Lemma 1 (Go all in) It is weakly e¢ cient to set fe = f .

Proof. See Appendix 13.3.
   Suppose that the …rm reports at time t = u that the technology has stalled at step u          1.
If the incentive constraint is binding at step u, then the intermediary should monitor the
…rm over the remainder of its life. As the right-hand side of (7) shows, this monitoring
activity reduces the …rm’s incentive to lie. In fact, a feature of the contract is that the …rm
will never lie, precisely because the incentive constraint (7) always holds.

Lemma 2 (Trust but verify) Upon a report by the …rm at time u of a stall at node (u 1; u),
for u = 1; 2;      ; S, the intermediary will monitor the project for the remaining time, t =
u; u + 1;      ; T , contingent upon survival, if and only if the incentive constraint (7) binds at
node (u; u).


                                                 18
Proof. See Appendix 13.5.
    How should the intermediary schedule the ‡ow of payments owed by the …rm, x(s; t)? To
encourage the …rm to always tell the truth the intermediary should backload the rewards that
the …rm can earn. In particular, it is (weakly) optimal to let the …rm realize all of its awards
only upon arrival at the terminal node (S; T ). The intermediary should take away all the
cash ‡ow from the …rm before this terminal node by setting x(s; t) =                                 s k(s; t)   for (s; t) 6=
(S; T ). It should then give the …rm at node (S; T ) all of the expected accrued pro…ts from the
project. This amounts to a negative payment from the …rm to the intermediary at this time
so that x(S; T ) 0. The pro…ts from the enterprise will amount in expected present-value
         P P
terms to Tt=1 minft;Sg
                 s=0
                        t
                          [ s k(s; t) C (p(s; t); k(s; t)) qk(s; t)] Pr (s; t) +f     0.
There may be other payment schedules that are equally e¢ cient but none can dominate this
one.9

Lemma 3 (Backloading) An optimal payment schedule from the …rm to the intermediary,
fx(s; t)g, is given by

   1. x(s; t) =     s k(s; t)   , for 0      s    S, s          t,1    t      T , and (s; t) 6= (S; T );

   2.

                                           XT minft;Sg
                                               X
                                                            t
           x(S; T ) =   S k(S; T )        f                     [ s k(s; t)      C (p(s; t); k(s; t))        qk(s; t)] Pr (s; t)
                                           t=1    s=0
                                                                                                       T
                                                                                           + f g=[         Pr (S; T )]   0:


Proof. See Appendix 13.6.
   9
       Return to the issue of lying upward, as discussed in footnote 8. Now, imagine an alternative setting
where the …rm gets a private signal about whether it is going to move up the ladder at time u before the
intermediary provides any working capital. Would it like to lie upwards in an attempt to receive more
working capital? The intermediary can structure a payment schedule that renders this option unattractive.
When the …rm fails to produce the         u k(u; u)   units of output in period u consistent with the positive signal,
then the intermediary should simply take all of actual output, or               u 1 k(u; u),   forever after.



                                                                19
5.1    Discussion

The solution to the above contract problem shares some features common to dynamic con-
tracts, but it also has some properties that are quite di¤erent. The current setting allows
for a nonstationary, non-decreasing process for TFP, or for the ’s. In fact, the ’s could be
allowed to drop after a stall, as long as the descent is deterministic (or any shocks are public
knowledge). The steps on the ladder need not be equally spaced. The odds of moving up
the ladder and the probabilities of survival could also be expressed as functions of s and t.
The theory is developed in terms of the left-hand side of (5), Pr (s; t), which is a general
function of s and t. Additionally, it would make no di¤erence if investors had to incur a
…xed cost every time they attempt to move up the ladder.
   The contract problem (P2) is presented in its primitive sequence space form as opposed
to the more typical recursive representation. This is more transparent, given the structure
adopted here for the economic environment. First, the binding pattern of the incentive
constraints may be quite complicated. In particular, it could bind at node (s; s), not bind
at node (s + 1; s + 1), and bind again at some node (s + j; s + j) for j > 1. This depends on
the assumed structure for the productivity ladder.
   Second, the fact that productivity can step up only to the next rung on the ladder
or remain on the current step complicates matters. It inserts history dependence into the
problem and implies that private information about the true value of the shock may persist
into the future. In the recursive representation, the intermediary would pick, each period, the
continuation payo¤s for the …rm subject to a promise-keeping constraint, say, as in Clementi
and Hopenhayn (2006). When the …rm lies, it will have a di¤erent belief about how the future
will evolve vis-à-vis the intermediary, given the history dependence in the shock structure.
The intermediary must also choose a continuation payo¤ to govern this situation, as in the
recursive formulation of Fernandez and Phelan (2000). This payo¤ places an upper bound on
the value of lying in the future. As a result, it forms the basis of a threat-keeping constraint
that the problem must also incorporate, a feature not required in Clementi and Hopenhayn
(2006). The sequence space form turns out to be more intuitive for the problem at hand.

                                              20
6     The Contract with Costly Cash-Flow Control
The theory developed up to this point stresses the role of monitoring in designing an e¢ cient
contract. The ability to monitor reduces the incentive of the …rm to misrepresent its current
situation and misappropriate funds, which makes it easier for the intermediary to recover
its investment and to …nance technology adoption. When monitoring is very costly, an
intermediary must rely primarily on a backloading strategy to create the incentives for
truthful behavior. As will be seen in the quantitative illustration, which is the subject of
Section 9, it may not be possible to …nance certain technologies absent the ability to monitor
e¤ectively. This is most likely to happen when a project has a large up front investment
and promises payo¤ streams tilted toward the end of the venture’s lifetime. This is the case
in the Mexico/United States example studied in Section 9. Here, Mexico has an ine¢ cient
monitoring technology relative to that of the United States. Thus, it is not able to adopt the
advanced technology used by the United States, which has a large …xed cost and a convex
productivity pro…le. This occurs despite the fact that production cost is lower in Mexico.
Instead, Mexico uses a less-productive technology, with a lower …xed cost and a concave
productivity schedule, which can be …nanced using a backloading strategy that requires
little monitoring.
    The cost of production in some countries is much lower than in Mexico. These lower
production costs should imply bigger pro…ts that, in turn, will make it easier for the in-
termediary to recover its investment. The intermediary could promise the …rm these extra
pro…ts at node (S; T ), which will increase the incentive e¤ects of backloading. Maybe such
countries could implement the U.S. technology at their lower cost of production. If not, then
what prevents them from using the Mexican technology? After all, it requires little in the
way of monitoring services.
    An extension to the baseline theory that provides one possible answer is now developed.
The premise is that it is very costly for intermediaries in some countries to force …rms to
pay out all of their publicly acknowledged output. Perhaps a fraction of output inherently
bene…ts the operators of …rms in the form of perks, kickbacks, nepotism, and so on. The

                                             21
intermediary can o¤er enticements to the operators of …rms so they will not do this, of course,
but this limits the types of technology that can be implemented. The extended model is
applied in Section 9 to India, where labor costs are extremely low.


6.1        Adding Costly Cash-Flow Control

Assume that a …rm can openly take the fraction                     of output due to weak institutional
structures. The intermediary cannot recover this output unless it catches the operators of
the …rm lying about the …rm’s state during an audit.10 The intermediary must design the
contract in a manner such that the retention of output will be dissuaded. How does this
a¤ect the contract presented in (P2)?
    Before characterizing the optimal contract for the extended setting, two observations are
made:

   1. The intermediary wants to design a contract that dissuades the …rm from trying to
         retain the fraction     of output at a node. To accomplish this, the payo¤ at any node
         from deciding not to retain part of output must be at least as great at the payo¤ from
         retaining a portion of output.

   2. A retention request is an out-of-equilibrium move. Therefore, it is always weakly
         e¢ cient for the intermediary to threaten to respond to a retention by lowering the
         …rm’s payo¤ to the minimum amount possible.

    These two observations lead to a no-retention constraint at each node (s; t) on the design
   10
        The assumption that the intermediary can take everything when the …rm is caught lying in an audit
is not necessary. It serves to separate the incentive constraints from the no-retention constraints, (12) and
(13), presented below. As a result, the incentive constraints (7) are not directly a¤ected by this extension.
This feature is a virtue for both analytical clarity and simplicity.




                                                      22
of the contract:
              X
              T
                      j
                          [ s k(s; j)              x(s; j)] Pr (s; j)
              j=t

                X
                T
                          j
                              s k(s; j)       Pr (s; j) ; for 1         s    S; s < t, 2       t    T (o¤-diagonal node)
                j=t


                                                                                                                        (12)

and
                    T minft;Sg
                    X  X
                                          t
                                              [ s k(s; t)       x(s; t)] Pr (s; t)
                    t=u         s=u
                          T minft;Sg
                          X  X
                                               t
                                                    s k(u   1; t) Pr (s; t) ; for 1        u       S (diagonal node):   (13)
                          t=u    s=u

The …rst constraint (12) applies to the case of a stall at state s. Here, productivity is stuck
at    s   forever. The second constraint (13) governs the situation where the …rm can still move
up the productivity ladder. If the …rm exercises its retention option, then the intermediary
will keep the capital stock at k(u                          1; t); that is, it will no longer evolve with the state of
the …rm’s productivity. Equation (9) then implies that the capital stock is locked in.
     To formulate the contract problem with costly cash-‡ow control, simply append the
no-retention constraints (12) and (13) to problem (P2). Lemma 2 still holds. Thus, the
intermediary will again monitor the …rm for the rest of its life whenever it claims that
technological progress has stalled (if and only if the incentive constraint at the stalled step
is binding). The payment schedule fx(s; t)g now takes a di¤erent form. In the baseline
version of the model, it is always optimal to make all payments to the …rm at the terminal
node (S; T ) to relax the incentive constraints. The retention option precludes this, however.
To discourage the …rm from exercising its retention option, it pays for the intermediary to
make additional payments, N (s; T ), to the …rm at the terminal date T for all steps s                                     S
on the ladder, provided the …rm does not exercise its retention option at any time before T .
This payment should equal the expected present value of what the …rm would receive if it


                                                                        23
exercised the retention option. Thus,
                               PT                       t
                                             t=s+1           s k(s; t)    Pr (s; t)
                       N (s; T ) =                      T
                                                                                        ; for 0   s    S:                 (14)
                                                             Pr(s; T )

Hence, Lemma 3 now appears as Lemma 4. Observe how the necessity to provide retention
payments reduces the size of the reward,                        x(S; T ), that the intermediary can give to the
…rm if and when it reaches the end of the ladder or node (S; T ). Thus, retention payments
reduce the intermediary’s ability to redirect the …rm’s rewards (or cash ‡ow) to the top of
the ladder.11

Lemma 4 (Backloading with retention payments) An optimal payment schedule from the
…rm to the intermediary, fx(s; t)g, is given by

   1. x(s; t) =      s k(s; t)   , for 0        s     S; 1      t < T , and s             t;

   2. x(s; T ) =      s k(s; T )        N (s; T ), for 0          s < S;

   3.
                                                T minft;Sg
                                                X  X
                                                                  t
        x(S; T ) =       S k(S; T )         f                         [ s k(s; t)        C (p(s; t); k(s; t))   qk(s; t)] Pr(s; t)
                                                t=1    s=0
                           X
                           S
                                   T                                                T
                                       N (s; T ) Pr (s; T )              + f g=[        Pr (S; T )];
                           s=0

        where N (s; T ) is speci…ed by (14).

Proof. See Appendix 13.6.
    Backloading the retention payments helps to satisfy the incentive constraint. To under-
stand this, suppose that the …rm lies and declares a stall at node (u; u). The intermediary
  11
       Return to the setting discussed in footnote 9, where the …rm gets a private signal about whether it will
move up the ladder before the intermediary supplies any working capital. Would it like to lie upward? If
the …rm can retain some output upon a stall, it may like to do this. The intermediary would then need to
provide an incentive not to lie upward. It could do this by providing a payment for reporting a stall. This
is another source of leakage in the contract, similar to the retention payments.


                                                                 24
will audit the …rm from then on. Recall the intermediary can recover all output if detects
a lie at some node (u; t), where t             u. Some …rms will indeed stall and …nd themselves
at node (u          1; u). Under the old contract, a stalled …rm would receive nothing because
x(u       1; t) =   u 1 k(u   1; t) for all t > u    1. This …rm can exercise its retention option and
take        u 1 k(u   1; t) for t > u     1. Now a …rm that is at node (u; u), but declares that it is
at (u      1; u), would also like to claim this part of output. It can potentially do this provided
it is not caught. To mitigate this problem, the intermediary gives the …rm the accrued value
of these retentions, N (u          1; T ), at the end of the contract, or time T , assuming that the
latter survives. This reduces the incentive for a …rm to lie and declare a stall at node (u; u).
A deceitful …rm will receive the payment N (u  1; T ) only if it successfully evades detection
                                                             Q
along the entire path from u to T . This happens with odds Tn=u [1 p (u 1; n)].
    Note how the intermediary’s ability to monitor interacts with the …rm’s potential to
retain output. The expected value of the retention payment from lying at (u; u) is N (u
      Q
1; T ) Tn=u [1 p (u 1; n)], for all u 2 f1; :::; Sg. When monitoring is very e¤ective, it is
di¢ cult for a masquerading …rm to capture this payment, which reduces the incentive to lie.
When monitoring is ine¤ective, it is easy to do this. The incentive to lie is then higher.
    Finally, when is investment e¢ cient or when will it match the level that would occur in
a world where the intermediary can observe the …rm’s shock without cost?12 Suppose that
after some state/date combination (t ; t ) along the diagonal of the ladder that neither the
incentive nor no-retention constraints, (7) and (13), ever bind again. Will investment be
e¢ cient from then on? Yes.

Lemma 5 (E¢ cient investment) Suppose that neither the incentive nor the diagonal-node
   12
        An implication of the irreversible investment assumption is now discussed. Suppose that capital can be
freely adjusted. Then, after a stall has been declared the intermediary could withdraw all working capital
from the venture. The ability of the …rm to retain funds would not matter. Alternatively, suppose the
intermediary cannot reduce the level of working capital but that the …rm can use some of the funds it retains
to increase inputs. To dissuade this possibility the intermediary could (i) monitor the …rm more heavily and
take everything (including the additional inputs) if it detects malfeasance and/or (ii) o¤er a larger retention
payment to entice the …rm not to retain some of its output.


                                                       25
no-retention constraints ever bind after node (t ; t ) for t < S. Investment will be e¢ ciently
undertaken on arriving at the state/date combination (t ; t ). (That is, the capital stock will
be at its e¢ cient level from period t + 1 on.)

Proof. See Appendix 13.7.



7       Self-Financed Start-Up Funding
The self-…nancing of projects is discussed in this section. To highlight some points related to
self-…nancing, per se, the environment outlined previously is simpli…ed slightly. In particular,
assume that there is one type of entrepreneur that can operate any type of project. To map
this into the developed structure, let t =    = max   2T ,   (f ) =   (f ) (the highest type), and
    (f ) = 0 for   6=   (no entrepreneurs of other types).
      The higher the level of funds that an entrepreneur possesses, then the greater is the
fraction of the project that he can self-…nance. This circumvents the informational problem.
At some point, the …rst-best allocations can be achieved.

Lemma 6 (E¢ cient self-…nance) There exists a level of self-…nanced start-up funding, fb,
such that the …rst-best allocations obtain.

Proof. See Appendix 13.8.
      At a given level of factor prices some technologies,         2 T , will be able to produce
a higher level of potential output than others. In particular, suppose that the following
condition holds.

Condition 7 (Technology ranking) Assume that, at some particular input price, q, technol-
ogy     yields a higher …rst-best level of expected discounted pro…ts than technology   whenever
    > . (Note that the ranking of technologies may change as the input price changes.)

Now, an entrepreneur is free to choose any technology he likes. He will select the one,          ,
that maximizes his surplus. That is,

                                       = arg max v(f ; )     " :                             (15)
                                              2T


                                                26
As an entrepreneur’s level of funds increases, allowing him to self-…nance his project better,
the incentive problem disappears. The entrepreneur should start favoring more advanced
technologies (higher ’s) over less advanced ones.

Proposition 8 (Technology switching) Suppose that at some level of wealth, f                     ;   , technology
  <    is chosen by an entrepreneur because it maximizes the value of his …rm. There exists a
set of wealth levels, F     ;      [f   ;       ; fb ] such that the more advanced technology   is preferred to
technology    whenever f 2 F            ;       and technology    is preferred to the more advanced technology
    whenever f 2 [f   ;   ; fb ]   F        ;   .

Proof. Appendix 13.9.
Given that there is a distribution of funds across new entrepreneurs, as represented by (f ),
some entrepreneurs may prefer to use one type of technology while others pick di¤erent ones.
Thus, in general, multiple technologies may be used in an economy.

Corollary 1 (Coexisting technologies) It is possible for multiple technologies to coexist in
an economy.

Proof. Appendix 13.10.
Some simple two-period examples illustrating the contracting setup are presented in Appen-
dix 15.



8      Equilibrium
There is one unit of labor available in the economy. This must be split across all operating
…rms. Recall that a …rm’s type is given by                   2 T , which indexes the vector f 0 ;    1 ; :::; S ;   g
connected with a particular productivity ladder and …xed cost. Again, the technologies are
ordered so that higher ’s correspond with more advanced technologies. An entrepreneur of
type t 2 T can potentially start a new …rm of type                        t. He incurs the disutility cost, " ,
(measured in terms of consumption) to operate a type- …rm. Entrepreneurs may di¤er by


                                                             27
the level of funds, f , that they bring to the project. The (non-normalized) distribution for
potential type-t entrepreneurs over funds is represented by                      t (f )   : [0; f ] ! [0; 1].
   Clearly an entrepreneur will operate the technology that o¤ers the largest surplus. The
choice for a type-t entrepreneur with f in funds is represented by                           (t; f ), where

                                        (t; f ) = arg max[v(f ; )            " ]:                               (16)
                                                           t

It may be the case that this entrepreneur does not want to operate any type of project, be-
cause v(f;      ) < " . Let the indicator function I (t; f ) denote whether a type-t entrepreneur
with f in funds will operate (or match with) a type- venture. It is de…ned by
                       8
                       < 1; if = arg max [v(f ; ) " ] and v(f ; ) "         0;
                                           t
           I (t; f ) =                                                                                          (17)
                       : 0; otherwise.

Note that the entrepreneur’s type, t, will not in‡uence his decision about how much working
capital and labor to hire. Represent the working capital and labor used at an (s; t) node in
a type- …rm, operated by an entrepreneur with f in funds, by k(s; t; ; f ) and l(s; t; ; f ),
respectively.
   The labor market clearing condition for the economy then reads
        XXZ                T minft;Sg
                           X  X
                 I (t; f )           [l(s; t; ; f ) + lm (s; t; ; f )] Pr (s; t) d t (f ) = 1;                  (18)
          2T t=1               t=1      s=1

where lm (s; t; ; f ) is the amount of labor that an intermediary will spend at node (s; t)
monitoring a type- venture operated by an entrepreneur with funds f . Every period some
…rms die; this death process is subsumed in the probabilities Pr (s; t). The quantity of the
amalgamated input used in monitoring, km (s; t; ; f ), is given by
                                   k(s; t; ; f ) 2        1
             km (s; t; ; f ) = [                ][                            1]p(s; t; ; f ) [cf. (4)],        (19)
                                         z         1   p(s; t; ; f )
which implies a usage of labor in the following amount:
                                              w !      !       ! 1
                      lm (s; t; ; f ) = (          )                 km (s; t; ; f ) [cf. (3)].                 (20)
                                              r1 !
   A de…nition of the competitive equilibrium under study is now presented to crystallize
the discussion so far.

                                                       28
De…nition 1 For a given steady-state cost of capital, r, a stationary competitive equi-
librium is described by (a) a set of working capital allocations, k(s; t; ; f ), labor alloca-
tions, l(s; t; ; f ) and lm (s; t; ; f ), and monitoring strategy, p(s; t; ; f ); (b) a set of optimal
matches between entrepreneurs and technologies represented by I (t; f ); and (c) an amalga-
mated input price, q, and wage rate, w, all such that

    1. The working capital …nancing program, k(s; t; ; f ), and the monitoring strategy, p(s; t; ; f ),
       speci…ed in the …nancial contract maximize the value of a type- venture for an en-
       trepreneur with f in funds, as set out by (P2), given the amalgamated input price, q.
       [Here (P2) should be amended to include the no-retention constraints (12) and (13).]

    2. The set of optimal matches between entrepreneurs and technologies, as represented by
       I (t; f ),is speci…ed by (17).

    3. A type- venture operated by an entrepreneur with f in funds hires labor, l(s; t; ; f ),
       to minimize its costs in accordance with (P1), given wages, w, and the size of the loan,
       k(s; t; ; f ), o¤ered by the intermediary. [This implies that l(s; t; ; f ) = f(w=r)[!=(1
              !
       !)]g       k(s; t; ; f ).]

    4. The amount of labor, lm (s; t; ; f ), used to monitor a venture is given by (20) in con-
       junction with (19).

    5. The price of the amalgamated input, q, is dictated by w in accordance with (1).

    6. The wage rate, w, is determined so that the labor market clears, as written in (18).



9      A Quantitative Illustration: The Choice of Technol-
       ogy in India, Mexico, and the United States
Why might one country choose a di¤erent set of production technologies than another coun-
try? A quantitative illustration is presented to show that the …nancial mechanism proposed


                                                 29
here o¤ers some promise for explaining cross-country di¤erences in technology adoption and,
hence, income. There are many reasons, of course, why countries may adopt di¤erent tech-
nology: di¤erences in the supplies of labor or natural resources that create a comparative
advantage for certain types of …rms; government regulations, subsidies, or taxes that favor
certain forms of enterprise over others; and the presence of labor unions and other factors
that may dissuade certain types of business. While these are valid reasons, the focus here
is on di¤erences in the e¢ ciency of the …nancial system. This is done without apology, be-
cause abstraction is a necessary ingredient for theory. A formal empirical assessment of the
mechanism, and a comparison with other explanations (including …nancial ones), is beyond
the scope of this work.
   In the quantitative illustration, an entrepreneur is free to adopt one of three technologies:
advanced, intermediate, and entry level. Additionally, it is assumed that entrepreneurs
have no start-up funds of their own (f = 0).13 The advanced technology has a (convex)
productivity ladder that grows faster than the intermediate one (which has a concave ladder),
which in turn grows faster than the entry-level technology (which also has a concave ladder).
The …xed cost for the advanced technology is bigger than that of the intermediate one,
which is larger than that of the entry-level technology. The advanced technology, with its
convex payo¤ structure and high …xed cost, is di¢ cult to implement without monitoring at
high factor prices. It is also di¢ cult to adopt at low factor prices when there is a costly
cash-‡ow control problem. The entry-level technology with its very low …xed cost is easy
to implement in the absence of monitoring and when there is a costly cash-‡ow control
problem. A country’s choice of technology depends on its factor prices and the state of its
  13
       Assume that there are many entrepreneurs capable of running each technology; that is, set   t (0)   =f ,
where f is some large number. This implies that there is free-entry into running a …rm, as in Hopenhayn
and Rogerson (1993). Assuming that only one technology, , will be run in a country, the labor-market
clearing condition (18) now appears as

                            T minft;Sg
                            X   X
                                         [l(s; t; ; 0) + lm (s; t; ; 0)] Pr (s; t) e f = 1;
                            t=1   s=1

where e      f is the equilibrium fraction of potential type- entrepreneurs that run a …rm.


                                                         30
…nancial system. An equilibrium is constructed in which the United States will adopt the
advanced technology, Mexico selects the intermediate one, and India chooses the entry-level
technology.
   Since the focus here is on the long run, let the length of a period be 5 years and set the
number of periods to 10, so that T = 10. Given this period length, the discount factor is
set so    = 0:985 , slightly below the 3 percent return documented by Siegal (1992). This
is a conservative choice since it gives backloaded long-term contracts a better chance. The
weight on capital in the production function, !, is chosen so that ! = 0:33. A value of 0:85
is assigned to the scale parameter,     . According to Guner, Ventura, and Xu (2008), this
lies in the range of recent studies.


9.1      Estimating the Input Prices

A key input into the analysis is the price for the amalgamated input, q. Start with Mexico
and the United States. The price of this input in Mexico relative to the United States is
what is important. Normalize this price to be 1 for the United States, so that q U S = 1.
(A superscript attached to a variable, either M X or U S, denotes the relevant country of
interest; viz, Mexico or the United States.) This can be done by picking an appropriate
                                       US
value for U.S. labor productivity,          , given values for the rental rate on capital, rU S , and
the wage rate, wU S . How to do this is discussed below. Is the price for this input more or
less expensive in Mexico? On the one hand, wages are much lower in Mexico. On the other
hand, capital is more expensive and labor is less productive. Hence, the answer is unclear
ex ante. Estimating the price of the input in Mexico, q M X , requires using formulas (1), (2),
and (3) in conjunction with an estimate of the rental price of capital in Mexico, rM X , the
wage rate, wM X , and the productivity of labor,        MX
                                                             .
   How is q U S set to 1? First, the rental rate on capital, rU S , is pinned down. To do this,
suppose that the relative price of capital in terms of consumption in the United States is
1. Thus, pUk S =pUc S = 1, where pUk S and pUc S are the U.S. prices for capital and consumption
goods. Assume that interest plus depreciation in each country sums to 10 percent of the

                                                  31
cost of capital. Hence, set rU S = (1:105                1)      (pUk S =pUc S ) = 1:105      1, which measures
the cost of capital in terms of consumption. Second, a value for the wage rate, wU S , is
selected. This is obtained by dividing the annual payroll by the number of employees in all
establishments in the manufacturing sector using the 2008 Annual Survey of Manufactures.
Thus, wU S = 47; 501. Last, given the above data for rU S and wU S , the value for                         US
                                                                                                                that
sets q U S equal to 1 can be backed out using equation (1). This implies                      US
                                                                                                   = 96; 427.
       Turn now to Mexico. What is the value of q M X ? Determining this value requires knowing
rM X , wM X , and      MX
                            . First, a value for the rental price of capital, rM X , is determined. The
relative price of capital is estimated (from the Penn World Table) to be about 21 percent
higher in Mexico than in the United States. Therefore, (pM
                                                         k
                                                           X
                                                             =pM
                                                               c
                                                                 X
                                                                   )=(pUk S =pUc S ) = 1:21,
where pM
       k
         X
           and pM
                c
                  X
                    are the Mexican prices for capital and consumption goods. Therefore,
rM X = (1:105        1)     (pM
                              k
                                X
                                  =pM
                                    c
                                      X
                                        ) = (1:105        1)      (pUk S =pUc S )   [(pM
                                                                                       k
                                                                                         X
                                                                                           =pM
                                                                                             c
                                                                                               X
                                                                                                 )=(pUk S =pUc S )] =
rU S     [(pM
            k
              X
                =pM
                  c
                    X
                      )=(pUk S =pUc S )] = (1:105   1)        1:21. This gives the rental price of capital in
terms of consumption for Mexico.
       Second, a real wage rate is needed for Mexico, or a value for wM X is sought. Again, this is
pinned down using data on annual payroll and the total number of workers in manufacturing
establishments; in this case, the data come from Mexico’s National Institute of Statistics and
Geography (INEGI). The result is wM X = 21; 419 once Mexican pesos are converted to U.S.
dollars on a purchasing power parity basis.
       Third, what is the productivity of labor in Mexico? A unit of labor in Mexico is taken
to be 55 percent as productive as in the United States, following Schoellman (2012). So set
 MX                 US
         = 0:55           = 53; 035. Finally, by using the obtained values for rM X , wM X , and                MX


in equation (1), it then follows that q M X = 0:9371. The upshot is that the amalgamated
input is 6 percent less expensive in Mexico relative to the United States.
       Move now to India. The rental price of capital in India, rIN , is about 23 percent higher in
India than in the United States (from the Penn World Table). Therefore, rIN = (1:105 1)
1:23. The real wage rate for India, wIN , will be chosen to approximate the output per worker
in the manufacturing sector relative to the United States. As a result, wIN = 7; 000, which


                                                         32
is about 15 percent of the U.S. wage rate. Finally, what is the productivity of labor in India?
A unit of labor in India is taken to be 35 percent as productive as in the United States.
Here 1.6 years of education are added to the number in Barro and Lee (2013) to adjust
their aggregate number upward to re‡ect the higher level of education in the manufacturing
sector. The procedure developed in Schoellman (2011) is then used to obtain a measure of
                                                     IN
labor productivity. This leads to                            = 33; 750. Finally, by plugging the obtained values
for rIN , wIN , and        IN
                                    into equation (1), it follows that q IN = 0:6.


9.2       Parameterizing the Technology Ladder

There are nine unique rungs (eleven) on the technology ladder; the last three are the same.
The generic productivity ladder is described by

                  s    = ln[    0   +   1 (s   + 1) +     2 (s   + 1)2 +     3 (s   + 1)3 ], for s = 0;        ; 9:

The parameter values for this ladder are di¤erent for India, Mexico, and the United States.
The odds of stalling are …xed over the age of a …rm and are given by . This di¤ers by
technology.
    The probability of surviving (until age t) is also allowed to di¤er across technologies. The
survival probabilities follow the process

                                                                 2 5
                   t   =   t 1 [1       (   0   +   1t   +    2 t )] ,   for t = 2;       ; 10; with      1   = 1.

This structure characterizing the odds of survival and stalling can easily be added onto the
theory developed, as discussed in Section 5.1. Finally, an upper bound on working capital
is imposed. This is denoted by k and is common across technologies.14
  14
       This upper bound prevents the scale of a venture becoming unrealistically large as input prices drop
to low levels. That is, the upper bound forces decreasing returns to bite more sharply at some point than
the adopted Cobb-Douglas representation of the production function allows. This could be due to span of
control or other problems.




                                                                   33
9.3    The Choice of Technology in India, Mexico, and the United
       States

A quantitative illustration is now provided where India, Mexico and the United States all
choose to adopt di¤erent production technologies. The U.S. (or advanced) technology o¤ers
a productivity pro…le that grows much faster with age than the Mexican contour (which
represents an intermediate-level technology). The start-up cost for the U.S. technology is
higher than the Mexican one. Even though Mexican factor prices are slightly lower than
in the United States, it is not pro…table to operate the advanced technology in Mexico.
This is because …nancing the advanced technology (at Mexican factor prices) requires a
level of e¢ ciency in monitoring that is too high for the Mexican …nancial system. Without
e¢ cient monitoring it is not possible for …nanciers to recover the cost of investment. The
intermediate-level technology does not require such a high level of monitoring e¢ ciency. The
productivity pro…le for the Indian technology is lower and ‡atter than the Mexican one. The
cost of production in India (q IN = 0:6) is much less expensive than in Mexico (q M X = 0:94)
and the United States (q U S = 1). Therefore, at …rst glance, one would expect that India
could easily adopt the technology used in Mexico. But adopting the Mexican technology
is not feasible for India because of a costly cash-‡ow control problem. This factor prevent
…nanciers from recovering their up front investment. Thus, India is forced to adopt the
entry-level technology with a relatively ‡at productivity schedule but low …xed cost. The
quantitative illustration is constructed so that the framework matches the size distribution
of establishments by age that is observed for India, Mexico, and the United States. It also
replicates the average size of …rms in these three countries— in fact, for the United States
the entire size distribution is …t. These four sets of facts discipline the assumed productivity
pro…les.




                                              34
9.3.1   Calibrating the Technology Ladders

First, the survival probabilities are obtained from the Indian, Mexican, and U.S. data. In
particular, a polynomial of the speci…ed form is …t to the data from each country. It turns
out that these survival probabilities are remarkably similar for Mexico and the United States.
So, assume that they are the same.
   Second, this leaves the parameters for describing productivity and the odds of a stall
along the diagonal. These parameters are selected so that the model …ts, as well as pos-
sible, several stylized facts about the Indian, Mexican, and U.S. economies. These facts
are output per worker, average plant size, the average growth in TFP over a plant’s life,
the (complementary) cumulative distribution of employment by establishment age, and the
private-debt-to-GDP ratio. The (complementary) distribution of employment by establish-
ment age is characterized by a set of points. For the United States alone, the establishment
size distribution in Lorenz-curve form is also added to the collection of stylized facts. So, let
Dj proxy for the jth data target for the model and M j (p) represent the model’s prediction
for this data target as a function of the parameter vector p        f 0;   1; 2; 3;   ; ; kg. The
parameter vector p is chosen for each country in the following fashion:
                                          X
                                    min       [Dj    M j (p)]2 :
                                      p
                                          j

The parameter values used in the simulation are reported in Table 2.
   Figure 3 shows the salient features of the technologies used in India, Mexico, and the
United States. The productivity of a …rm increases with a move up the ladder. The U.S.
ladder has a convex/concave pro…le, while the Indian one is concave. The Mexican ladder
lies between the other two. Note that the ascent is much steeper for a U.S. …rm than a
Mexican one. The productivity pro…le for the Indian is lower and ‡atter than the Mexican
one. The survival rate is higher for younger establishments in India than for plants in either
Mexico or the United States (recall that the survival rates for the latter two countries are the
same). The shape of the technology ladder, or the ’s, is identi…ed from the age distribution
of employment in each country. In Appendix 15.3, the two-period example presented earlier

                                                35
                                                          Survival probability                                             Productivity ladder
                                                    1.0                                                               10
                                                                                                                                        U.S.
                                                              India
                                                    0.8




                                                                                       Productivity, θs (log scale)
                             Prob of Survival, σs
                                                                                                                                               Mexico
                                                    0.6



                                                    0.4                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                   India

                                                    0.2
                                                          Mexico
                                                                U.S.
                                                    0.0
                                                          2      4      6 t
                                                                      Age,    8   10                                       0   2    4   6      8     10
                                                                                                                                   Step, s



Figure 3: Productivity and survival in India, Mexico, and the United States (model). The
diagram displays the assumed productivity ladders (right panel) for India, Mexico, and the
United States. It also illustrates the probability pro…les for survival (left panel).

is used to illustrate how this is done.


9.3.2      Establishment Size Distributions

The model matches the U.S. establishment-size distribution very well, as seen in Figure 4,
which plots this distribution in Lorenz-curve form. However, the model overpredicts the
share of small establishments in employment.                                                                           Mexican plants are about half the size of
U.S. plants. The model mimics this feature of the data well, as shown in Table 3. Plants in
India are even smaller, about 10 percent of the size of American plants; the model predicts
7 percent.
    Figure 5 plots the model’s …t for the complementary cumulative distributions of employ-
ment by age for the three countries; that is, it graphs one minus the cumulative distribution
of employment by age.15 Establishments older than 30 years account for a smaller fraction
  15
       The data on establishments in India are problematic for at least two reasons. First, India has a large
informal sector. Therefore, using statistics containing information about only the formal sector might be mis-
leading. Second, the large di¤erences between sectors in India— mainly agriculture versus manufacturing—
imply that statistics computed at the aggregate level may not be close to those computed for manufacturing


                                                                                       36
                                                                       Parameter Values
       Parameter                                                                                                  Value
                                                                                                United States       Mexico        India
       Discount factor,                                                                         0:985             0:985        0:985
       Production function, scale, , capital’s share, !                                         0:8, 0:33         0:8, 0:33    0:8, 0:33
       Capital, upper bound, k                                                                  12                12           12
       Fixed cost,                                                                              0:255             0:015        0
       Labor e¢ ciency,                                                                         96; 427           53; 035      33; 750
       Pr Stall, 1                                                                              0:31              0:6          0:6
       Steps along ladder, the ’s (productivity)                                                See Fig. 3        See Fig. 3   See Fig. 3
       Pr survival at time t, the ’s                                                            See Fig. 3        See Fig. 3   See Fig. 3
       Input price, q                                                                           1:0               0:94         0:6
       Monitoring e¢ ciency, z                                                                  1:75              0:50         0:50
       Retention,                                                                               0:06              0:06         0:48

                   Table 2: The parameter values used in the simulations.




                                                            100
                                                                       model
                                                                       data
                                                            80
                         Cumulative Percent of Employment




                                                            60



                                                            40



                                                            20



                                                             0
                                                                  50    70      90        95        97       99   99.5
                                                                               Size percentile, Employment




Figure 4: U.S. establishment-size distribution in Lorenz-curve form: data and model. Data
sources for all …gures are presented in Appendix 14.




                                                                                      37
                                                                      1.0

                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                          model
                                                                      0.6                                                 data
                                                                                               India
                                                                      0.4




                   Share of Employment in Plants Older than x years
                                                                      0.2

                                                                      0.0
                                                                            5   10   15      20         25      30   35     40
                                                                      1.0

                                                                      0.8

                                                                      0.6
                                                                                             Mexico
                                                                      0.4

                                                                      0.2

                                                                      0.0
                                                                            5   10   15      20         25      30   35     40
                                                                      1.0

                                                                      0.8                 United States
                                                                      0.6

                                                                      0.4

                                                                      0.2

                                                                      0.0
                                                                            5   10   15      20          25     30   35     40
                                                                                          Plant Age, years ≥x




Figure 5: The (complementary) cumulative distributions of employment by age ( ) for
plants in India, Mexico, and the U.S., data and model.

of employment in India or Mexico relative to the United States, as the right sides of the
graphs show. The calibrated framework mimics the share of employment by age for Indian
…rms (the top panel) very well. The size of old Indian plants in the model is slightly too
small, though. Next, consider Mexico (the middle panel). The …t is good, but the model
has a little di¢ culty matching the size of young plants in Mexico; for example, the model
overpredicts (underpredicts) the employment share for establishments older (younger) than
10 years. Now switch to the United States (the bottom panel). The model matches the
share of employment by age for the United States very well. Still, it does not quite capture
the fact that some old …rms in the United States are very large. Finally, note from Table 3
that the model’s predictions about the relationship between employment and establishment
age are captured using TFP pro…les for plants that grow at roughly the correct rates for
India, Mexico, and the United States. That is, employment grows with age faster in an
American plant than in an Indian one because TFP grows faster in a plant in the United
States compared with one in India.
alone.


                                                                                               38
9.3.3   Productivity

Can the above framework generate sizable di¤erences in productivity between India, Mexico,
and the United States, due to di¤erences in technology adoption, which are in turn induced by
di¤erences in …nancial markets? Before proceeding, some de…nitions are needed. Aggregate
output in a country is given by
                                      T minft;Sg
                                      X  X
                            o( ) =                 o(s; t; ) Pr (s; t; ) ,
                                      t=1   s=1

where o(s; t; ) represents a …rm’s production at the (s; t) node when it uses the          technology.
Note that the odds of arriving at node (s; t) are now also a function of . In a similar vein,
de…ne the aggregate labor amounts of labor and capital that are hired by
                                      T minft;Sg
                                      X  X
                             l( ) =                l(s; t; ) Pr (s; t; ) ;
                                      t=1   s=1

                                      T minft;Sg
                                      X  X
                            k( ) =                 k(s; t; ) Pr (s; t; ) ;
                                      t=1   s=1

where k(s; t; ) and l(s; t; ), respectively, denote the quantities of capital and labor that a
…rm will hire at node (s; t) when it uses the       technology.
   Labor productivity in a country reads o( )=l( ). As can be seen, the model performs
will in replicating the fact that productivity in Mexico is only one-third of productivity in
the United States. Indian productivity is only one-tenth of the American level. The model
duplicates this as well.   Likewise, a measure of TFP can be constructed. In particular,
TFP is de…ned as o( )=[k( ) l( )1       ], where        is capital’s share of income and is set to 1=3.
The framework mimics excellently the facts that Indian and Mexican TFPs are 46 and 24
percent, respectively, of the U.S. level.




                                                   39
               Stylized Facts for India, Mexico, and the United States
         Statistics                       U.S.        Mexico        India
                                      Data Model Data Model Data Model
         Output per worker            1.00 1.00    0.33 0.31    0.12 0.15
         TFP                          1.00 1.00    0.46 0.40    0.24 0.25
         Average …rm size             1.00 1.00    0.55 0.67    0.11 0.14
         Debt-to-output ratio         1.65 1.83    0.24 0.08    0.24 0.08
         Employment share, age 10 yr 0.25 0.21     0.52 0.49    0.51 0.44
         ln(TFPage>35 ) ln(TFPage<5 ) 2.23 2.10    0.51 0.33    0.30 0.16

                             Table 3: Stylized Facts, Data Versus Model.

10         Why Doesn’t Technology Flow from Rich to Poor
           Countries?
What determines the technology a nation will use? Can di¤erences in cash-‡ow control and
monitoring justify the adoption of less productive technologies, even when input prices are
substantially less expensive (implying that the advanced technology would be very pro…table
in the absence of any contracting frictions)? As it turns out, there is a wide range of values
for      and z that are consistent with the United States adopting the advanced technology,
Mexico the intermediate one, and India the entry-level technology. Some diagrams are
developed next to show this.
      For technology      to operate in a country with a …nancial system characterized by ( ; z)
requires that16
                                           v(q; ; z; )      " = 0;                         (21)

and
                      v(q; ; z; t)    "t    0, for t 6=    and ; t 2 fIN; M X; U Sg.       (22)

Recall that " is the cost to an entrepreneur of running technology . Equation (21) is the
zero-pro…t condition for technology , while equation (22) ensures that it is not pro…table
for an entrepreneur to deviate and operate one of the other two technologies. Focus on the
  16
       This condition is the analog of (17) for the simulated economy.



                                                      40
choice between the advanced and intermediate technology. If an equilibrium occurs where the
advanced technology is operated, then condition (21) implicitly describes an equilibrium price
function de…ned by v(q; ; z; U S)              "U S = 0. Write this relationship as q U S = Q(z; ;              =
U S). Similarly, when the intermediate technology is adopted, the condition v(q; ; z; M X)
"M X = 0 will specify a price locus q M X = Q(z; ;                 = M X). Figure 6 plots the two price
schedules, which result from the simulation, as a function of monitoring e¢ ciency, z, when
  = 0:06 (the value in Mexico and the United States). For either technology, as monitoring
becomes more e¢ cient investment will increase, which will drive up wages and hence q. The
function Q(z; ; = U S) moves up faster with z than the function Q(z; ; = M X) because
the advanced technology responds more to shifts in the e¢ ciency of monitoring, z, than does
the intermediate one.
    Now focus on the points to the right of the vertical line in Figure 6. In this region,
the advanced technology is adopted so equilibrium prices will lie on the dashed line. It is
not pro…table for an entrepreneur to deviate and operate the intermediate technology. To
see why, note that along the lower solid line an entrepreneur would earn zero pro…ts from
operating the intermediate technology. Thus, at higher prices he would incur a loss. Suppose,
counterfactually, that the intermediate technology is adopted in equilibrium; then input
prices would be on the solid line. Here, an entrepreneur should deviate and run the advanced
technology. This occurs because along the higher dashed line the entrepreneur earns zero
pro…ts from the advanced technology. So, clearly, he would earn positive pro…ts at the
lower prices on the solid line. Therefore, an equilibrium where the intermediate technology
is operated is not deviation proof. Observe the wide range of z’s that are consistent with
adopting either technology.
    Figure 7 shows the adoption zones in ( ; z) space for each technology. That is, it illus-
trates the combinations of           and z that are consistent with the adoption of each technology.17
   17
        Note that the units of z are not pinned down in the analysis. For example, one could just as easily rewrite
                                                            z )2 ( 1 1 p
the monitoring cost function as C(k; p; q; ze) = qk 2 exp( 2e              1)p. The solution to the contracting
problem would be exactly the same, but ze would have the same units as ln z. So, think of z as an ordinal
measure. Pinning down the units would require information about the relationship between the inputs and


                                                         41
                                             1.00

                                                                                      qUS = Q(z,ψ=0.06,τ=US)

                                             0.98




                           Factor price, q
                                             0.96




                                             0.94                                           qMX = Q(z,ψ=0.06,τ=MX)



                                             0.92

                                                                                      Advanced technology
                                                    Intermediate technology
                                             0.90
                                                 0.00      0.25     0.50       0.75      1.00     1.25     1.50      1.75
                                                                           Monitoring efficiency, z



Figure 6: The choice between the advanced and intermediate technologies as a function of
monitoring e¢ ciency.

The diagram takes into account that as                                         and z change, so does q. In other words, it is
done in general equilibrium. Focus on the boundary between the advanced and intermediate
technologies, shown in the left panel of the …gure. This “zooming in” spotlights Mexico
and the United States. There is a trade-o¤ between                                                  and z. Higher levels for     , which
imply poorer cash-‡ow control, can be compensated for by higher values of z or by greater
e¢ ciency in monitoring, at least up to a point. The points labeled “Mexico” and “USA”
indicate the values for                      and z that are used for these two countries in the simulation. At
these two points, the cost of the amalgamated input, q, is the same as in the data for Mexico
and the United States; that is, 0.94 and 1.0.
    The right panel of Figure 7 portrays the boundary between the entry-level and inter-
mediate technologies. Again, there is trade-o¤ between                                                   and z but now it is not as steep
because monitoring is less important for these technologies. The point labeled “India”indi-
cates the values for      and z for this country in the simulation. At this point, the price for
the amalgamated input is 0:6, the value observed in India. The retention problem in India
outputs of the monitoring activity.



                                                                               42
                  0.15                                                                                             0.6

                  0.14
                                                                                                                            Entry-level technology
                                                                                                                   0.5                                   INDIA (0.50,0.50)
                  0.13
                                 Intermediate technology
                  0.12
                                                                                                                   0.4
 ψ, retention share




                                                                                              ψ, retention share
                  0.11

                  0.10                                                                                             0.3
                                                                                                                            Intermediate technology
                  0.09                                       Advanced technology
                                                                                                                   0.2
                  0.08
                         MEXICO (0.50, 0.06)                                                                                                                  Advanced technology
                  0.07
                                                                                                                   0.1                   MEXICO (0.50,0.06)
                                                                    USA (1.75, 0.06)
                  0.06
                      0.25      0.50     0.75      1.00      1.25         1.50         1.75                          0.25                             0.50                          0.75
                                         z, monitoring efficiency                                                                        z, monitoring efficiency


Figure 7: Adoption zones in general equilibrium for the advanced, intermediate, and entry-
level technologies.

is so severe that it is far removed from being able to adopt the advanced technology. Last,
note that each technology has large adoption zones. Thus, there are many combinations of
          and z that are consistent with the adoption of the particular technology. In this sense,
the analysis is quite robust.
                  Finally, by how much would the …xed cost, /, for the advanced technology need to lowered
so that India and Mexico would adopt it, holding …xed their price for the amalgamated input?
India would adopt the advanced technology at 77 percent of the U.S. value and Mexico at
88 percent. Note that because the price of amalgamated input is lower in India and Mexico,
…rms in these countries would produce more output than in the United States. Thus, the
…xed-cost-to-output ratio in India is 43.4 percent of the U.S. one, while for Mexico it is 84.9.
If q were allowed to change, then the …xed cost in each country would need to be lowered
further to entice adoption. This experiment shows that the …xed costs would need to be
lowered considerably to switch the pattern of adoption.




                                                                                 43
                                                                                                            US




                            Average Probability of Being Monitored
                                                                     0.25


                                                                     0.20
                                                                                                            India
                                                                     0.15


                                                                     0.10


                                                                     0.05

                                                                                                   Mexico
                                                                     0.00


                                                                            0   1   2   3      4   5    6           7
                                                                                        State, s



                                                        P                                                                              P
    Figure 8: Average monitoring probability by state, [ t                                                   s   Pr (s; t) p(s; t)]=   t s   Pr (s; t).


10.1      The Role of Monitoring

Figure 8 illustrates the average odds of being monitored by state, s. As can be seen, for
the U.S. technology the odds of being monitored after declaring a stall rise steeply toward
the top of the ladder. The U.S. technology ladder is very convex, so the payo¤s from lying
are greatest at the last steps. At step s = 7, the average monitoring probability (across all
t     7) exceeds 25 percent. Monitoring is also done for the Indian ladder, but for a di¤erent
reason. Monitoring helps with the cash-‡ow control problem. With monitoring someone
who lies is more likely to be caught. They can then no longer retain part of the …rm’s cash
‡ow. Very little monitoring is done for the Mexican ladder because monitoring is ine¢ cient
and expensive and the cash-‡ow control problem is small.




                                                                                        44
11     The Role of Financial Frictions

11.1    Empirical evidence on the availability of …nancial informa-
        tion and the cost of enforcing contracts

Is the ability of a nation’s …nancial system to produce information and enforce contracts
important for its level of output and TFP? Some evidence on this question is presented
now. The data used in this section are discussed in Appendix 14. Bushman et al. (2004)
construct an index measuring …nancial transparency in …rms across countries. The index
is based on six series for each country. The …rst series measures disclosures about R&D,
capital investments, accounting methods, and whether disclosures are broken down across
geographic locations, product lines, and subsidiaries. The second measure re‡ects informa-
tion about corporate governance, such as the identity and remuneration of key personnel
and the ownership structure of the …rm. The quality of the information provided by the ac-
counting principles adopted is captured in the third measure. The frequency and timeliness
of …nancial reporting is given in the fourth series. The amount of private information acqui-
sition by private analysts is captured by the number of analysts in a country following large
…rms. This constitutes the …fth series. The last series proxies for the quality of …nancial
reporting by the media. Bushman et al. (2004) aggregate up these six series using factor
analysis into a single index of …nancial transparency, dubbed “info”here. This variable can
be thought of as re‡ecting z in current analysis. Figure 9 presents scatterplots showing how
GDP and TFP are related to this index representing the production of …nancial information.
Both GDP and TFP are positively associated with the series measuring the production of
…nancial information. The relationship is quite tight.
   Next, an index is constructed that measures the cost of enforcing contracts in various
countries. The underlying data are obtained from The World Bank’s Doing Business data-
base. In particular, three series are used. The …rst measures the cost of settling a business
dispute. The second series records the number of procedures that must be …led to resolve a
dispute. The number of days required to settle a dispute constitutes the last index. These

                                             45
                             50000
                                                                                                                     1.4

                             40000                                                                                   1.2

                                                                                                                     1.0
                             30000
            GDP per capita




                                                                                                                     0.8




                                                                                                               TFP
                             20000                                                                                   0.6

                                                                                                                     0.4
                             10000
                                                                                                                     0.2

                                 0
                                                                                                                     0.0

                                 -2.0    -1.5      -1.0      -0.5   0.0    0.5         1.0   1.5    2.0                -2.0    -1.5      -1.0      -0.5   0.0    0.5         1.0   1.5    2.0
                                                Production of Financial Information, z                                                Production of Financial Information, z




Figure 9: The relationship between the production of …nancial information, on the one hand,
and GDP per capita (left panel) and TFP (right panel) on the other hand.

                             50000                                                                                   1.5


                             40000

                                                                                                                     1.0
                             30000
            GDP per capita




                             20000
                                                                                                               TFP




                                                                                                                     0.5

                             10000


                                0                                                                                    0.0



                                        -1.5          -1.0          -0.5         0.0          0.5                             -1.5          -1.0          -0.5         0.0          0.5
                                                          Cost of Enforcement, ψ                                                                Cost of Enforcement, ψ




Figure 10: The relationship between the cost of enforcing contracts, on the one hand, and
GDP per capital (left panel) and TFP (right panel) on the other hand.

three series are aggregated up using factor analysis into a single index re‡ecting the cost
of contract enforcement, call “enfor.” This variable is taken as a measure of                                                                                                                   . Figure 10
presents scatterplots showing the relationship of GDP and TFP to this index. Both GDP
and TFP are negatively related to the cost of contract enforcement. The relationship be-
tween the cost of contract enforcement, on the one hand, and GDP or TFP, on the other,
is cloudier than the relationship between the production of …nancial information and ei-
ther of the latter two variables. Still, the relationships plotted in Figure 10 are statistically
signi…cant (at the 1 percent level).
   Table 4 presents the results of some regression analysis. This analysis is only intended


                                                                                                          46
                                          Regression Results
                     Variable               ln(GDP)            ln(TFP)
                     info, z           0:69      0:60     0:20      0:20
                                       (0:11)      (0:13)         (0:06)       (0:08)
                     enfor,              0:37        0:33            0:16        0:16
                                          (0:07)    (0:08)         (0:04)       (0:05)
                                                         ~
                     …ndev                         0:00                          0:00~
                                                   (:00)                         (0:00)
                     constant          9:27        9:07              0:47        0:46
                                        (0:10)     (0:21)            (0:06)       (0:12)
                     R2           0.75             0.76           0.51         0.51
                     observations 42               42             40           40

Table 4: *** denotes signi…cance at the 1 percent level and ~ indicates a lack of signi…cance
at the 10 percent level. The numbers in parentheses are standard errors.

for illustrative purposes.18 In particular, both GDP and TFP are positively related with
“info” and negatively associated with “enfor.” They are also economically and statistically
signi…cant. If Kenya increased its …nancial transparency to the U.S. level, then its GDP
and TFP would rise by 215 and 62 percent respectively. Similarly, by reducing the cost
of enforcing contracts to the U.S. level, Bangladesh could increase its GDP and TFP by
159 and 69 percent, respectively. Interestingly, when a traditional measure of the e¢ ciency
of …nancial intermediation is added to these regressions, the private-credit-to-GDP ratio
(labeled “…ndev”), it is insigni…cant in both an economic and a statistical sense. Two
measures of collateral requirements and a measure of access to …nancial markets were also
used as the third variable. They, too, are insigni…cant.


11.2        The Role of External Finance

            “The entrepreneur does not save in order to obtain the means which he needs,
        nor does he accumulate any goods before he begins to produce.”
            “The entrepreneur is never the risk bearer. ... The one who gives credit comes
        to grief if the undertaking fails.”Joseph A. Schumpeter (1961, pp. 136 and 137).
  18
       A more careful analysis would proceed along the line of the papers surveyed in Levine (2005) and would
constitute a paper in its own right.



                                                      47
   Schumpeter (1961) believed that …nance provided nutrients necessary for entrepreneurial
activity to ‡ourish. The current analysis stresses the role of information and the costs of
enforcing contracts as key factors in determining the amount of …nancial capital that can
be raised. For simplicity, it has downplayed the importance of start-up funds that the
entrepreneurs themselves may have. (Recall that in the quantitative analysis f = 0.) From
the perspective of the theory developed here, start-up funds from outside parties, such as
venture capitalists, should be treated as originating from the intermediary. This does not
dismiss as unimportant the wherewithal an entrepreneur brings to a venture, but simply
states that the quantitative analysis ignores it. Does this omission matter?
   The importance of external …nance in the literature is usually gauged by cross-country
comparisons of measures of private credit to GDP. The private-credit-to-GDP ratio rises with
GDP. This fact can be interpreted as indicating that an entrepreneur’s own start-up funds
are more important in developing countries vis à vis developed ones, since private debt is
smaller in the former countries. Another interpretation is that developed countries use more
advanced technologies than developing countries and that these technologies require more
funding than less advanced ones. Is the model consistent with observed data on private-
debt-to-GDP ratios in India, Mexico and the United States?
   How should the amount of debt extended by the intermediary to the …rm be measured in
the current setting? The notation of debt is state-contingent here. Let d(s; t) represent the
amount of debt that the …rm owes the intermediary at node (s; t). Suppose that fb
                                                                                x(s; t)g is
some schedule of payments that the …rm has committed to paying the intermediary. Many
payment schedules can potentially support the optimal contract. For a particular schedule,
de…ne the debt at node (s; t), which is connected with the payment schedule fb
                                                                             x(s; t)g, by

                                                   Pr(s; t)
            d(s; t + 1) = [d(s; t)     b(s; t)]
                                       x                       , for s < t and t < T   1;   (23)
                                                  Pr(s; t + 1)
                                                b(s; T ), for all s;
                                     d(s; T ) = x                                           (24)




                                                   48
                                                                   Pr(s; s)
                      d(s + 1; s + 1) = [d(s; s)     b(s; s)]
                                                     x
                                                                Pr(s + 1; s + 1)
                                         Pr(s; s + 1)
                          d(s; s + 1)                    , for 0 < s < S    1,                   (25)
                                        Pr(s + 1; s + 1)

and
                                                                 Pr(S; S)
                        d(S; S + 1) = [d(S; S)       b(S; S)]
                                                     x                       :                   (26)
                                                                Pr(S; S + 1)
The interpretation of (23), which determines debt at o¤-diagonal points, is relatively straight-
forward. In state (s; t), the …rm owes debt in the amount d(s; t). It discharges the amount
b(s; t) so it will then owe d(s; t)
x                                       b(s; t). Should it arrive at the next node (s; t + 1), it will
                                        x
then be obliged to repay [d(s; t)       b(s; t)]fPr(s; t)=[ Pr(s; t + 1)]g in interest and principal,
                                        x
where the gross state-contingent interest rate is Pr(s; t)=[ Pr(s; t + 1)]. Equation (24) is the
terminal condition that ensures the debt is paid o¤ at the end node (s; T ). The interpretation
of (25) is similar, except that as the …rm moves up a step along the diagonal, the expected
debt at node (s; s + 1), which is associated with a stall, is written o¤ the books; the states
(s; s + 1) and (s + 1; s + 1) had an odds ratio of Pr(s; s + 1)= Pr(s + 1; s + 1). Equation (26)
is another terminal condition determining debt at the last step (S; S) along the diagonal.
The debt at the step (S; S) must be consistent with the debt at the next o¤-diagonal step,
(S; S + 1), along the top of the ladder.
   Using the de…nition for debt at each node, a measure of private debt to GDP can be
constructed as                 PT PS
                                  t=1       Pr(s; t) maxfd(s; t); 0g
                                      PT s=0PS                       :
                                       t=1   s=0 Pr(s; t)o(s; t)

As in the data, only the nonnegative values of d(s; t) are recorded. That is, only those
nodes where the …rm is indebted to the intermediary are counted. Now, various schedules
for fb
     x(s; t)g can be constructed that are consistent with the optimal contract. For example,
                                  b(s; t) = x(s; t)
when constructing of d(s; t), let x                      qk(s; t). Here the …rm can be thought of
as using its own cash ‡ow to pay for its inputs instead of surrendering its cash ‡ow to the
intermediary and having the intermediary lend the money to buy its inputs. Clearly, this
                                                               b(s; t) is used below for the
does not change the nature of the contract. This de…nition for x


                                                   49
calculation of the private-debt-to-GDP ratios.19
       What are the model’s predictions for the private-debt-to-GDP ratios? These are pre-
sented in Table 3. As can be seen, in the data the private-debt-to-GDP ratio is much higher
in the United States (1.65) than it is for either India (0.24) or Mexico (0.24). The model
captures this fact in a qualitative sense (1.83, 0.08, and 0.08). It does reasonably well in
matching the magnitudes for the United States, but it underpredicts the magnitudes for In-
dia and Mexico. Again, in the quantitative analysis, the entrepreneur’s self-…nanced start-up
funds are set to zero (f = 0). This suggests that cross-country di¤erences in the private-
debt-to-GDP ratio may re‡ect di¤erences in technology adoption. That is, more developed
countries adopt more advanced technologies that, in turn, require higher levels of …nancing
and hence debt. Selling drinks on the street requires a di¤erent level of borrowing than
launching rockets into space, so to speak.


11.3        Finance and Development

Imagine endowing India and Mexico with the U.S. …nancial system. Three questions come to
mind: By how much would Mexican and Indian GDP increase? Would this bring them to the
U.S. level of development? How much of the gain in output is due to the adoption of new
technologies versus capital deepening? To address these questions, let O(z; ; rM X ;                              MX
                                                                                                                       )
represent the level of output that Mexico would produce if it had the …nancial system proxied
for by (z; ), given the Mexican rental rate on capital, rM X , and the Mexican level of human
             MX
capital,          . The percentage gain in output from Mexico adopting the U.S. …nancial sys-
                              US                                    MX
tem is 100 [ln O(z U S ;           ; rM X ;   MX
                                                   ) ln O(z M X ;        ; rM X ;   MX
                                                                                         )]. The percentage of the
  19
                              b(s; t) = x(s; t) the …rm surrenders all cash ‡ow to the intermediary while the
       Just to be clear, when x
intermediary lends the …rm all of the money for its inputs, qk(s; t). (Recall at that in most state/date
combinations x(s; t) =    s k(s; t)                              b(s; t) = x(s; t)
                                      .) The two payment schemes x                                     b(s; t) = x(s; t)
                                                                                          qk(s; t) and x
correspond with di¤erent amounts of the …rm’s cash ‡ow being used to …nance the investment, qk(s; t),
and hence di¤erent levels of external …nancing. They give the same allocations, however. Clearly, payment
         b(s; t), that are convex combinations of the two extremes x(s; t)
schemes, x                                                                           qk(s; t) and x(s; t) would work
too.


                                                          50
gap in the di¤erence between Mexican and U.S. output that would be closed is measured by
                      US                                           MX                                      US
100 [ln O(z U S ;          ; rM X ;    MX
                                            )    ln O(z M X ;           ; rM X ;   MX
                                                                                        )]=[ln O(z U S ;        ; rU S ;   US
                                                                                                                                )
               MX
ln O(z M X ;        ; rM X ;   MX
                                      )]. Similarly, let T (z; ; rM X ;            MX
                                                                                        ) represent the level of TFP
that Mexico would produce if it had the …nancial system (z; ), again given rM X and                                          MX
                                                                                                                                    .
Here TFP is measured in the manner discussed earlier. By standard Solow accounting, the
contribution of TFP growth to output growth, when Mexico adopts the U.S. …nancial system,
                               US                                       MX                                        US
is just 100 [ln T (z U S ;          ; rM X ;    MX
                                                     ) ln T (z M X ;         ; rM X ;   MX
                                                                                             )]=[ln O(z U S ;          ; rM X ;     MX
                                                                                                                                         )
               MX
ln O(z M X ;        ; rM X ;   MX
                                      )]. Do the same thing for India.
    Table 5 shows that both Mexico and India could increase their outputs considerably
by adopting the U.S. …nancial system: 46.1 percent and 71.8 percent, respectively. These
seemingly large numbers are in accord with those in the quantitative models developed by
Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011), Greenwood, Wang, and Sanchez (2013), and Townsend
and Ueda (2010). Yet, adopting the U.S. …nancial system would close only 40.0 percent of
the gap between Mexican and American incomes and 38.4 percent of the gap for India. This
transpires because Mexico and India have lower levels of human capital than the United
States and higher prices for physical capital. TFP would jump up by 42.8 percent in Mexico
and by 46.4 percent in India. This is a consequence of adopting the U.S. technology.
    Interestingly, the capital-to-labor ratio rises by only 9.8 percent in Mexico. In India it
moves up by 76.3 percent. The improvement in TFP accounts for 93 percent of Mexican
output growth and 65 percent of Indian output growth. This is in line with King and Levine
(1994), who report that di¤erences in productivities, and not factor supplies, are likely to
explain di¤erences in incomes across countries. The …nding here is echoed in Midrigan and
Xu (2014), who use a quantitative model and argue that the impact of …nancial frictions on
economic development through the capital-deepening channel, versus a technology adoption
one, is likely to be small. Last, the debt-to-output ratio increases by over 300 percent for both
India and Mexico. When India and Mexico are endowed with the U.S. …nancial system they
adopt the advanced technology. From (21) it follows that the price of the amalgamated input
in both of these countries is the same as in the United States; that is, q IN = q M X = q U S = 1.


                                                              51
                    Impact of Adopting U.S. Financial System
                               (z = z U S and = U S )
                                        Mexico                      India
                            Increase, % Gap Closed, % Growth, % Gap Closed, %
 Output per worker              46.1            40.0          71.8         38.4
 TFP                            42.8            52.9          46.4         39.9
 Capital-to-labor ratio         9.8             10.0          76.3         36.0
 Debt-to-output ratio          318.7           100.0         312.3        100.1
                                        Decomposition of Output Growth, %
 Contribution from TFP                    93                          65
 Contribution from Capital                 7                          35

     Table 5: The impact for India and Mexico of adopting the U.S. …nancial system.

(This does not imply that wages are the same in the three countries because r and          are
di¤erent.) Consequently, the same …nancial contract is o¤ered to entrepreneurs in all three
countries, resulting in equal levels of debt relative to output.



12     Conclusions
The role of …nancial intermediation in underwriting business ventures is investigated here.
The analysis stresses the interplay between the structure of technology and the ability of
an intermediary to fund it. A dynamic costly state veri…cation model of lending from
intermediaries to …rms is developed to examine this. The model is embedded into a general
equilibrium framework where intermediation is competitive. A …rm’s level of productivity is
private information. The framework has several unique features not found in the literature.
   First, the costly state veri…cation model presented has several novel characteristics. As in
the conventional costly state veri…cation paradigm, an intermediary is free to audit a …rm’s
returns. The auditing technology imposed here, however, is quite ‡exible. Speci…cally, the
intermediary can pick the odds of a successful audit. The costs of auditing are increasing
and convex in this probability. Additionally, these costs are decreasing in the technological
e¢ ciency of the …nancial system. Additionally, it may not be possible to write a contract that
secures, when desired, all of a …rm’s cash ‡ow. This leakage in cash ‡ow limits the ability

                                              52
of intermediaries to create incentives for …rms that increase the likelihood of a successful
venture. Additionally, the analysis allows new …rms to supply some of their own funds to
help venture start-up.
   Second, to stress the nexus between …nance and the structure of technology, the latter
is given a more general representation than is traditionally found in the …nance and devel-
opment literature. Di¤erences in business opportunities are represented by variations in the
stochastic processes governing …rms’productivities. A stochastic process is characterized by
a non-decreasing movement along a productivity ladder. The positions of the rungs on the
ladder and the odds of moving up the ladder di¤er by the type of venture. A stall on the
ladder is an absorbing state.
   The form of the technology has implications for …nance. Some ventures may have exciting
potential for pro…t, but intermediaries may be required to provide large up-front investments
of working capital and have to wait for prolonged periods of time before any potential re-
turns are realized. For such investments, the ability of an intermediary to conduct ex post
monitoring and to control cash ‡ows are important for the viability of long-term lending
contracts. Monitoring is important for detecting malfeasance. The more e¢ cient the moni-
toring, the less incentive there will be for a …rm to cheat on the …nancial contract. Likewise,
the ability to secure cash ‡ows in the contract is vital for creating incentives using back-
loading strategies that improve the odds of a successful venture. The upshot is that the set
of desirable technologies within a country is a function of the state of the nation’s …nancial
system. Therefore, a country’s income and TFP also depend on its …nancial system.
   India, Mexico, and the United States have very di¤erent levels of income and TFP. Some
evidence is presented suggesting that the three countries use di¤erent production technolo-
gies. First, Indian production establishments are much smaller than Mexican ones, which
in turn are much smaller than U.S. ones. Second, establishment size increases more rapidly
with age in the United States than in either India or Mexico. Can di¤erences in technology
adoption, due to di¤erences in …nancial systems, partially explain this? To address this
question, the framework is specialized to a situation where there are three technologies: an


                                              53
advanced technology, an intermediate one, and an entry-level one. An equilibrium is con-
structed where, given U.S. factor prices and the e¢ ciency of the U.S. …nancial system, it is
optimal to adopt the advanced technology in the United States. Likewise, given Mexican
(Indian) factor prices and the Mexican (Indian) …nancial system, it is best to use the inter-
mediate (entry-level) technology in Mexico (India). This is done while matching the above
facts about Indian, Mexican, and U.S. establishment-size distributions, so the analysis has
some discipline.
   The framework is able to replicate the observed patterns of income and TFP across In-
dia, Mexico, and the United States. The analysis predicts that India and Mexico will have
lower private-debt-to-GDP ratios than the United States, even though …rms in all countries
are assumed to have no start-up funds of their own. This transpires from di¤erences in the
pattern of investments and cash ‡ows generated by the technologies that …rms in the coun-
tries adopt. Some cross-country regression analysis is presented that suggests information
production and cash ‡ow control are important factors in determining nations’GDPs and
TFPs. Finally, the analysis suggests that …nancial development plays an important role in
economic development. Both Mexico and India could increase their GDPs signi…cantly by
adopting the U.S. …nancial system, with the technology adoption channel playing a more
important role than the capital accumulation channel. Financial development is important
but is not the sole driver of economic development.



13     Appendix: Theory

13.1    The General Contract Problem with Reports at All Dates
        and States

Consider the general contract problem where reports for all states and dates are allowed.
To construct this problem, more powerful notation is needed.        To this end, let Ht
f0; 1; : : : ; minft; Sgg represent the set of states that could happen at date t. The set of



                                             54
all histories for states up to and including date t then reads Ht                                             H1   :::   Ht . Denote
an element of Ht , or a history, by ht . Some of these histories cannot happen. It is not
possible for a …rm’s productivity to advance after a stall, for example. Given this limitation,
de…ne the set of feasible or viable histories by V t                                   fht 2 Ht : Pr(ht ) > 0g, where Pr (ht )
is the probability of history ht . To formulate the retention constraints it is useful to de…ne
V t (s; j) as the set of viable (or feasible) histories that can follow from node (s; j), where
s      j         t. The period-t level of productivity conditional on a history, ht , is represented by
    (ht ). Finally, let the state in period j implied by the history ht read hj (ht ) and write the
history of states through j as hj (ht ).
                     t
      Let        t (h )     be a report by the …rm in period t of its current state to the intermediary, given
the true history ht , where the function                             t   : Ht ! Ht . A truthful report in period t,                 t
                                                                                                                                t (h ),
                                     t            t                                                                 t
happens when                  t (h       )=   t (h )   = ht (ht ). A reporting strategy is de…ned by                     ( 1;    ; t ).
Recall that the …rm is unable to report a state higher than it actually has. As a result, the
set of all feasible reporting strategies, S, consists of reporting strategies, , such that
            t
     1.         (ht ) 2 Ht , for all t                1 and ht 2 Ht ;

                t
     2.     t (h )          ht (ht ), for all t            1 and ht 2 Ht .

   Taking some liberty with notation, denote the contract elements in terms of the history of
          n                                         oT
                  t              t           t    e
reports by k( t (h ); t); x( t (h )); p( t (h )); f    . Given this notation, the general contract
                                                                               t=1
problem (P3) between the …rm and intermediary can be written as
                                                       X
                                                       T X
                                max                                 t
                                                                          (ht )k(ht ; t)         x(ht ) Pr ht + f        fe;     (P3)
                                                  T
                  f   k(ht ;t);x(ht );p(ht );fe gt=1   t=1 ht 2Ht

subject to
                                                            (ht )k(ht ; t)         x(ht )       0;                               (27)

     X
     T X
                        t
                              (ht )k(ht ; t)           x(ht ) Pr ht
     t=1 ht 2Ht

                                         X
                                         T X                                                         Y
                                                                                                     t
                                                       t             t                      t
                             max                              t           t
                                                            (h )k( (h ); t)            x( (h ))  t
                                                                                                         [1    p ( n (hn ))] Pr ht ;
                               2S
                                         t=1 ht 2Ht                                                  n=1



                                                                              55
                                                                                                                        (28)

  X
  T           X
                         t
                                (ht )k(ht ; t)             x(ht ) Pr ht
  t=j ht 2V t (s;j)

                             X
                             T           X
                                                      t
                                                          (ht )k(hs 1 ; s) Pr ht ; for s = 1;        ; S and s      j   T:
                             t=j      ht 2V t (s;j)


                                                                                                                        (29)

                   k((ht 1 ; t); t) = k((ht 1 ; t                 1); t), for all t where t   1 = ht 1 (ht 1 );         (30)

                    k(ht ; t) = k((hs 1 ; s                  1); s),   for all t > s = hs 1 (ht ) and s < S;
                                                                                                                        (31)
                    k(ht ; t) = k(hS ; S);                             for t > S and S = hS (ht );
and

                 X
                 T X
                                  t
                                       x(ht )         C p(ht ); k(ht ; t)      qk(ht ; t) Pr ht        + fe    0;       (32)
                 t=1   ht 2Ht

in addition to the self-…nancing constraint (11). Note how (28) di¤ers from (7). Here a
truthful reporting strategy must deliver a payo¤ in expected present discounted value terms
over the entire lifetime of the contract that is no smaller than the one that could be obtained
by an untruthful report. The general notation also allows the two no-retention constraints,
(12) and (13), to be expressed in the more compact single constraint (29). The objective
function (P3) and the rest of the constraints (27), (30) to (32) are the direct analogs of those
presented in (P2), so they are not explained.
   Turn now to a more restricted problem where the …rm is not allowed to make a report
that is infeasible; that is, a claim about a zero probability event.20 The set of restricted
reporting strategies, R, consists of all reporting strategies, , such that

          t
  1.          (ht ) 2 V t , for all t            1 and ht 2 V t ;

              t
  2.      t (h )       ht (ht ), for all t                1 and ht 2 V t .
  20
       A similar restriction is made in Kocherlakota (2010).



                                                                       56
The restricted contract problem (P4) between the …rm and intermediary reads

                                              X
                                              T X
                          max                               t
                                                                    (ht )k(ht ; t)            x(ht ) Pr ht + f       fe;      (P4)
                fk(ht ;t);x(ht );p(ht )gT
                                        t=1   t=1 ht 2V t

subject to

  X
  T X
                  t
                       (ht )k(ht ; t)          x(ht ) Pr ht
  t=1 ht 2V t

                              X
                              T X                                                                  Y
                                                                                                   t
                                               t                t                         t
                      max                             t
                                                    (h )k( (h ); t)  t
                                                                                x( (h ))       t
                                                                                                       [1   p ( n (hn ))] Pr ht ;
                        2R
                              t=1 ht 2V t                                                          n=1


                                                                                                                              (33)


              X
              T X
                              t
                                  x(ht )       C p(ht ); k(ht ; t)            qk(ht ; t) Pr ht                +f      0;      (34)
                t=1 ht 2V t

and (27), (29), (30), and (31) in addition to (11).
   The lemma presented below holds.

Lemma 9 The contracts speci…ed by problems (P3) and (P4) are the same.

Proof. It will be demonstrated that any contract that is feasible for problem (P3) is also
                                                                                                                 T
feasible for (P4) and vice versa. Now suppose that fk (ht ; t); x (ht ); p (ht )gt=1 represents an
optimal solution to the general problem (P3). A feasible solution for the restricted problem
                                                                                     t
(P4) will be constructed. To begin with, for reports                                     (ht ) 2 Rt , let

                                               k ( t (ht ); t) = k ( t (ht ); t);

                                                   x ( t (ht )) = x ( t (ht ));

                                                   p ( t (ht )) = p ( t (ht ));

where a “ ”represents a choice variable in the restricted problem. (Recall that for a truthful
         t
report       (ht ) = ht .)



                                                                         57
                                                                                               t
    The general problem also allows for infeasible histories to be reported–that is, for           (ht ) 2
S t =Rt . For these reports a plausible alternative will be engineered that o¤ers the same payo¤
to the …rm and intermediary and that also satis…es all constraints. To do this, let

                                                i = max j (ht ) 2 Rj :
                                                      j


Thus, i indexes the duration of feasible reports. Manufacture an alternative plausible history,
bt (ht ), as follows:
                                           bt (ht ) = ( i (ht ); i;  ; i):
                                                                 | {z }
                                                                  t i
               t
Finally, for       (ht ) 2 S t =Rt set

                                             t
                                         k (b (ht ); t) = k ( t (ht ); t);
                                                t
                                           x~ (b (ht )) = x ( t (ht ));
                                                t
                                           p~ (b (ht )) = p ( t (ht )):

    The constructed solution will satisfy all constraints attached to the restricted problem.
In particular, a solution to the general problem (P3) will satisfy the incentive compatibility
constraint for the restricted problem because ht 2 Ht and R                   S. Therefore, the right-
hand side of the incentive constraint for the restricted problem can be no larger than the
right-hand side of the incentive constraint for the general problem. Hence, the value of the
optimized solution for (P4) must be at least as great as for (P3), since the two problems
share the same objective function.
                                            T
    Let fk (ht ; t); x (ht ); p (ht )gt=1 be an optimal solution for the restricted problem (P4).
                        t
Now, for reports            (ht ) 2 Rt , construct a feasible solution to the general problem (P3) as
follows:

                                         k ( t (ht ); t) = k ( t (ht ); t);

                                           x ( t (ht )) = x ( t (ht ));

                                           p ( t (ht )) = p ( t (ht ));


                                                          58
where the “ ”denotes the quantity in the general problem. The constraints associated with
the general problem will be satis…ed by this particular solution. Focus on the incentive
                                                           t
constraint and take an o¤-the-equilibrium path report,         (ht ) 2 S t =Rt . The intermediary
can always choose to treat this in the same manner as a report of ( i (ht ); i;  ; i), with
                                                                             | {z }
                                                                                    t i
           j   t      j
i = max (h ) 2 R , in the restricted problem. Therefore, the value of the optimized
       j
solution for (P3) must be at least as great as for (P4). To take stock of the situation, the
value of the objective function in problem (P3) must be at least as great as the value returned
by problem (P4) and vice versa. Since the objective functions are the same, this can occur
only if the optimal solutions for both problems are also the same.
   Append the no-retention constraints (12) and (13) to problem (P2). It will now be
established that the appended version of problem (P2) delivers the same solution as the
restricted problem (P4). To do this, the incentive constraint (7) in (P2) must be related to
the incentive constraint (33) in (P4). The restricted problem (P4) has just one incentive
constraint, which dictates that a truthful reporting strategy must deliver a payo¤ in expected
present discounted value terms over the lifetime of the entire contract that is no smaller than
what could be obtained by an untruthful one. Problem (P2) has S incentive constraints
requiring that reports along the diagonal in Figure 1 must have payo¤s in expected present
discounted value terms over the remainder of the contract that weakly dominate those that
could be obtained by telling lies.

Lemma 10 The contracts speci…ed by the appended version of problem (P2) and problem
(P4) are the same.

Proof. The only di¤erences between problems (P2) and (P4) are the incentive constraints,
modulo di¤erences in notation used for the states, viz ht and (s; t). Knowing ht is the same
as knowing (s; t), and vice versa, given the structure of the productivity ladder. That is,
there is a one-to-one mapping, G, such that (s; t) = G(ht ) and ht = G 1 (s; t). It will now be
shown that any allocation that satis…es the incentive constraint in one problem must satisfy
the incentive constraint in the other. Given this, the two problems must be same.

                                              59
   First, take an allocation fk(ht ; t); x(ht ); p(ht )g that satis…es the incentive constraint (33)
for the restricted problem (P4). Consider the same allocation fk(G(ht )); x(G(ht )); p(G(ht ))g
for problem (P2). Suppose this allocation violates the incentive constraint (7) in problem
(P2) at some node (s ; s ). The expected present value of the path following telling the lie at
(s ; s ) exceeds the expected present value from telling the truth by assumption. The path
of truthful reports to this node is unique: There is only one sequence of steps to (s ; s ), as
is obvious from the structure of the ladder shown in Figure 1. Under a truthful reporting
scheme, the paths of potential reports following this node are unique. So too is the path
following a lie at (s ; s ), because if the …rm lies at this node, then it cannot report moving
up afterward. Call the path following a lie at (s ; s ) the “lie path.” Now, in the contract
fk(ht ; t); x(ht ); p(ht )g replace the unique potential truthful paths following (s ; s ) with the
unique lie path. That is, for t    s replace ht with G 1 (s       1; t). This must yield a higher
expected present value than fk(ht ; t); x(ht ); p(ht )g. This is a contraction.
   Second, consider some allocation that satis…es the incentive constraint (7) attached to
the appended version of problem (P2). Assume that this allocation violates the incentive
constraint (33) for problem (P4). This implies that at some nodes (s; s) along the diagonal
in Figure 1 it pays to tell lies. Choose the …rst such state/time pair (s; s), denoted by
(s ; s ). The path of truthful reports up to this point must be unique. From this point on,
the …rm cannot report going farther up the ladder. Hence, it cannot tell any further lies.
The expected present value of the path following a lie at (s ; s ) must exceed the expected
present value from telling the truth for (33) to be violated. This implies that (7) must have
been violated at node (s ; s ), a contradiction.


13.2     Proofs for the Contract Problem (P2)

Some lemmas and proofs describing the structure of the optimal contract are now presented.
All lemmas and proofs apply to the appended version of problem (P2), where the no-retention
constraints (12) and (13) have been added.



                                                60
13.3     Proof of Go All In

Proof. Let      be the multiplier associated with the zero-pro…t constraint (10) and                    be the
multiplier connected with the self-…nancing constraint (11). The …rst-order condition linked
with fe is
                                                     1+            = 0.

If   > 0 then the constraint (11) is binding and the result holds automatically. Alternatively,
if   = 0 then     = 1. In this situation the …rm is indi¤erent between investing in its own
project or placing the funds in a bank. On the one hand, by giving fe to the intermediary
the …rm lowers its payo¤ in the objective function by fe. On the other hand, this is exactly
compensated for by loosening the zero-pro…t constraint that will result in an decrease in
payments from the …rm to the intermediary [or the x(s; t)’s] in the amount fe.

Remark 1 Since        = 1+         and              0, it must transpire that           1. This makes intuitive
sense. When the entrepreneur hands over wealth to the intermediary, the lowest expected
gross return that it can receive is 1= . This is what a saver earns from depositing funds with
the intermediary. This is worth exactly 1 in present value terms.


13.4     Transformation of Problem (P2) with Self-Financing to Prob-
         lem (P5) without It

Lemma 1 allows problem (10) with the possibility of self-…nancing to be converted into an
equivalent problem (P5) without self-…nancing. The latter problem has a larger capitalized
value for the …xed costs, b; speci…cally, b =                    f.

                                              T minft;Sg
                                              X  X
                                                             t
                v=          max                                  [ s k(s; t)   x(s; t)] Pr (s; t) ;       (P5)
                     fk(s;t);x(s;t);p(s;t)g
                                              t=1     s=0

subject to (6) to (9), the new zero-pro…t constraint (35) and the no-retention constraints
(12) and (13). Note that the self-…nancing constraint (11) has now been eliminated.



                                                            61
           T minft;Sg
           X  X
                         t
                             [x(s; t)     C (p(s; t); k(s; t))   qk(s; t)] Pr (s; t)   (   f)   0:     (35)
                                                                                       | {z }
           t=1    s=0
                                                                                         b


Lemma 11 (Conversion of problem with self-…nancing to one without self-…nancing) The
problem with self-…nanced start-up funds (P2) reduces to problem (P5), where the …xed cost
is b =       f.

Proof. In line with Lemma 1, set fe = f . Use this fact to eliminate f                   fe in the objective
function and to replace fe with f in the zero-pro…t condition.

Remark 2 All that matters for the contract is                    f , given the above lemma. That is, what
matters for the contract is the amount of initial funds that the intermediary must put up and
this is consistent with many di¤erent combinations of                  and f . Thus, a project with a …xed
cost of , where the entrepreneur has f in start-up funding will have the same allocations as
one where the …xed cost is              f , but where the entrepreneur has no start-up funds. Therefore,
without cross-country data on              and f separately, it may be di¢ cult to ascertain how much
start-up funds matter.

In what follows the proofs in Sections (13.5), (13.6), and (13.7) refer to the transformed
problem (P5).


13.5       Proof of Trust but Verify

Proof. (Su¢ ciency) It will be shown that the intermediary will monitor the …rm at node
(u 1; t) (for all t     u) only if the incentive constraint (7) binds at (u; u). Assume otherwise;
that is, suppose to the contrary that the incentive constraint does not bind at (u; u) but that
p (u     1; t) > 0 for some t       u. The term p (u          1; t) shows up in only two equations in the
appended version of problem (P5): in the zero-pro…t constraint of the intermediary (35) and
on the right-hand side of the incentive constraint (7) at node (u; u). Picture the Lagrangian
associated with problem (P5). By setting p (u                 1; t) = 0, pro…ts to the intermediary can be

                                                         62
increased through the zero-pro…t constraint (35). This raises the value of the Lagrangian.
At the same time, it will have no impact on the maximum problem through the incentive
constraint (7) because its multiplier is zero. Therefore, the value of Lagrangian can be raised,
a contradiction.
    (Necessity) Assume that the incentive constraint (7) binds at (u; u) and that p(u 1; t) = 0
for some t        u. Note that the marginal cost of monitoring is zero at node (u                       1; t) since
C1 (0; k(u       1; t)) = 0. Now increase p(u             1; t) slightly. This relaxes the incentive constraint
and thereby increases the value of the Lagrangian. It has no impact on the zero-pro…t
condition (35) as C1 (0; k(u             1; t)) = 0. This implies a contradiction because the value of
the Lagrangian will increase.


13.6      Proof of Backloading: Lemmas 3 and 4

Proof. (Lemma 4, with Lemma 3 a special case) Consider the no-retention constraint (12)
at node (s; s + 1). Here a stall has just occurred. To satisfy the no-retention constraint
at this point the present value of the payments to the …rm from there onward must be at
                   PT       t
least as large as    t=s+1    s k(s; t) Pr (s; j). This is what the …rm can take by exercising

its retention option. This payment, which is necessary, should be made at node (s; T ).
                                                 PT     t                        T
Thus, at node (s; T ) pay the amount N (s; T ) =  t=s+1   s k(s; t) Pr (s; j) =[   Pr(s; T )].
Shifting the retention payments along the path (s; s + 1); (s; s + 2);                    ; (s; T   1) to the node
(s; T ), by increasing x(s; s + 1); x(s; s + 2);                  ; x(s; T   1) and lowering x(s; T ), helps with
incentives. It reduces the right-hand side of the incentive constraint (7) at node (s+1; s+ 1).
This occurs because the …rm will not receive the retention payment if it is caught lying at
some node (s; s + j) for j > 1. It has no impact on the right-hand side at other nodes
along the diagonal. This shift does a¤ect the left-hand side of (7), for u < s + 1, and
increases it, for u               s + 1. Moreover, if the payments are set according to (2) in the
lemma, it follows by construction that the no-retention constraint (12) holds at all nodes
(s; t), for t         s + 1. It is not bene…cial to pay a retention payment bigger than N (s; T )
      PT          t                              T
=        t=s+1        s k(s; t)   Pr (s; j) =[       Pr(s; T )], as will be discussed.

                                                             63
    Suppose that x(s; t) <            s k(s; t)       at some node (s; t), for s           t < T . It will be es-
tablished that by setting x(s; t) =               s k(s; t)    the incentive constraint (7) can be (weakly)
relaxed. Suppose t = s. Then, increase x(s; s) by                    s k(s; s)   x(s; s) and reduce x(S; T ) by
                          s T
[ s k(s; s)   x(s; s)][         Pr(s; s)= Pr(S; T )]. In other words, shift the payment to the …rm
from node (s; s) to node (S; T ) while keeping its present value constant. The left-hand sides
of the incentive constraints (7), for u                 s, will remain unchanged. For u > s, the left-hand
sides will increase. The right-hand sides of the incentive constraints will remain constant,
however. Thus, this change will help relax any binding incentive constraints. This shift
also helps with the no-retention constraints (13) for u > s. Next, suppose that s < t < T .
Presume that a retention payment is made at (s; T ) in the amount N (s; T ), as speci…ed by
(14). It was argued above that a payment of at least this size must be made at node (s; T )
to prevent retention at node (s; s + 1). It will be argued below that it is not bene…cial to
pay a higher amount. For the o¤-diagonal node (s; t), raise x(s; t) by                      s k(s; t)   x(s; t) and
                                                      t T
reduce x(S; T ) by [ s k(s; s)         x(s; t)][            Pr(s; t)= Pr(S; T )]. This change can only increase
the left-hand side of the incentive constraints for u > s and has no impact elsewhere. It
reduces the right-hand side at node (s; s). The right-hand sides elsewhere are una¤ected.
This change also helps with the no-retention constraints (13) for u > s. Finally, consider
the node (s; T ), for s < S. A similar line of argument can be employed to show that is not
optimal to set x(s; T ) <        s k(s; T )           N (s; T ); that is, to pay a retention payment bigger
than N (s; T ).

Corollary 2 (Lemma 3) If               = 0, then x(s; T ) = 0; that is, it is weakly e¢ cient to take all
of a …rm’s output at every node but (S; T ). Thus, Lemma 3 is a special case of Lemma 4.


13.7      Proof of E¢ cient Investment

Proof. The …rst step is to de…ne the …rst-best allocation. The …rst-best allocation for
working capital solves the following problem:
                          XT minft;Sg
                              X
                                                  t
                     max f                            [ s k(s; t)   qk(s; t)] Pr (s; t)g      ;
                    fk(s;t)g
                                t=1     s=0


                                                              64
subject to the information and irreversibility constraints, (8) and (9). Now, k(s; t) = k(s; s+
1) = k(s + 1; s + 1) for all t > s, by the information and irreversibility constraints. This
allows the above problem to be recast as
                                                      minft;S 1g
                                        X
                                        T                X
                                                  t
                            max f                                  [ s k(s; s + 1)      qk(s; s + 1)] Pr (s; t)
                        fk(s;s+1)g
                                        t=1              s=0
                            X
                            S 1
                                   s+1
                        +                   [   s+1 k(s; s     + 1)         qk(s; s + 1)] Pr (s + 1; s + 1)g      :
                            s=0

Focus on some k(s; s + 1). It will show up in the top line of the objective function whenever
t   s + 1. The …rst-order condition for k(s; s + 1) that is connected with this problem reads

X
T
        t                               1                             s+1                          1
              s k(s; s      + 1)                q Pr (s; t)+                   s+1 k(s; s   + 1)       q Pr (s + 1; s + 1) = 0:
t=s+1


    For the second step, focus on the appended version of problem (P5). Now, using the
information, irreversibility, and zero-pro…t constraints, (8), (9), and (35), in conjunction
with the solution for the x(s; t)’s presented in Lemma 4, the contracting problem can be
rewritten as
                                       minft;S 1g
                         XT                 X
                                   t
            max         f                              [ s k(s; s + 1)          C(p(s; t); k(s; s + 1))     qk(s; s + 1)] Pr (s; t)
    fk(s;s+1);p(s;t)g
                            t=1             s=0
        X
        S 1
              s+1
    +               [   s+1 k(s; s      + 1)            C(p(s + 1; s + 1); k(s; s + 1))            qk(s; s + 1)] Pr (s + 1; s + 1)g   ;
        s=0




                                                                        65
subject to the 2S incentive and diagonal-node no-retention constraints:

                minft;S 1g
    X
    T              X
            t
                              [ s k(s; s + 1)              C(p(s; t); k(s; s + 1))                  qk(s; s + 1)] Pr (s; t)
    t=1            s=u
    X
    S 1
                s+1
+                     [   s+1 k(s; s   + 1)       C(p(s + 1; s + 1); k(s; s + 1))                          qk(s; s + 1)] Pr (s + 1; s + 1)
    s=u 1

                                                 X
                                                 u 1                                  X
                                                                                      T
                                                                                               t
                                                               s k(s; s + 1)                       Pr(s; t)
                                                 s=u                                 t=s+1
                                                                                                     j
                                                 X
                                                 S                            X
                                                                              T                      Y
                                                                                      j
                             k(u       1; u) f         (   i         u 1 )f               Pr(i; j)         [1    p(u        1; n)]
                                                 i=u                           j=i                   n=u

                                                                               Y
                                                                               T                                 PS          t
                                                               T                                                      t=u  Pr(u 1; t)
                                                     +             Pr(i; T )         [1     p(u      1; n)][           T
                                                                                                                                      ]g;
                                                                               n=u
                                                                                                                        Pr(u 1; T )

and
                minft;S 1g
    X
    T              X
            t
                              [ s k(s; s + 1)              C(p(s; t); k(s; s + 1))                  qk(s; s + 1)] Pr (s; t)
    t=1            s=u
    X
    S 1
                s+1
+                     [   s+1 k(s; s   + 1)       C(p(s + 1; s + 1); k(s; s + 1))                          qk(s; s + 1)] Pr (s + 1; s + 1)
    s=u 1

                                                 X
                                                 u 1                                  X
                                                                                      T
                                                                                               t
                                                               s k(s; s   + 1)                     Pr(s; t)
                                                 s=u                                 t=s+1
                                                                                                                T minft;Sg
                                                                                                                X  X
                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                            k(u       1; u)                          s   Pr (s; t) ;
                                                                                                                t=u    s=u

for u = 1;                ; S. Let     u   and   u   represent the multipliers attached to the uth incentive and
diagonal-node no-retention constraints, respectively. Now suppose that after some diagonal
node (t ; t ) that neither the incentive nor diagonal-node no-retention constraints ever bind
again; that is, let (t ; t ) be the last diagonal node at which one or both of incentive and
no-retention constraints bind. Consider one of the incentive or no-retention constraints up
to and including node (t ; t ). The variable k(s; s + 1) will not show up on the right-hand
side of any of these constraints. Examine the left-hand side. The variable k(s; s + 1) appears
in the …rst line whenever t                      s + 1. It does not appear in the third line because s                                        u        1.

                                                                           66
Therefore, the …rst-order condition for k(s; s + 1) is

         X
         t                   X
                             T
                                 t                               1
  [1 +         (j+   j )]f                 s k(s; s   + 1)              q Pr (s; t)
         j=1             t=s+1

                                                      s+1                                1
                                                 +                   s+1 k(s; s   + 1)         q Pr (s + 1; s + 1)g = 0;

for s    t . Recall that p(s; t) = 0 whenever the incentive constraint does not bind by Lemma
2, so that C2 (0; k(s; s + 1)) = 0.
                                                                                                       Pt
   Turn to the last step. Divide the above …rst-order condition by 1 +                                    j=1 ( j   +   j ).   It
now coincides with the one for the planner’s problem. Thus, investment is e¢ cient.


13.8       E¢ cient Self-Financing

Proof. Let k (s; t) denote the allocations that are associated with the e¢ cient investment
plan. Set fb to
                                           T minft;Sg
                                           X  X
                                 fb =                        t
                                                                 k (s; t) Pr (s; t) + :
                                           t=1       s=0

It will be shown that the e¢ cient allocation is optimal when f = fb. To see this, set

                                                 x(s; t) = p(s; t) = 0:

This plan for the p(s; t)’s and x(s; t)’s will satisfy the incentive constraints and limited
liability constraints. The zero-pro…t constraint is also satis…ed because the amount that the
intermediary initially receives from the entrepreneur, fb, covers the expected discounted cost
of the project. The information and irreversibility constraints are satis…ed by construction.
The expected discounted return to the …rm is
                                     T minft;Sg
                                     X  X
                                                       t
                                                           sk    (s; t) Pr (s; t)        fb;
                                     t=1     s=0

which is of course the level of expected discounted pro…ts occurring in the …rst-best alloca-
tion. Essentially, the …rm is turning over to the intermediary su¢ cient funds to …nance to
the present value of investments. The …rm can then keep the resulting cash ‡ow.

                                                                 67
Remark 3 The e¢ cient allocation may be supported at lower levels of self-…nanced start-up
funding than fb.


13.9     Proof of Technology Switching

Proof. If at some level of wealth f        ;   the more advanced technology                      is not preferred to
technology , then
                                     v(f   ;   ; )     v(f          ;   ; ) < 0:

By the previous lemma, at the level of wealth, fb , the more advanced technology delivers
the …rst-best level of expected discounted pro…ts. This cannot be replicated by technology
 . Hence,
                                         v(fb ; )      v(fb ; ) > 0:

Now, v(f ; ) is continuous in f for        and . By the intermediate value theorem there exists
at least one threshold level of wealth, f       ;    2 [f       ;   ; fb ], such that

                                         v(f ; )       v(f ; ) = 0.

Thus, the function v(f ; )    v(f ; ) must cross 0 at least once. Now pick

                             F   ;   = ff : v(f ; )                     v(f ; ) > 0g:                          (36)




13.10       Proof of Coexisting Technologies

Proof. Suppose that at some level of self-…nanced start-up funds, f , a …rm picks technology,
  , in line with (15). Now, consider some more advanced technology                              >   . The …rm will
prefer   to    whenever f 2 F        ;   , where F          ;       is de…ned by (36). Technology          may not
maximize v(f ; ). Denote the optimal technology by                               ; note   6=   since v is preferred
to , which in turn is preferred to         . Pick any f 0 2 F                ;   . Let    be the optimal technology
that is associated with this level of start-up funding. Then, the technologies                          and     will
coexist whenever there are entrepreneurs with the start-up funds f and f 0 .

                                                       68
14     Appendix: Data

14.1    Table 1

Average establishment size. Data for average establishment size are from di¤erent sources for
each country. (i) The number for India is based on information obtained from two sources:
the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) for 2007-08, which gathers data on formal sector
manufacturing plants, and the National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) for 2005-06,
which collects data on informal sector manufacturing establishments. (ii) The …gure for
Mexico is calculated using data from Mexico’s 2004 Economic Census conducted by INEGI.
(iii) The number for the United States is derived from …gures published in the 2002 Economic
Census published by the U.S. Census Bureau.


14.2    Figure 4

A special request was made to obtain these data. Data for the United States are from the
2002 Economic Census published by the U.S. Census Bureau. They can be obtained using
the U.S. Census Bureau’s FactFinder. These are businesses that have no paid employees but
are subject to federal income tax in the United States.




                                             69
                                        United States
                                              Raw Data            Cumulative Share
                                           Est     Empl            Est     Empl

              All establishments         350,828     14,699,536    0           0
              Establishment Size
              1 to 4, employees          141,992      279,481      40.5       1.90
              5 to 9                     49,284       334,459     54.5       4.18
              10 to 19.                  50,824       702,428      69.0       8.96
              20 to 49                    51,660     1,615,349     83.7      19.94
              50 to 99                    25,883     1,814,999     91.1      32.29
              100 to 249                  20,346     3,133,384    96.9       53.61
              250 to 499                   6,853     2,357,917     98.9      69.65
              500 to 999                   2,720     1,835,386     99.6      82.13
              1,000 to 2,499               1,025     1,494,936     99.9      92.30
              2,500 or more                 241      1,131,197    100.0     100.00
              Mean establishment size                   41.9


14.3    Figure 5

The data for India, Mexico, and the United States displayed in Figure 5 are from Hsieh and
Klenow (2014). The table below shows the statistics used to construct Figure 5.

                           Hsieh and Klenow (2014) Facts
                                           Employment Share
             Establishment Age, yr.     U.S (2002)     Mexico (2003)      India (1994)
             <5                            0.137           0.280             0.282
             5-9                           0.110           0.235             0.224
             10-14                         0.115           0.173             0.155
             15-19                         0.092           0.100             0.089
             20-24                         0.074           0.077             0.067
             25-29                         0.072           0.039             0.043
             30-34                         0.072           0.035             0.036
             35-39                         0.049           0.019             0.018
             >39                           0.280           0.041             0.086


14.4    Section 11

The data used for real GDP and TFP derive from Penn World Table 8. For each country
an average value for these series is calculated from 1995 on. The information variable is the


                                              70
FACTOR1 series presented in Bushman et al. (2004, Appendix B). Three series from The
World Bank’s Doing Business database are aggregated using factor analysis to obtain an
index for the cost of enforcing contracts. The series are time (days), cost (% of claims), and
procedures (number). For each country an average of these series was taken from 2003 on.
Last, the series on …nancial development are taken from The World Bank’s Global Financial
Development dataset. The series used for “…ndev”is private credit by deposit money banks
and other …nancial institutions to GDP (%). Here an average from 2005 on is taken. Three
other series were also entered as the additional third variable in the regression: viz, …rms
identifying access to …nance as a major constraint (%), loans requiring collateral (%), value of
collateral needed for a loan (% of the loan amount). These series had no predictive power in
the regressions (albeit they reduced the sample size) and so are omitted from the reporting.



15        Appendix: Some Two-Period Examples
Some simple two-period examples illustrating the contracting setup are presented here. They
show how the shape of the productivity pro…le and the size of the …xed cost connected with
a blueprint in‡uence the form of the contract. They also demonstrate the importance that
monitoring, retention, and self-…nancing play in the design of a contract. Last, a connection
is drawn between the productivity ladder and survival probabilities, on the one hand, and
the aggregate distribution of employment by plant age, on the other.
      In all examples, a blueprint, b, is described by the quadruple b   f   0   = 0;   1   > 0;   2

 1;       0g. Output is produced in accordance with the Leontief production function o =
minf ; kg. The cost of the amalgamated input, q, is set to zero.


15.1       The Importance of Monitoring and Self-Financed Start-Up
           Funds

The …rst example focuses on the importance of monitoring and self-…nance. To this end,
let the cost of monitoring be prohibitive and abstract away from the issue of retention; in

                                               71
particular, set z =       = 0. A venture’s survival is guaranteed, implying                                             = 1. Therefore,
a project is …nanced only when a feasible backloading strategy exists. This strategy must
induce the …rm to repay the intermediary enough to cover the …xed cost of the venture.
The entrepreneur has f in self-…nanced start-up funds, which he can contribute to …nancing
the project. Therefore, assume f < . The entrepreneur turns all of his funds over to the
intermediary at the start of the venture.
   The …rst-best production allocation is very easy to compute in the example. Simply
set k(0; 1) = k(1; 1) = k(0; 2) =             1   and k(1; 2) = k(2; 2) =                        2.       As a result, the …rst-best
expected pro…t, , from implementing the blueprint is

                                                       2                              2 2
                                              1   +         (1        )   1   +              2        :

Now, focus on the set of blueprints, B, that potentially yield some …rst-best expected level
of pro…ts, :

                                                                                  2                           2 2
      B( )     f   0   = 0;    1   > 0;   2       1;            0;    1   +           (1         )    1   +         2             = g:

Which blueprints b 2 B( ) can actually attain the …rst-best level of expected pro…ts, ?
   Because monitoring is prohibitively expensive, backloading is the only way to satisfy the
incentive constraints at nodes (2; 2) and (1; 1). Backloading implies that the …rm receives a
                        2 2
return of ( + f )=(           ) at node (2; 2) and nothing elsewhere. (Recall that the intermediary
earns zero pro…ts.) If the …rm reports                 1   at node (2; 2), or lies, it can pocket                             2         1.   Hence,
                                                                                                                    2 2
satisfying the incentive constraint at node (2; 2) requires that ( + f )=(                                                )         2         1   or

                                                                                  2 2
                                              2        1   + ( + f )=(                  ):                                                        (37)

Observe that backloading will work only when the total expected payo¤ of the project is not
too concentrated on the highest productivity state,                           2.      Or, in other words, the productivity
pro…le cannot be too convex.
   Next, consider the incentive constraint at node (1; 1). By misreporting                                                        at this node,
the …rm can guarantee itself              1       0    =    1    in both periods 1 and 2. By declaring a stall,


                                                                 72
however, its capital stock will be locked in at                                 1,   in accord with the irreversibility constraint
(9). Satisfying the incentive constraint at this node therefore requires that the expected
payo¤ from truthfully reporting                               =     1,   in the hope of reaching node (2; 2) and receiving
                2 2
( + f )=(             ), dominates the payo¤ from lying and claiming                                                =       0   = 0. Thus, it must
                                                      2
transpire that               +f             1   +             1,   implying that

                                                          1        ( + f )=[(1 + )(                  )]:                                      (38)

Hence, when             1   is large relative to the project’s expected pro…ts, , it pays for the …rm to
lie in the …rst period. The …rst-best allocation cannot be supported.
     There are two additional constraints to consider. First,                                              1       2,   by assumption. Second,
                                                                                                 2                              2 2
recall that                 0. This implies the restriction                              1   +       (1        )   1    +             2   0, which
can be rewritten as

                                                      2 2                                                  2 2
                                        2        =(           )      f    [1 + (1                )]=(            )g 1 :                       (39)

To understand the impact of variations in the …xed cost, set                                                       = 0. It is a simple matter
to show that both incentive constraints must hold. In this situation, all of the returns from
the project will be given to the …rm. The payo¤ from lying arises solely from the possibility
of evading the …xed cost. As                         increases, the …rst-best gross pro…ts of the blueprint,                                   1   +
 2                          2 2
     (1     )   1   +             2,   rise to keep net pro…ts constant. A larger fraction of the gross pro…ts
must be paid back to the intermediary to cover the …xed cost. This makes it harder to satisfy
the incentive constraints.
     The right panel of Figure 11 plots the two incentive constraints (37) and (38), the 45-
degree line, and the …xed-cost constraint (39). The shaded quadrilateral illustrates the
values of       1   and       2   where the …rst-best allocation can be implemented using a backloading
strategy, given the four constraints. Again, a high value of                                                   1   will cause the node (1; 1)
incentive constraint to bind. Why? When                                    1   is high, then either                 2   must be relatively small
or    relatively large to maintain the …xed level of pro…ts, . It pays for the …rm to lie at
node (1; 1) when k(1; 1) =                      1.   Likewise, when                  2   is large, the incentive constraint at node
(2; 2) will bite. The left panel shows how the two incentive constraints shift inward as the

                                                                               73
Figure 11: The right panel shows the set of implementable …rst-best allocations. The left
panel illustrates what happens when the level of self-…nancing drops to zero.

funds that the …rm can use for self-…nancing shrink. The case where f = 0 is plotted in the
diagram. The set of implementable …rst-best allocations shrinks from the quadrilateral to
the triangle. With self-…nancing the intermediary funds a smaller fraction of the …xed cost,
which reduces the incentive for the …rm to lie.
     Consider a point, such as A, where            1   =    2.   In this case, the incentive constraint
(38) collapses to     1          1   (    f )=[(1 + )(      )]. Then, the …rst-best allocation cannot
be supported if       > f ; that is, when the project cannot be fully self-…nanced. Hence,
the implication of this constraint is that the …rst-best payo¤ from the project cannot be
supported when the productivity pro…le is too concave— that is, when                 2   is close in value
to   1.   Thus, second-best allocations must be entertained. A contract can be written that
supports a second-best allocation, provided that                   f <     =(1 + ); this condition is
explained below. Interestingly, advancing the …rm a level of working capital below                 1   may
help to satisfy the …rst-period incentive compatibility constraint, so that here k(1; 1) =
k(1; 1) = k(0; 2) <       1.   This is because reducing the funding has a larger impact on the payo¤
to misreporting at node (1; 1) than it does to overall pro…ts , and thereby helps to generate a
gradually increasing payo¤ pro…le. To see this, suppose that the …rm will lie in period 1 when


                                                       74
                                                                                                   2
 =   1.   The expected pro…ts from this lying strategy would be ( +                                    )k(1; 1). Alternatively,
                                                                                       2
the …rm could tell the truth. Then, it will receive                   k(1; 1) +                1        (     f ). To maintain
                                                                      2                                          2
indi¤erence between these two strategies, set ( +                         )k(1; 1) =           k(1; 1) +             1   (    f ).
                                                  2
This implies k(1; 1) =     1   (     f )=(            )<   1.   The condition that                  f<        =(1+ ) ensures
that the payo¤ from telling the truth net of the funds used for self-…nance is nonnegative,
given the level of capital investment, k(1; 1). When                        f>     =(1 + ), it is not feasible to
use such a strategy.
   Finally, focus on a point such as B. Now, the incentive constraint at the (2; 2) node
is violated, so that   2       1   + ( + f )=(             )2 . This implies that              1   <(          f )=[     (1 + )].
All expected pro…ts derive solely from the return to node (2; 2), because the discounted
                                                                                           2
expected value of the returns at nodes (1; 1) and (1; 2), or [                    +                (1       )] 1 , is insu¢ cient
to cover the …xed cost net of the portion funded by the …rm,                                       f . Therefore, there are
not enough resources available to employ a backloading strategy that will entice the …rm to
tell the truth at node (2; 2). That is, there are no pro…ts–only losses–that the intermediary
can redirect to node (2; 2) from the other nodes on the tree. The …rm avoids these losses by
lying. Monitoring must be used to implement such a point. If monitoring is perfectly e¢ cient
(z = 1), then the …rst-best allocations can be supported at point B. When monitoring is
e¢ cient, the …rst-best allocation can also be obtained at point A. Therefore, in economies
with poor monitoring the choice set for technologies is limited to those blueprints that can be
implemented with backloading strategies. With better monitoring this choice set is expanded
to include technologies that cannot be implemented with backloading alone.


15.2      Costly Cash-Flow Control

The second example focuses on how costly cash-‡ow control in‡uences the design of the
contract. To keep things simple, assume that the entrepreneur has no funds available for
self-…nancing start-up costs; that is, set f = 0. All of the remaining features of the previous
example are retained but now                 0.



                                                            75
15.2.1        The No-Retention Constraints

The …rm now has the ability to retain the fraction                                           of output at any node on the ladder.
The nodes (0; 1) and (0; 2) can be ignored because                                       0   = 0, so there is nothing for the …rm
to retain here. Focus on the second period …rst. Suppose that the …rm …nds itself at node
(1; 2); that is, it stalls after reaching                    1.    The …rm will retain                              1   units of output here.
                                                                                    2
This event has an expected discounted value of                                          (1           )     1.   Alternatively, consider the
case where the …rm declares that it has reached node (2; 2). Here it will receive the amount
        2                         2 2
[            (1   )       1 ]=(         ). Note that the …rm’s pro…ts have been reduced by the necessity for
the intermediary to make a retention payment at node (2; 1). The …rm can choose to retain
the amount            2   at node (2; 2). Thus, the no-retention constraint at node (2; 2) requires that
         2                          2 2
[            (1       )     1 ]=(         )       2.   This can be rearranged to get
                                                                                                    2 2
                                              2        [(1        )= ]      1   + =(                      ):

The line RC(2; 2) in the left panel of Figure 12 illustrates the no-retention constraint. It
slopes downward.
      Move back in time to period 1, speci…cally to node (1; 1). If the …rm moves to node (2; 2),
                                                             2                                      2 2
it will earn pro…ts in the amount [                               (1            )       1 ]=(             ). This occurs with probability
    . If it moves to node (1; 2), then it will receive                                   1.     Therefore, its expected discounted
                                                                                                2                            2 2
pro…ts from telling the truth at node (1; 1) are                                    [                (1         )   1 ]=(          ) + (1    )          1

= =(         ). If the …rm decides to exercise its retention option, it will receive (1 + )                                                      1.   In
this circumstance, the intermediary will not increase the working capital to                                                          2   (from       1 ).

The period-1 no-retention constraint dictates that =(                                           )         (1 + )        1,   or that

                                                       1     =[(1 + )(                       )]:

This is shown by the curve RC(1; 1) in the left panel of Figure 12.


15.2.2        The Incentive Compatibility Constraints

The incentive compatibility constraints are also a¤ected by the …rm’s ability to retain cash
‡ow. Consider the incentive constraint at node (2; 2) …rst. As just discussed, when the …rm

                                                                       76
                                                                   2                         2 2
tells the truth, then it will receive [                                (1        )   1 ]=(            ). When the …rm lies, it can
now pocket          2         1   +       1.   Therefore, satisfying the period-2 incentive constraint requires
                2                              2 2
that [              (1            )    1 ]=(         )     2   1   +        1.   This constraint can be rewritten as

                                                                                           2 2
                                                     2   [(        )= ]     1   + =(             ):

The incentive compatibility constraint is represented in the left panel of Figure 12 by the
line IC (2; 2). Note that it lies below the old curve IC(2; 2), because (                                                  )= < 1. In
fact, it will slope down when                        > .
     Move back in time to node (1; 1). The pro…ts from lying will be (1 + )(                                               1   +        0)   =
(1 + ) 1 , because                0   = 0. As was mentioned, the expected pro…ts from telling the truth are
     . Therefore, the period-1 incentive constraint is the same as before:

                                                           1   =[(1 + )(             )]:

Hence, the old IC(1; 1) curve will still apply for period 1.


15.2.3      The Upshot

Observe that the period-1 retention constraint will be automatically satis…ed when the …rst-
period incentive constraint holds; therefore, it can be dropped from the analysis. Now, the
shaded triangle on the far left side in the left panel of Figure 12 shows those ( 1 ;                                              2)   com-
binations that satisfy the period-2 no-retention constraint, RC(2; 2), but not the incentive
compatibility constraint, IC (2; 2). The ( 1 ;                              2)   combinations that satisfy IC (2; 2), but
not RC(2; 2), are shown by the hatched triangle on the right. Note that the triangle on the
left admits higher                2= 1   ratios than the one on the right. Thus, the no-retention constraint
does not penalize convex productivity ladders as much as the incentive constraint does. The
fact that the IC (2; 2) slopes upward implies that it does not restrict the absolute sizes of
 1   and   2;   it is a restriction on how large                   2   can be relative to              1   (for a given expected level
of net pro…ts). By contrast, along the RC(2; 2) constraint an increase in                                           2   must be met by
a decrease in           1.   If the …rm can retain more cash ‡ow in the second period, then the amount

                                                                       77
that it can retain in the …rst period must be decreased, so the payo¤ from exercising the
no-retention option in the second period becomes larger (again, for a given level of expected
net pro…ts). Furthermore, the IC (2; 2) curve rotates downward as                               rises. Thus, retention
worsens the incentive problem because the payo¤ from lying increases when it can retain
some of the output. Hence, retention further limits the ability to implement convex pro…les
and makes monitoring even more important.
   The right panel in Figure 12 illustrates the upshot of the above analysis. Note that the
                                                                                                2 2                    2 2
RC(2; 2) constraint is located above the              > 0 constraint, since =(                        )           =(         ) and
                  2
 =[(1        )]       > =f[1 + (1        )]   g. The hatched area illustrates the values of                            1   and    2

where the …rst-best allocation can be supported using a backloading strategy. This area has
shrunk due to the costly cash-‡ow control problem and lies within the old triangle.


15.3         Identifying the Productivity Ladder

The two-period example is resurrected here to illustrate the connection between the produc-
tivity ladder and survival probabilities, on the one hand, and the aggregate distribution of
employment by plant age, on the other. It will be shown that in order for old …rms to ac-
count for more of aggregate employment than young …rms, it must transpire that                                         2= 1      >1
and that this ratio must rise with the plant death probability 1                                . The example illus-
trates how the productivity ladder can be identi…ed in the applied analysis using data on
the age distribution of employment. To see this, take the structure of the earlier examples
but assume now that             1, z = 1, and         = 0; thus, a …rm’s survival is not ensured, moni-
toring is perfect, and there is no retention. The …rst-best solution will obtain. Consequently,
k(0; 1) = k(1; 1) = k(0; 2) =       1   and k(1; 2) = k(2; 2) =              2.   Let k(s; t) = minfe
                                                                                                    k(s; t); l(s; t)g
so that the amount of labor used corresponds with the amount of working capital. (Note
that q = 0 implies that r = w = 0.)
                                                                                                             2
   Employment by young and old …rms in the economy is given by                                   1   and          (1         )   1+
 2 2
        2.   Note that      1   Q   2
                                        (1    )   1   +   2 2
                                                                2   as   1    Q     [(1     )   1    +     2 ].    Therefore,
to have old …rms accounting for more employment than young ones, when survival is not

                                                          78
Figure 12: Set of implementable …rst-best allocations with costly cash-‡ow control. The
left panel portrays the no-retention constraints. The right panel shows the set of …rst-best
allocations that can be implemented.




                                            79
guaranteed (                < 1), it must transpire that         2   >   1.   In particular, it must happen that
 2   >        1 [1          (1       )]=(   ), where [1     (1       )]=(     ) > 1 (when        < 1). Note that
1        (1          )]=(        ) is decreasing in   so that this lower bound for      2   will rise as   falls for a
given value of              1.   In other words, the pro…le of productivity must become steeper as survival
falls.
     Now imagine two countries where plants have the same survival rate. Older plants can
account for a higher level of employment in one of the countries only if plants there also climb
a steeper productivity pro…le than in the other country. This consideration will be important
when comparing plants in the United States with those in Mexico. Alternatively, suppose
that in two countries young and old plants have the same aggregate levels of employment.
Then, the country with the lower survival rate must also have a steeper productivity pro…le.
This fact will be important when comparing India and Mexico.



References
         Aghion, Philippe and Howitt, Peter. 1992. “A Model of Growth Through Creative
         Destruction.”Econometrica, 60 (2): 323-351.

         Antunes, António, Cavalcanti, Tiago and Villamil, Anne. 2008. “The E¤ect of Finan-
         cial Repression and Enforcement on Entrepreneurship and Economic Development.”
         Journal of Monetary Economics, 55 (2): 278-297.

         Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Du‡o, Esther. 2005. “Growth Theory through the Lens
         of Development Economics.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1A, edited by
         Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 473–552.

         Barro, Robert and Lee, Jong-Wha. 2013, “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment
         in the World, 1950-2010.”Journal of Development Economics, 104 (C): 184-198.

         Buera, Franciso J., Kaboski, Joseph P. and Shin, Yongseok. 2011. “Finance and De-
         velopment: A Tale of Two Sectors.”American Economic Review. 101 (5): 1964–2002.

         Bushman, Robert M., Piotroski, Joseph D. and Smith, Abbie J. 2004. “What Deter-
         mines Corporate Transparency.”Journal of Accounting Research, 42 (2): 207-252.

         Caselli, Francesco and Coleman, Wilbur John. 2006. “The World Technology Frontier.”
         American Economic Review, 96 (3): 499-522.


                                                             80
Castro, Rui, Clementi, Gian Luca and MacDonald, Glenn M. 2004. “Investor Protec-
tion, Optimal Incentives, and Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
119 (3): 1131-1175.

Clementi, Gian Luca and Hopenhayn, Hugo. 2006. “A Theory of Financing Constraints
and Firm Dynamics.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (1): 229-265.

Fernandez, Ana and Phelan, Christopher. 2000. “A Recursive Formulation for Re-
peated Agency with History Dependence.”Journal of Economic Theory, 91: 223-247.

Golosov, Mikhail and Tsyvinski, Aleh. 2006. “Designing Optimal Disability Insurance:
A Case for Asset Testing.”Journal of Political Economy, 114 (2): 257-279.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Jovanovic, Boyan. 1990. “Financial Development, Growth,
and the Distribution of Income.”Journal of Political Economy, 98 (5): 1076-1107.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Sanchez, Juan M. and Wang, Cheng. 2010. “Financing Develop-
ment: The Role of Information Costs.” American Economic Review, 100 (4): 1875-
1891.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Sanchez, Juan M. and Wang, Cheng. 2013. “Quantifying the
Impact of Financial Development on Economic Development.” Review of Economics
Dynamics, 16 (1): 194-215.

Guner, Nezih, Ventura, Gustavo and Xu, Yi. 2008. “Macroeconomic Implications of
Size-Dependent Policies.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 11 (4): 721-744.

Hopenhayn, Hugo and Rogerson, Richard. 1993. “Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation:
A General Equilibrium Analysis.”Journal of Political Economy, 101 (5): 915-38.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Klenow, Peter. 2014. “The Life Cycle of Plants in India and
Mexico.”Unpublished paper, University of Chicago.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Olken, Benjamin A. 2014. “The Missing ‘Missing’ Middle.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28 (3): 89–108.

King, Robert G. and Levine, Ross. 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be
Right.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (3): 717-737.

King, Robert G. and Levine, Ross. 1994. “Capital Fundamentalism, Economic De-
velopment and Economic Growth.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, 40 (June): 259-292.

Kocherlakota, Narayana R. 2010. The New Dynamic Public Finance. Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton, N.J.



                                      81
Levine, Ross., 2005. “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence”In Handbook of Eco-
nomic Growth, Vol. 1A, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 865-934.

Luttmer, Erzo G. J. “On the Mechanics of Firm Growth.”Review of Economic Studies,
78 (3): 1042-1068.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1990. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?”
American Economic Review, 80 (2): 92-96.

Marcet, Albert and Marimon, Ramon, 1992. “Communication, Commitment, and
Growth.”Journal of Economic Theory, 58 (2): 219-249.

Midrigan, Virgiliu and Xu, Daniel Yi. 2014. “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence
from Plant-Level Data.”American Economic Review, 104 (2): 422-58.

Moll, Benjamin. 2014. “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-
Financing Undo Capital Misallocation.” American Economic Review, 104 (10): 3186-
3221.

Prescott, Edward C. 1998. “Needed: A Theory of Total Factor Productivity.” Inter-
national Economic Review, 39 (3): 525-551.

Schoellman, Todd. 2012. “Education Quality and Development Accounting.” Review
of Economic Studies, 79 (1): 388-417.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1961. The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry Into
Pro…ts, Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Siegal, Jeremy J. 1992. “The Real Rate of Interest from 1800-1990: A Study of the
U.S. and the U.K.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 29 (2): 227-252.

Townsend, Robert M. 1979.“Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly
State Veri…cation.”Journal of Economic Theory, 21 (2): 256-293.

Townsend, Robert M. and Ueda, Kenichi. 2010. “Welfare Gains from Financial Liber-
alization.”International Economic Review, 51 (3): 553-597.

Wang, Cheng. 2005. “Dynamic Costly State Veri…cation.” Economic Theory, 25 (4):
887–916.

Williamson, Stephen D. 1986. “Costly Monitoring, Financial Intermediation, and Equi-
librium Credit Rationing.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 18 (2): 159-79.




                                      82
