                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ACCOUNTING FOR CHANGES IN BETWEEN-GROUP INEQUALITY

                                          Ariel Burstein
                                        Eduardo Morales
                                         Jonathan Vogel

                                       Working Paper 20855
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20855


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2015




We thank Treb Allen, Costas Arkolakis, David Autor, Gadi Barlevy, Lorenzo Caliendo, Davin Chor,
Arnaud Costinot, Jonathan Eaton, Pablo Fajgelbaum, Gene Grossman, David Lagakos, Bernard Salanié,
Nancy Stokey, and Mike Waugh for helpful comments and David Autor and David Dorn for making
their code available. Vogel thanks the Princeton International Economics Section for their support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ariel Burstein, Eduardo Morales, and Jonathan Vogel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Accounting for Changes in Between-Group Inequality
Ariel Burstein, Eduardo Morales, and Jonathan Vogel
NBER Working Paper No. 20855
January 2015, Revised January 2016
JEL No. E24,F16,J2

                                               ABSTRACT

We perform a quantitative analysis of observed changes in U.S. between-group inequality between
1984 and 2003. We use an assignment framework with many labor groups, equipment types, and
occupations in which changes in inequality are caused by changes in workforce composition, occupation
demand, computerization, and labor productivity. We parameterize our model using direct measures
of computer usage within labor group-occupation pairs and quantify the impact of each shock for various
measures of between-group inequality. We find, for instance, that the combination of computerization
and shifts in occupation demand account for roughly 80% of the rise in the skill premium, with computerization
alone accounting for roughly 60%. We show theoretically how computerization and changes in occupation
demand may be caused by international trade and quantify the impact of trade in computers on U.S.
inequality.


Ariel Burstein                                        Jonathan Vogel
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8365                                      Columbia University
Box 951477                                            420 West 118th Street
UCLA                                                  New York, NY 10027
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                            and NBER
and NBER                                              jvogel@columbia.edu
arielb@econ.ucla.edu

Eduardo Morales
Department of Economics
Princeton University
310 Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
ecmorales@princeton.edu
1    Introduction
The last few decades have witnessed pronounced changes in relative average wages
across groups of workers with different observable characteristics (between-group inequal-
ity); see, e.g. Acemoglu and Autor (2011). For example, the wages of workers with more
education relative to those with less and of women relative to men have increased sub-
stantially in the United States.1
    Following Katz and Murphy (1992), a large literature has emerged studying how
changes in relative supply and demand for labor groups shape their relative wages. Changes
in relative demand across labor groups have been linked prominently to computerization
(or a reduction in the price of equipment more generally)—see e.g. Krusell et al. (2000),
Autor and Dorn (2013), and Beaudry and Lewis (2014)—and to changes in relative de-
mand across occupations and sectors, driven by structural transformation, offshoring,
and international trade—see e.g. Autor et al. (2003), Buera et al. (2015), and Galle et al.
(2015). Related to the first hypothesis, Table 1 shows that computer use rose dramati-

                                                      1984   1989   1993    1997   2003
                   All                                27.4   40.1    49.8   53.3   57.8
                   Gender        Female               32.8   47.6    57.3   61.3   65.1
                                 Male                 23.6   34.5    43.9   47.0   52.1
                   Education     College degree       45.5   62.5    73.4   79.8   85.7
                                 No college degree    22.1   32.7    41.0   43.7   45.3

                         Table 1: Share of hours worked with computers

cally between 1984 and 2003 and that computers are used more intensively by educated
workers and women.2 Related to the second hypothesis, Figure 1 shows that education-
and female-intensive occupations grew relatively quickly over the same time period; see
Table 12 in Appendix B for details.
    The goal of our paper is to use a general equilibrium model together with detailed
data on factor allocation to quantify the impact of computerization and changes in oc-
cupation demand on between-group inequality in the United States; in addition, we aim
to quantify the role of international trade in shaping these forces. We base our analysis

    1 The relative importance of between- and within-group inequality is an area of active research. Autor

(2014) concludes: “In the U.S., for example, about two-thirds of the overall rise of earnings dispersion
between 1980 and 2005 is proximately accounted for by the increased premium associated with schooling
in general and postsecondary education in particular.” On the other hand, Helpman et al. (2012) conclude:
“Residual wage inequality is at least as important as worker observables in explaining the overall level and
growth of wage inequality in Brazil from 1986-1995.”
    2 We describe our data sources in depth in Section 4.1 and Appendix B.



                                                     1
Figure 1: Growth (1984-2003) of the occupation share of labor payments and the average
(1984 & 2003) of the share of workers in the occupation who have a college degree (left)
and are female (right)

on an assignment model with many groups of workers and many occupations—building
on Eaton and Kortum (2002), Lagakos and Waugh (2013), and Hsieh et al. (2013)—which
we extend to incorporate many types of equipment. We use this framework because it
allows for potentially rich patterns of complementarity between computers, labor groups
and occupations and, in spite of its high dimensionality, remains tractable enough to es-
timate its key parameters, perform aggregate counterfactuals, and incorporate interna-
tional trade in a parsimonious manner. Moreover, the model’s aggregate implications for
relative wages nest those of workhorse models of between-group inequality, e.g. Katz
and Murphy (1992) and Krusell et al. (2000).
    The impact of changes in the economic environment on between-group inequality is
shaped by comparative advantage between labor groups, equipment types, and occu-
pations. Consider, for example, the potential impact of an increase in the productivity of
computers on a given labor group—such as educated workers or women—that uses com-
puters intensively. A labor group may use computers intensively for two reasons. First,
it may have a comparative advantage with computers, in which case this group would
use computers relatively more within occupations, as we show is the case in the data for
more educated workers. In this case, our model predicts that computerization increases
the relative wage of this labor group. Second, a labor group may have a comparative ad-
vantage in occupations in which computers have a comparative advantage, in which case
this group would be allocated disproportionately to occupations in which all workers are
relatively more likely to use computers, as we show is the case in the data for women. In
this case, our model predicts that computerization may increase or decrease the relative
wage of this group depending on the degree of substitutability between occupations.3

   3 This implies that our model is flexible enough to allow computerization to increase the relative wage of

workers who are relatively productive using computers and reduce the relative wage of workers employed

                                                     2
    To quantify the impact that computerization and changes in occupation demand, labor
supply, and labor productivity have had on relative wages in the U.S. over recent decades,
we therefore must: measure these changes; identify comparative advantage between la-
bor groups, equipment types, and occupations; and estimate the elasticity of substitution
between occupations (which shapes the responsiveness of occupation prices to shocks)
and an elasticity shaping the within-worker dispersion of productivity across occupation-
equipment type pairs (which shapes the responsiveness of group average wages to our
measures of changes in occupation prices and equipment productivity).
    Comparative advantage can be inferred directly from data on the allocation of work-
ers to equipment type-occupation pairs. Over any time period, we measure changes in
the the determinants of relative wages as follows. Changes in “equipment productivity”
that result in computerization can be inferred from changes in the allocation of work-
ers to computers within labor group-occupation pairs; focusing on within labor group-
occupation pairs is important because aggregate computer usage rise in the absence of
changes in equipment productivity if either labor groups that have a comparative advan-
tage using computers or occupations that have a comparative advantage with comput-
ers grow. Changes in occupation demand (“occupation shifters”) can be inferred from
changes in the allocation of workers to occupations within labor group-equipment type
pairs and in the labor income shares across occupations. Changes in labor supply (“labor
composition”) are directly observed in the data. Finally, we measure labor productivity
as a residual to exactly match changes in the average wage of each labor group.4
    In order to estimate the two key elasticities, we derive moment conditions that are con-
sistent with equilibrium relationships generated by our model. We identify the structural
elasticity of substitution between occupations using the reduced-form elasticity of occu-
pation labor income to measured occupation prices. We identify the structural elasticity
shaping the within-worker dispersion of productivity across occupation-equipment type
pairs using the reduced-form elasticity of labor-group-specific average wages to labor-
group-specific weighted averages of changes in occupations’ prices and equipment types’
productivities. Because of the endogeneity of occupation prices, when estimating both
elasticities we use a function of our measures of changes in equipment productivity as an
instrument.


in occupations in which computers are particularly productive, as described by, e.g., Autor et al. (1998) and
Autor et al. (2003).
    4 Residual labor productivity affects the relative productivity of labor groups, independent of the equip-

ment they use and occupations in which they are employed. Factors shaping residual labor productivity
include, for example, discrimination and the quality of education and health systems; see e.g. Card and
Krueger (1992) and Goldin and Katz (2002).

                                                      3
    As is evident from the previous discussion, our procedure crucially requires infor-
mation for multiple years on the shares of workers of each labor group that belong to
each equipment type-occupation pair. We obtain this information for the U.S. from the
October Current Population Survey (CPS) Computer Use Supplement, which provides
data for five years (1984, 1989, 1993, 1999, and 2003) on whether a worker has direct or
hands on use of a computer at work—be it a personal computer, laptop, mini computer,
or mainframe—and on worker characteristics, hours worked, and occupation; see, e.g.,
Krueger (1993) and Autor et al. (1998) for previous studies using the October Supple-
ment. For our purposes, this data is not without limitations: it imposes a narrow view
of computerization that does not capture, e.g., automation of assembly lines; it only pro-
vides information on the allocation of workers to one type of equipment, computers; it
does not detail the share of each worker’s time at work spent using computers; and it
does not extend beyond 2003.5
    We find that computerization alone accounts for roughly 60% of all shocks that have
had a positive impact on the skill premium (i.e. the relative wage of workers with a
college degree to those without) between 1984 and 2003 and plays a similar role in ex-
plaining disaggregated measures of between-education inequality (e.g., the relative wage
of workers with graduate training relative to high school dropouts). This result from
our model is driven by the following three observations in the data. First, we observe a
large rise in the share of workers using computers within labor group-occupation pairs,
which our model interprets as a large increase in computer productivity (i.e. comput-
erization). Second, more educated workers use computers within occupations relatively
more than less educated workers, which—together with computerization—yields a rise in
their relative wages according to our model. Third, more educated workers are also dis-
proportionately employed in occupations in which all workers use computers relatively
intensively, which—together with computerization and an estimated elasticity of substi-
tution between occupations greater than one—also yields a rise in their relative wages
according to our model. The combination of computerization and occupation shifters ac-
counts for roughly 80% of the rise in the skill premium, leaving only 20% to be explained
by labor productivity, the shock measured as a residual to match observed changes in
relative wages.
    We find that computerization, occupation shifters, and labor productivity all play im-
portant roles in accounting for the reduction in the gender gap (i.e. the relative wage of
   5 Our   sample period, 1984-2003, accounts for a substantial share of the increase in the skill premium
and reduction in the gender gap in the U.S. since the late 1960s. In Appendix D we show that the German
Qualification and Working Conditions survey, which alleviates some of the limitations of the CPS data, reveals
similar patterns of comparative advantage in Germany as in the U.S.

                                                      4
male to female workers). Computerization reduces the gender gap in spite of the fact that,
unlike educated workers, women do not have a comparative advantage using comput-
ers. Computerization decreases the gender gap because women are disproportionately
employed in occupations in which all workers use computers intensively and our esti-
mate of the elasticity of substitution across occupations is larger than one.
    Whereas in our baseline model we treat computerization as an exogenous change, in
Section 7 we study the extent to which this observed change in computer productivity is
a consequence of international trade in equipment. We focus on equipment trade both be-
cause computerization is a dominant force in accounting for the rise in the skill premium
(as we show in the present paper), and because many countries import a large share of
their equipment (as shown in Eaton and Kortum (2001)). Theoretically, we show that the
procedure to quantify the impact on relative wages of moving to autarky in equipment
trade is equivalent to the procedure we follow in our baseline model to calculate changes
in relative wages in a closed economy with the only difference that the computerization
shock is now measured as a simple function of import shares of different equipment types
in the open economy. We also provide a simple procedure to quantify the differential ef-
fects on wages in a given country of changes in primitives (i.e. worldwide technologies,
labor compositions, and trade costs) between two time periods relative to the effects of
the same changes in primitives if that country were a closed economy. Using this latter
result, we quantify the impact of trade in equipment goods on between-group inequality
in the U.S. between 1984 and 2003 for different values of the trade elasticity. In Appendix
I, we extend the model to additionally allow for trade in occupations and in intermedi-
ate industries and show how the occupation shifters introduced in our baseline model
become simple functions of occupations’ and industries’ import and export shares. In
practice, however, occupation-specific import and export shares are hard to obtain, and
this prevents us from measuring the impact that trade in occupations has had on wage
inequality in the U.S.
    Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the related literature.
We describe our framework, characterize its equilibrium, and discuss its mechanisms in
Section 3. We parameterize the model in Section 4, describe our baseline closed-economy
results in Section 5, and consider various robustness exercises and sensitivity analyses
in Section 6. Finally, we extend our model to incorporate and quantify the impact of
international trade in equipment in Section 7 and conclude in Section 8. Additional details
and robustness exercises are relegated to appendices.




                                            5
2    Literature
We follow Hsieh et al. (2013) and Lagakos and Waugh (2013) in using an assignment
model of the labor market parameterized with a Fréchet distribution. We extend these
models by introducing equipment types as another dimension along which workers sort,
and international trade as another set of forces determining the equilibrium assignment
of workers to occupations and equipment types. This framework allows us to incorpo-
rate multiple labor groups (enabling us to study within a unified framework the sources
of changes in inequality in the United States between multiple groups of workers, such as
the decline in the gender gap and the rise in the return to education across disaggregated
education groups) and multiple occupations and equipment types (allowing us to study
within a unified framework the impact of changes in occupation demand shifters, com-
puter productivity, labor productivity and labor composition). Furthermore, the frame-
work guides us in how to use detailed data on the allocation of different labor groups
to occupations and types of equipment to measure comparative advantage between la-
bor groups, occupations and types of equipment, the changes in occupation shifters and
equipment productivity, and key elasticities.
    In trying to explain the evolution of between-group inequality as a function of changes
in observables, rather than explaining patterns in the skill premium and gender gap
through latent skill- or gender-biased technological change, our paper’s objective is most
similar to Krusell et al. (2000) and Lee and Wolpin (2010). Krusell et al. (2000) estimate
an aggregate production function which permits capital-skill complementarity and show
that changes in aggregate stocks of equipment, skilled labor, and unskilled labor can ac-
count for much of the variation in the U.S. skill premium. We corroborate the findings in
Krusell et al. (2000) and extend them by additionally considering the impact of equipment
productivity growth on the gender gap and other measures of between-group inequality.
However, we rely on a distinct methodology. Whereas Krusell et al. (2000) identify the
degree of capital-skill complementarity exclusively using aggregate time series data, our
approach additionally leverages information on the allocation of workers to computers
and occupations and, consequently, yields parameter estimates shaping the degree of
equipment-labor group complementarity that are robust to allowing for exogenous time
trends in the relative productivity of each labor group; see Acemoglu (2002) for a discus-
sion of the relevance of allowing for these time trends in this context.
    Lee and Wolpin (2010) use a dynamic model of endogenous human capital accumula-
tion to study the evolution of relative wages and labor supply and find that skill-biased
technical change (the residual) plays the central role in explaining changes in the skill


                                            6
premium. By allowing for a greater degree of disaggregation (e.g. 30 occupations) and
exploiting detailed data on factor allocation, our results substantially reduce the role of
changes in the residual (labor productivity) in shaping changes in the skill premium. On
the other hand, in contrast to Lee and Wolpin (2010), we treat labor composition as ex-
ogenous.6
    Two important related papers use differential regional exposure to computerization to
study the differential effect across regions of technical change on the polarization of U.S.
employment and wages, Autor and Dorn (2013), and on the gender gap and skill pre-
mium, Beaudry and Lewis (2014). Our approach complements these papers, embedding
computerization into a general equilibrium model that allows us to quantify the effect
of computerization (as well as other shocks) on changes over time in between-group in-
equality. Instead of relying on regional variation in the exposure to computerization, we
make use of detailed data on computer usage within labor group-occupation pairs.
    Our focus on occupation shifters is related to a broad literature using shift-share anal-
yses. For instance, Autor et al. (2003) use a shift-share analysis and find that occupation
shifters account for more than 50% of the relative demand shift favoring college labor
between 1970 and 1988; we arrive at a similar result using a shift-share analysis between
1984 and 2003 in our data even though our decomposition exercise implies that occupa-
tion shifters account for a relatively small share of the rise in the relative wage of college
labor. Under some assumptions (Cobb-Douglas utility and production functions), shift-
share analyses structurally decompose changes in wage bill shares, i.e. changes in labor
income for one labor group relative to the sum of labor payments across all labor groups,
into within and between occupation shifters; see e.g. Katz and Autor (1999). However,
changes in wage bill shares can be very different from changes in relative wages (on which
we focus), especially when changes in labor composition are large, as they are in the data.
Therefore, the results of shift-share analyses are not inconsistent with the finding in our
decomposition exercise that occupation shifters account for only 19% of the rise in the

   6 Extending     our model to endogenize education and labor participation—maintaining a static
environment—would give rise to the same equilibrium equations determining factor allocations and wages
conditional on labor composition. In this case, our measures of shocks—to occupation shifters, equipment
productivity, and labor productivity—and our estimates of model parameters are robust to extending our
model to endogenize the supply of each labor group. In our counterfactual exercises, we fix labor compo-
sition to isolate the direct effect of individual shocks to occupation shifters, equipment productivity, and
labor productivity on labor demand and wages. In order to take into consideration the accumulation of
occupation-specific human capital as studied in, e.g., Kambourov and Manovskii (2009a) and Kambourov
and Manovskii (2009b), we would have to include occupational experience as a worker characteristic when
defining labor groups in the data (unfortunately, the October CPS does not contain this information) and
model the corresponding dynamic optimization problem that workers would solve when deciding which
occupation to sort into. We leave this for future work.

                                                     7
relative wage of college labor.7
    The approach that we use to bring our model to the data does not require mapping
occupations into observable characteristics such as those introduced in Autor et al. (2003).
Instead, for each labor group, we estimate measures of comparative advantage that vary
flexibly across occupations, independent of the similarity in the task composition of these
occupations. Similarly, our procedure to measure occupation-specific demand shocks
does not use any information on the task composition of occupations. Consequently,
the counterfactual exercises that we perform have implications for the growth of differ-
ent occupations that do not rely on information on their task composition. As we show
in Appendix F.1, one can use the predictions of our model for the growth rates of each
occupation we consider to understand which of our measured shocks are causing the cor-
relation between occupation growth and occupation characteristics documented in Autor
et al. (2003). For instance, we find that computerization generates an expansion in those
occupations that are intensive in non-routine cognitive analytical and interpersonal tasks
and a contraction in occupations that are intensive in non-routine manual physical tasks.
    In relying on detailed data on workers’ computer usage, our paper is related to an
earlier literature studying the impact of computer use on wages; see e.g. Krueger (1993)
and Entorf et al. (1999). This literature has identified the impact of computer usage on
wages by regressing wages of different workers on a dummy for computer usage, an
identification approach that DiNardo and Pischke (1997) criticize. Our approach to esti-
mate key model parameters does not rely on such a regression. Instead, a component of
our structural estimation builds on the empirical approach suggested by Acemoglu and
Autor (2011) as a stylized example of how their assignment model might be brought to
the data. Specifically, we regress changes in labor-group-specific wages on interactions
between beginning-of-sample measures of the specialization of the different labor groups
across occupations and equipment types and measures of changes in those occupations’
prices and equipment types’ productivities. The possible endogeneity concerns affecting
this regression are very different from those described in DiNardo and Pischke (1997) and
are discussed in detail in Section 4.3.
    In modeling international trade, we empirically study the theoretical insights of Costinot
and Vogel (2010) and Costinot and Vogel (Forthcoming) regarding the impact of interna-
tional trade on inequality in a high-dimensional environment. We show, as in concurrent
work by Galle et al. (2015) and Lee (2015), that one can use a similar approach to that
   7 Firpo et al. (2011) uses a statistical model of wage setting to investigate the contribution of changes in
the returns to occupational tasks compared to other explanations such as de-unionization and changes in
the labor market wide returns to general skills. Our paper complements theirs by incorporating general
equilibrium effects and explicitly modeling the endogenous allocation of factors.

                                                      8
introduced by Dekle et al. (2008) in a single-factor trade model—i.e. replacing a large
number of unknown parameters with observable allocations in an initial equilibrium—in
a many-factor assignment model. Finally, in modeling international trade in equipment,
we extend the quantitative analyses of Burstein et al. (2013) and Parro (2013), who study
the impact of trade in capital equipment on the skill premium using the model of Krusell
et al. (2000).


3     Model
In this section we introduce the baseline version of our model, characterize its equilib-
rium, and show how to use it to decompose observed changes in relative average wages
into four types of changes in the economic environment: labor composition, equipment
productivity, occupation shifters, and labor productivity. Finally, we provide intuition for
how each of these changes affects relative wages.


3.1    Environment
At time t there is a continuum of workers indexed by z ∈ Zt , each of whom inelastically
supplies one unit of labor. We divide workers into a finite number of labor groups, in-
dexed by λ. The set of workers in group λ is given by Zt (λ) ⊆ Zt , which has mass Lt (λ).
There is a finite number of equipment types, indexed by κ. Workers and equipment are
employed by production units to produce a finite number of occupations, indexed by ω.
    Occupations are used to produce a single final good according to a constant elasticity
of substitution (CES) production function
                                                                          !ρ/(ρ−1)
                            Yt =    ∑ µt (ω )   1/ρ
                                                      Yt (ω )   (ρ−1)/ρ
                                                                                     ,                 (1)
                                     ω


where ρ > 0 is the elasticity of substitution across occupations, Yt (ω ) ≥ 0 is the endoge-
nous output of occupation ω, and µt (ω ) ≥ 0 is an exogenous demand shifter for occu-
pation ω.8 The final good is used to produce consumption, Ct , and equipment, Yt (κ ),



    8 We show in Appendix I that we can disaggregate µt (ω ) further into sector shifters and within-sector
occupation shifters. We also show how changes in the extent of international trade/offshoring in sectoral
output and occupation output may generate changes in these sector shifters and within-sector occupation
shifters. For now, however, we combine sector and within-sector occupation shifters and treat them as
exogenous.

                                                       9
according to the resource constraint

                                       Yt = Ct + ∑ pt (κ ) Yt (κ ) ,                                      (2)
                                                    κ


where pt (κ ) denotes the cost of a unit of equipment κ in terms of units of the final good.9
     Occupation output is produced by perfectly competitive production units. A unit
hiring k units of equipment type κ and l efficiency units of labor group λ produces
kα [ Tt (λ, κ, ω ) l ]1−α units of output, where α denotes the output elasticity of equipment
in each occupation and Tt (λ, κ, ω ) denotes the productivity of an efficiency unit of group
λ’s labor in occupation ω when using equipment κ.10 Comparative advantage between
labor and equipment is defined as follows: λ0 has a comparative advantage (relative
to λ) using equipment κ 0 (relative to κ) in occupation ω if Tt (λ0 , κ 0 , ω )/Tt (λ0 , κ, ω ) ≥
Tt (λ, κ 0 , ω )/Tt (λ, κ, ω ). Labor-occupation and equipment-occupation comparative ad-
vantage are defined symmetrically.
     A worker z ∈ Zt (λ) supplies e (z) × ε (z, κ, ω ) efficiency units of labor if teamed with
equipment κ in occupation ω. Each worker is associated with a unique e (z) ∈ (eλ , ēλ )—
with 0 < eλ ≤ ēλ < ∞—allowing some workers within Zt (λ) to be more productive than
others across all possible (κ, ω ); we normalize the average value of e (z) across workers
within each λ to be one (and prove this is without loss of generality in Appendix A). Each
worker is also associated with a vector of ε (z, κ, ω ), one for each (κ, ω ) pair, allowing
workers within Zt (λ) to vary in their relative productivities across (κ, ω ) pairs. We im-
pose two restrictions. First, the distribution of e (z) is independent of the distribution of
ε (z, κ, ω ) across (κ, ω ). Second, each ε (z, κ, ω ) is drawn independently from a Fréchet dis-
tribution with cumulative distribution function G (ε) = exp ε−θ , where a higher value
                                                                        

of θ > 1 decreases the within-worker dispersion of efficiency units across (κ, ω ) pairs.11

   9 Here  we assume that Yt (κ ) denotes the supply of equipment κ in period t. This is equivalent to as-
suming that equipment fully depreciates every period. Alternatively, we could assume that Yt (κ ) denotes
investment in capital equipment κ, which depreciates at a given rate. All our counterfactual exercises are
consistent with this alternative model with capital accumulation, interpreting them as comparisons across
balanced growth paths in which the real interest rate and the growth rate of relative productivity across
equipment types are both constant over time. In our baseline model, we treat the cost of producing equip-
ment as exogenous. We show in Section 7 how changes in the extent of international trade in equipment
generates endogenous changes in pt (κ ).
   10 We restrict α to be common across ω because we do not have the data to estimate a different value of

α(ω ) to each ω. Moreover, without affecting any of our results, we can extend the model to incorporate
other inputs such as structure or intermediate inputs s, which areproduced linearly using  the final good
                                                                                         η
and which enter the production function multiplicatively as s1−η kα [ Tt (λ, κ, ω ) l ]1−α . In either case, α
is the share of equipment relative to the combination of equipment and labor.
    11 See Adao (2015) for an approach relaxing these two restrictions in an environment in which each

worker faces exactly two choices. In Appendix E we show that our results hold exactly if we also allow

                                                     10
The assumption that ε (z, κ, ω ) is distributed Fréchet is made for analytical tractability; it
implies that the average wage of a labor group is a CES function of occupation prices and
equipment productivity.12
   Total output of occupation ω, Yt (ω ), is the sum of output across all units producing
occupation ω using any labor group λ and equipment type κ. All markets are perfectly
competitive and all factors are freely mobile across occupations and equipment types.
Relation to alternative frameworks. Whereas our framework imposes strong restrictions
on occupation production functions, its aggregate implications for wages nest those of
two frameworks that have been used commonly to study between-group inequality: the
canonical model, as named in Acemoglu and Autor (2011), and an extension of the canon-
ical model that incorporates capital-skill complementarity; see e.g. Katz and Murphy
(1992) and Krusell et al. (2000), respectively.13


3.2    Equilibrium
We characterize the competitive equilibrium, first in partial equilibrium—taking occupa-
tion prices as given—and then in general equilibrium. Additional derivations are pro-
vided in Appendix A.
Partial equilibrium. With perfect competition, equation (2) implies that the price of
equipment κ relative to the price of the final good (which we normalize to one) is simply
pt (κ ). An occupation production unit hiring k units of equipment κ and l efficiency units
of labor λ earns revenues pt (ω ) kα [ Tt (λ, κ, ω ) l ]1−α and incurs costs pt (κ ) k + vt (λ, κ, ω ) l,
where vt (λ, κ, ω ) is the wage per efficiency unit of labor λ when teamed with equipment
κ in occupation ω and where pt (ω ) is the price of occupation ω output. The profit maxi-
mizing choice of equipment quantity and the zero profit condition—due to costless entry
of production units—yield
                                                      −α           1
                            vt (λ, κ, ω ) = ᾱpt (κ ) 1−α pt (ω ) 1−α Tt (λ, κ, ω )


for correlation for each z of ε (z, κ, ω ) across (κ, ω ) pairs. Moreover, we also conduct our analysis allowing
for variation across labor groups in the dispersion parameter θ and show that our quantitative results are
robust.
   12 The wage distribution implied by this assumption is a good approximation to the observed distribu-

tion of individual wages; see e.g. Saez (2001) and Figure 5 in the Appendix.
   13 The aggregate implications of our model for relative wages are equivalent to those of the canonical

model if we assume no equipment (i.e. α = 0) and two labor groups, each of which has a positive produc-
tivity in only one occupation. The model of capital-skill complementarity is an extension of the canonical
model in which there is one type of equipment and the equipment share is positive in one occupation and
zero in the other (i.e. α = 0 for the latter occupation).

                                                      11
if there is positive entry in (λ, κ, ω ), where ᾱ ≡ (1 − α) αα/(1−α) . Facing the wage profile
vt (λ, κ, ω ), each worker z ∈ Zt (λ) chooses the equipment-occupation pair (κ, ω ) that
maximizes her wage, e (z) ε (z, κ, ω ) vt (λ, κ, ω ).
    The assumption that ε (z, κ, ω ) is distributed Fréchet and independent of e (z) implies
that the probability that a randomly sampled worker, z ∈ Zt (λ), uses equipment κ in
occupation ω is
                                                 h                 −α           1
                                                                                   iθ
                                            Tt (λ, κ, ω ) pt (κ ) 1−α pt (ω ) 1−α
                   πt (λ, κ, ω ) =                                                        iθ .                         (3)
                                                                       −α             1
                                            h
                                                      0    0
                                   ∑κ 0 ,ω 0 Tt (λ, κ , ω ) pt (κ ) 0 1 − α       0
                                                                            pt (ω ) 1 − α




The higher is θ—i.e. the less dispersed are efficiency units across (κ, ω ) pairs—the more
responsive are factor allocations to changes in prices or productivities. According to equa-
tion (3), comparative advantage shapes factor allocations. As an example, the assignment
of workers across equipment types within any given occupation satisfies
                                                                                                            1/θ
              Tt (λ0 , κ 0 , ω )       Tt (λ, κ 0 , ω )         πt (λ0 , κ 0 , ω )       πt (λ, κ 0 , ω )
                                                                                   
                                                        =                                                          ,
              Tt (λ0 , κ, ω )          Tt (λ, κ, ω )            πt (λ0 , κ, ω )          πt (λ, κ, ω )

so that, if λ0 workers (relative to λ) have a comparative advantage using κ 0 (relative to κ)
in occupation ω, then they are relatively more likely to be allocated to κ 0 in occupation ω.
Similar conditions hold for the allocation of workers to occupations (within an equipment
type) and for the allocation of equipment to occupations (within a labor group).
    The average wage of workers in group λ teamed with equipment κ in occupation ω,
denoted by wt (λ, κ, ω ), is the integral of e (z) ε (z, κ, ω ) vt (λ, κ, ω ) across workers teamed
with κ in occupation ω, divided by the mass of these workers. Given our assumptions on
e (z) and ε (z, κ, ω ), we obtain
                                                                   −α                1
               wt (λ, κ, ω ) = ᾱγTt (λ, κ, ω ) pt (κ ) 1−α pt (ω ) 1−α πt (λ, κ, ω )−1/θ ,

where γ ≡ Γ (1 − 1/θ ) and Γ (·) is the Gamma function. An increase in productivity
or occupation price, Tt (λ, κ, ω ) or pt (ω ), or a decrease in equipment price, pt (κ ), raises
the wages of infra-marginal λ workers allocated to (κ, ω ). However, the average wage
across all λ workers in (κ, ω ) increases less than that of infra-marginal workers due to
self-selection, i.e. πt (λ, κ, ω ) increases, which lowers the average efficiency units of the λ
workers who choose to use equipment κ in occupation ω.
    Denoting by wt (λ) the average wage of workers in group λ (i.e. total income of the
workers in group λ divided by their mass), the previous expression and equation (3)

                                                            12
imply wt (λ) = wt (λ, κ, ω ) for all (κ, ω ), where14
                                                                                                     !1/θ
                                                                        −α               1
                                                                                                θ
                    wt (λ) = ᾱγ      ∑         Tt (λ, κ, ω ) pt (κ )   1− α   pt (ω )   1− α               .   (4)
                                      κ,ω


General equilibrium. In any period, occupation prices pt (ω ) must be such that total
expenditure in occupation ω is equal to total revenue earned by all factors employed in
occupation ω,
                                                   1
                          µt (ω ) pt (ω )1−ρ Et =     ζ t (ω ) ,                    (5)
                                                  1−α
where Et ≡ (1 − α)−1 ∑λ wt (λ) Lt (λ) is total income and ζ t (ω ) ≡ ∑λ,κ wt (λ) Lt (λ) πt (λ, κ, ω )
is total labor income in occupation ω. The left-hand side of equation (5) is expenditure
on occupation ω and the right-hand side is total income earned by factors employed in
occupation ω. In equilibrium, the aggregate quantity of the final good is Yt = Et , the
aggregate quantity of equipment κ is

                                       1      α
                        Yt (κ ) =                 ∑ πt (λ, κ, ω ) wt (λ) Lt (λ) ,
                                    pt (κ ) 1 − α λ,ω

and aggregate consumption is determined by equation (2).


3.3    Decomposing changes in relative wages
Our objective in this paper is to use the framework described above to quantify the rela-
tive importance of different changes in the economic environment in determining changes
in relative wages between labor groups. In what follows, we impose the assumption that
Tt (λ, κ, ω ) can be expressed as

                           Tt (λ, κ, ω ) ≡ Tt (λ) Tt (κ ) Tt (ω ) T (λ, κ, ω ).                                 (6)

Accordingly, whereas we allow labor group, Tt (λ) ≥ 0, equipment type, Tt (κ ) ≥ 0, and
occupation, Tt (ω ) ≥ 0, productivity to vary over time, we impose that the interaction
between labor group, equipment type, and occupation productivity, T (λ, κ, ω ) ≥ 0, is

  14 The  implication that average wage levels are common across occupations within λ (which is inconsis-
tent with the data) obviously implies that the changes in wages will also be common across occupations
within λ. In Appendix G we decompose the observed changes in average wages for each λ into a between
occupation component (which is zero in our model) and a within occupation component and show that the
between component is small. Furthermore, we show that by incorporating preference shifters for working
in different occupations that generate compensating differentials, similar to Heckman and Sedlacek (1985),
our model can generate differences in average wage levels across occupations within a labor group.

                                                          13
constant over time. That is, we assume that comparative advantage is fixed over time.
This restriction allows us to separate the impact on relative wages of λ-, κ-, and ω-specific
productivity shocks. In Section 6.3 we relax this restriction.
     Given the restriction in equation (6), one could use the model described above to de-
compose changes in relative average wages for any two labor groups observed in a par-
ticular economy between any two points in time into changes in labor composition, Lt (λ);
changes in labor productivity, Tt (λ); changes in occupation demand, µt (ω ); changes in
occupation productivity, Tt (ω ); changes in equipment productivity, Tt (κ ); and changes
in equipment production costs, pt (κ ). This requires being able to measure the changes
in these six exogenous components that have taken place in the economy of interest be-
tween the same two points in time. However, given available data for the U.S., we can-
not separately identify changes in occupation demand and occupation productivity; in-
stead, we combine them in a composite occupation shifter, at (ω ) ≡ µt (ω ) Tt (ω )(1−α)(ρ−1) .
Similarly, we do not separately identify changes in equipment productivity and equip-
ment production costs; instead, we combine them in a composite equipment productiv-
                        −α
ity, qt (κ ) ≡ pt (κ ) 1−α Tt (κ ). Hence, in our empirical analysis, we decompose the observed
changes in relative wages in the U.S. into four shocks: (i ) labor composition, (ii ) equip-
ment productivity, (iii ) occupation shifters, and (iv) labor productivity.15
     Given measures of changes in these shocks and model parameters, we will quantify
the impact of observed changes in each shock on relative wages across labor groups. To
solve for changes in relative wages as a function of changes in any of these shocks, we
express the system of equilibrium equations described in Section 3.2 in changes, denoting
changes in any variable x between any two periods t0 and t1 by x̂ ≡ xt1 /xt0 . Changes in
average wages—using equations (4) and (6)—are given by
                                         "                                         #1/θ
                        ŵ(λ) = T̂ (λ)       ∑ (q̂ (ω ) q̂ (κ ))θ πt0 (λ, κ, ω )          ,             (7)
                                             κ,ω


where qt (ω ) denotes transformed occupation prices, i.e. qt (ω ) ≡ pt (ω )1/(1−α) Tt (ω ).

  15 The  two components of the computerization shock, Tt (κ ) and pt (κ ), could be measured separately
using information on the price of computers and other types of equipment, which is subject to known
quality-adjustment issues raised by, e.g., Gordon (1990). Similarly, the two components of the occupation
shock, Tt (ω ) and µt (ω ), could be measured separately using information on changes in occupation prices,
which are hard to measure in practice. Notice that, if the aim of our exercise were not to determine the im-
pact of observed changes in the economic environment on observed wages but rather to predict the impact
of counterfactual or hypothetical changes in the economic environment on relative average wages, then it
would not be necessary to combine changes in equipment productivity and equipment production costs
into a single shock, or similarly to combine changes in occupation demand and occupation productivity
into a single composite shock.

                                                      14
Changes in transformed occupation prices—using equations (3), (5), and (6)—are deter-
mined by the following system of equations

                                                             (q̂ (ω ) q̂ (κ ))θ
                           π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) =                                                          ,               (8)
                                              ∑κ 0 ,ω 0 (q̂ (ω 0 ) q̂ (κ 0 )) πt0 (λ, κ 0 , ω 0 )
                                                                             θ


                                     1
                                ζ t0 ( ω ) ∑
  â (ω ) q̂ (ω )(1−α)(1−ρ) Ê =               wt0 (λ) Lt0 (λ) πt0 (λ, κ, ω ) ŵ (λ) L̂ (λ) π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) .
                                           λ,κ
                                                                                                          (9)
In this system, the forcing variables are the four shocks mentioned above: L̂(λ), T̂ (λ),
â (ω ), and q̂ (κ ). Given these variables, equations (7)-(9) yield the model’s implied values
of changes in average wages, ŵ(λ), allocations, π̂ (λ, κ, ω ), and transformed occupation
prices, q̂ (ω ).16


3.4     Intuition
The impact of shocks on wages. In partial equilibrium—i.e. for given changes in trans-
formed occupation prices—changes in wages are proportional to changes in labor pro-
ductivity, T̂ (λ), and to a CES combination of changes in transformed occupation prices
and equipment productivities, where the weight given to changes in each of these compo-
nents depends on factor allocations in the initial period t0 , πt0 (λ, κ, ω ); see equation (7).
An increase in occupation ω’s transformed price or equipment κ’s productivity between
t0 and t1 raises the relative average wage of labor groups that disproportionately work in
occupation ω or use equipment κ in period t0 . In what follows we describe the general
equilibrium impact on relative wages of changes in occupation shifters, labor composi-
tion, labor productivity, and equipment productivity.
    Changes in occupation shifters and labor composition affect wages only indirectly (i.e.
in general equilibrium) through transformed occupation prices.17 Consider an increase
in the occupation shifter at (ω ), i.e. â (ω ) > 1, arising either from an increase in the de-
mand shifter for occupation ω or an increase (decrease) in the productivity of all workers
employed in occupation ω if ρ > 1 (ρ < 1). This shock raises the transformed price
    16 Given available data, we can only measure relative shocks to occupation shifters, equipment produc-

tivity, and labor productivity. Specifically, rather than measure T̂ (λ), â (ω ), and q̂ (κ ), we can only measure
T̂ (λ) / T̂ (λ1 ), â (ω ) / â(ω1 ), and q̂ (κ ) /q̂(κ1 ) for any arbitrary choice of a benchmark labor group, λ1 , oc-
cupation, ω1 , and type of equipment, κ1 . However, we can re-express equations (7), (8), and (9)—see Ap-
pendix C—so that changes in relative wages, ŵ (λ) /ŵ(λ1 ), transformed occupation prices, q̂ (ω ) /q̂(ω1 ),
and allocations, π̂ (λ, κ, ω ), depend on relative shocks to labor composition, L̂ (λ) / L̂(λ1 ), occupation
shifters, â (ω ) / â(ω1 ), equipment productivity, q̂ (κ ) /q̂(κ1 ), and labor productivity, T̂ (λ) / T̂ (λ1 ).
    17 In Section 4.3, we provide empirical evidence that supports our model’s implication that changes in

labor composition affect wages only indirectly through occupation prices.

                                                           15
of occupation ω (an increase in occupation productivity reduces the primitive occupation
price, pt (ω )) and, therefore, the relative wages of labor groups that are disproportion-
ately employed in occupation ω. Similarly, an increase in labor supply Lt (λ) reduces the
transformed prices of occupations in which group λ is disproportionately employed. This
lowers the relative wage not only of group λ, but also of other labor groups employed in
similar occupations as λ. An increase in labor productivity Tt (λ) directly raises the rel-
ative wage of group λ and reduces the transformed prices of occupations in which this
group is disproportionately employed, thus reducing the relative wages of labor groups
employed in similar occupations as λ.18
    Finally, consider the impact of a change in the productivity of equipment κ, i.e. q̂ (κ ) >
1. The direct (i.e. partial equilibrium) impact of this shock is to raise the relative wages
of labor groups that use κ intensively. In general equilibrium this shock also reduces
the transformed prices of occupations in which κ is used intensively, lowering the rela-
tive wages of labor groups that are disproportionately employed in these occupations.
Overall, the impact on relative wages of changes in equipment productivity depends on
the value of ρ and on whether aggregate patterns of labor allocation across equipment
types are mostly a consequence of variation in labor-equipment comparative advantage
or mainly determined by variation in labor-occupation and equipment-occupation com-
parative advantage. While in practice all sources of comparative advantage are active, it
is useful to consider two extreme cases.
    If the only form of comparative advantage is between workers and equipment, then
an increase in qt (κ ) does not affect relative occupation prices (since all occupations are
equally intensive in κ) and, therefore, the partial equilibrium effect—i.e. for given changes
in transformed occupation prices—is the same as the general equilibrium effect. In this
case an increase in qt (κ ) will increase the relative wages of worker groups that use equip-
ment κ more intensively in the initial period.
    On the other hand, if there is no comparative advantage between workers and equip-
ment but there is comparative advantage between workers and occupations and between
equipment and occupations, then an increase in qt (κ ) directly increases the relative wages
of worker groups that use equipment κ intensively (those disproportionately employed in
κ-intensive occupations) and indirectly, through transformed occupation prices, reduces
the relative wages of worker groups employed in κ-intensive occupations. The relative

  18 Costinot and Vogel (2010) provide analytic results on the implications for relative wages of changes
in labor composition, Lt (λ), and occupation demand, µt (ω ), in a restricted version of our model in which
there are no differences in efficiency units across workers in the same labor group (i.e. θ = ∞), there is
no capital equipment (i.e. α = 0), and T (λ, ω )—i.e. our T (λ, κ, ω ) in the absence of equipment—is log-
supermodular.

                                                    16
strength of the direct and indirect channels depends on ρ. The relative wages of worker
groups employed in κ-intensive occupations rise—i.e. the direct effect dominates the
indirect occupation price effect—if and only if ρ > 1. Intuitively, an increase in qt (κ )
acts like a positive productivity shock to the occupations in which κ has a comparative
advantage. If ρ > 1, this increases employment and the relative wages of labor groups
disproportionately employed in the occupations in which κ has a comparative advantage.


The role of θ and ρ. The parameter θ, which governs the degree of within-worker dis-
persion of productivity across occupation-equipment type pairs, determines the extent of
worker reallocation in response to changes in transformed occupation prices and equip-
ment productivities: a higher dispersion of idiosyncratic draws, as given by a lower value
of θ, results in less worker reallocation. Concerning the role of θ for changes in labor group
average wages, taking a first-order approximation of equation (7) at period t0 allocations,
we obtain:

                 log ŵ(λ) = log T̂ (λ) + ∑ πt0 (λ, κ, ω ) (log q̂ (ω ) + log q̂ (κ )) .               (10)
                                             κ,ω


Therefore, for given changes in transformed occupation prices and equipment productiv-
ities, the change in average wages does not depend on θ, up to a first-order approxima-
tion.19 However, a lower value of θ results in less worker reallocation across occupations
in response to a shock and, therefore, larger changes in occupation prices. Hence by af-
fecting occupation price changes, the value of θ affects the response of average wages to
shocks even up a first-order approximation.
    The parameter ρ determines the elasticity of substitution between occupations, with a
higher value of ρ reducing the responsiveness of occupation prices to shocks and hence,
reducing the impact through occupation price changes of shocks on relative wages. For
example, because labor composition only affects relative wages through occupation prices,
a higher value of ρ reduces the impact of labor composition on relative wages. Similarly,
as we described above, a higher value of ρ reduces the negative effects of computeriza-
tion on wages of labor groups with a comparative advantage on occupations that use
computers intensively.


  19 More  generally, the shape of the distribution of ε (z, κ, ω ) —which we have assumed to be Fréchet—
does not matter for the first-order effect of any shock on average wage changes (given changes in occupation
prices and equipment productivities) because, for any worker group λ, the marginal worker’s wage is equal
across occupations and equipment types (i.e. applying an envelope condition on the workers’ assignment
problem).

                                                    17
4     Parameterization
According to equations (7)-(9), the impact of changes in the economic environment be-
tween any two periods t0 and t1 on relative wages depends on: (i ) period t0 measures
of factor allocations, πt0 (λ, κ, ω ), average wages, wt0 (λ), labor composition, Lt0 (λ), and
labor payments by occupation, ζ t0 (ω ); (ii ) measures of relative shocks to labor composi-
tion, L̂(λ)/ L̂(λ1 ), occupation shifters, â(ω )/ â(ω1 ), equipment productivity to the power
θ, q̂(κ )θ /q̂(κ1 )θ , and labor productivity, T̂ (λ)/ T̂ (λ1 ); and (iii ) estimates of the parameters
α, ρ, and θ.


4.1     Data
We use data from the Combined CPS May, Outgoing Rotation Group (MORG CPS) and
the October CPS Supplement (October Supplement) in 1984, 1989, 1993, 1997, and 2003.
We restrict our sample by dropping workers who are younger than 17 years old, do not
report positive paid hours worked, or are self employed. Here we briefly describe our use
of these sources; we provide further details in Appendix B. After cleaning, the MORG
CPS and October Supplement contain data for roughly 115,000 and 50,000 individuals,
respectively, in each year.
    We divide workers into 30 labor groups by gender, education (high school dropouts,
high school graduates, some college completed, college completed, and graduate train-
ing), and age (17-30, 31-43, and 44 and older). We consider two types of equipment:
computers and other equipment. We use thirty occupations, which we list, together with
summary statistics, in Table 12 in Appendix B.
    We use the MORG CPS to construct total hours worked and average hourly wages
by labor group by year.20 We use the October Supplement to construct the share of total
hours worked by labor group λ that is spent using equipment type κ in occupation ω in
year t, πt (λ, κ, ω ). In 1984, 1989, 1993, 1997, and 2003, the October Supplement asked
respondents whether they “have direct or hands on use of computers at work,” “directly
use a computer at work,” or “use a computer at/for his/her/your main job.” Using a
computer at work refers only to “direct” or “hands on” use of a computer with typewriter
like keyboards, whether a personal computer, laptop, mini computer, or mainframe. We
construct πt (λ, κ 0 , ω ) as the hours worked in occupation ω by λ workers who report

    20 We
        measure wages using the MORG CPS rather than the March CPS. Both datasets imply similar
changes in average wages within a labor group. However, the March CPS does not directly measure hourly
wages of workers paid by the hour and, therefore, introduces substantial measurement error in individual
wages, which we will use in one of our sensitivity analyses; see Lemieux (2006).

                                                  18
that they use a computer κ 0 at work relative to the total hours worked by labor group
λ in year t. Similarly, we construct πt (λ, κ 00 , ω ) as the hours worked in occupation ω
by λ workers who report that they do not use a computer at work (where κ 00 = other
equipment) relative to the total hours worked by labor group λ in year t.21
   Constructing factor allocations, πt (λ, κ, ω ), as we do introduces four limitations. First,
our view of computerization is narrow. Second, at the individual level our computer-use
variable takes only two values: zero or one. Third, we are not using any information
on the allocation of non-computer equipment. Finally, the computer use question was
discontinued after 2003.22
Factor allocation. By aggregating πt (λ, κ, ω ) across ω and λ, we showed in Table 1 that in
the aggregate women and more educated workers use computers more intensively than
men and less educated workers, respectively. Here we identify a few key patterns in the
disaggregated πt (λ, κ, ω ) data.
   To determine the extent to which college educated workers (λ0 ) compared to workers
with high school degrees in the same gender-age group (λ) use computers (κ 0 ) relatively
more than non-computer equipment (κ) within occupations (ω), the left panel of Figure 2
plots the histogram of
                                 πt λ0 , κ 0 , ω        πt λ, κ 0 , ω
                                                                     
                             log                 − log
                                  πt λ0 , κ, ω
                                                                     
                                                        πt λ, κ, ω
across all five years, thirty occupations, and six gender-age groups described above.
Clearly, college educated workers are relatively more likely to use computers within oc-
cupations compared to high school educated workers. A similar pattern holds comparing
across other education groups.
    The right panel of Figure 2 plots a similar histogram, where λ0 and λ now denote
female and male workers in the same education-age group. This figure shows that on
average there is no clear difference in computer usage across genders within occupations
(i.e. the histogram is roughly centered around zero). Hence, in order to account for the

    21 On average across the five years considered in the analysis, we measure π ( λ, κ, ω ) = 0 for roughly
                                                                                    t
27% of the (λ, κ, ω ) triplets. As a robustness check, in Appendix F.2 we drop age as a characteristic defining
a labor group and redo our analysis with the resulting 10 labor groups. With only 10 labor groups, the share
of measured allocations πt (λ, κ, ω ) that are equal to 0 is substantially smaller.
    22 The German Qualification and Working Conditions survey, used in e.g. DiNardo and Pischke (1997), helps

mitigate the second and third concerns by providing data on worker usage of multiple types of equipment
and, in 2006, the share of hours spent using computers. In Appendix D, we show using this more detailed
German data similar patterns of comparative advantage—between computers and education groups and
between computers and gender—as in the U.S. data. We do not accounting exercise for Germany because
wage data is noisy in publicly available datasets, see e.g. Dustmann et al. (2009), and because the German
Qualification and Working Conditions survey contains many fewer observations than the October Supplement
(depending on the year, between roughly 10,700 and 21,150 observations after cleaning).

                                                      19
Figure 2: Computer relative to non-computer usage for college degree relative to high
school degree workers (female relative to male workers) in the left (right) panel

fact that women use computers more than men at the aggregate level—see Table 1—
women must have a comparative advantage in occupations in which computers have a
comparative advantage.
    We can similarly study the extent to which labor groups differ in their allocations
across occupations conditional on computer usage and the extent to which computers
differ in their allocations across occupations conditional on labor groups. For instance,
using similar histograms we can show that women are much more likely than men to
work in administrative support relative to construction occupations, conditional on the
type of equipment used; and that computers are much more likely to be used in adminis-
trative support than in construction occupations, conditional on labor group. These com-
parisons provide an example of a more general relationship: women tend to be employed
in occupations in which all labor groups are relatively more likely to use computers.


4.2   Measuring shocks
Here we describe our baseline procedure to measure shocks to labor composition, L̂(λ)/ L̂(λ1 ),
equipment productivity to the power θ, q̂(κ )θ /q̂(κ1 )θ , occupation shifters, â(ω )/ â(ω1 ),
and labor productivity, T̂ (λ)/ T̂ (λ1 ). We measure changes in labor composition directly
from the MORG CPS. We measure changes in equipment productivity using data only on
changes in disaggregated factor allocations over time, π̂ (λ, κ, ω ). We measure changes
in occupation shifters using data on changes in disaggregated factor allocations and la-
bor income shares across occupations over time as well as model parameters. Finally, we
measure changes in labor productivity as a residual to match observed changes in relative
wages. We provide details on our baseline procedure in Appendix C.1 and variations of
this procedure in Appendices C.2 and C.3 (both of which yield very similar results).
    Consider first our measure of changes in equipment productivity to the power θ.
Equations (3) and (6) imply
                                      q̂(κ )θ     π̂ (λ, κ, ω )
                                               =                                           (11)
                                     q̂(κ1 ) θ   π̂ (λ, κ1 , ω )

                                            20
for any (λ, ω ) pair. Hence, if computer productivity rises relative to other equipment
between t0 and t1 , then the share of λ hours spent working with computers relative to
other equipment in occupation ω will increase. It is important to condition on (λ, ω )
pairs when identifying changes in equipment productivity because unconditional growth
over time in computer usage, shown in Table 1, may also reflect growth in the supply
of labor groups who have a comparative advantage using computers and/or changes
in occupation shifters that are biased towards occupations in which computers have a
comparative advantage. To construct changes in equipment productivity to the power θ,
we combine the data on the right-hand side of equation (11) over (λ, ω ) pairs following
the procedure described in Appendix C.1.
    Second, consider our measure of changes in occupation shifters. Equation (9) implies
                                                                 (1−α)(ρ−1)
                                â(ω )    ζ̂ (ω )        q̂(ω )
                                       =                                           .                 (12)
                               â(ω1 )   ζ̂ (ω1 )       q̂(ω1 )

We construct the right-hand side of equation (12) as follows. Equations (3) and (6) provide
a measure of changes in transformed occupation prices to the power θ between t0 and t1
for any (λ, κ ) pair,
                                   q̂(ω )θ    π̂ (λ, κ, ω )
                                           =                .                          (13)
                                  q̂(ω1 )θ   π̂ (λ, κ, ω1 )
As described in Appendix C.1, we combine these (λ, κ ) pair specific measures to obtain a
unique measure of changes in transformed occupation prices to the power θ, q̂(ω )θ /q̂(ω1 )θ .23
Intuitively, if the share of λ hours spent working with κ in occupation ω relative to in oc-
cupation ω1 increased, then it must be that the transformed price of ω rose relative to ω1 .
As above, it is important to condition on (λ, κ ) when identifying changes in transformed
occupation prices. Given values of α, ρ, and θ, we recover (q̂(ω )/q̂(ω1 ))(1−α)(ρ−1) . Next,
given values of q̂(κ )θ /q̂(κ1 )θ and q̂(ω )θ /q̂(ω1 )θ , we construct ζ̂ (ω )/ζ̂ (ω1 ) using the right-
hand side of equation (9). Note that if ρ = 1, changes in occupation shifters depend only
on changes in the share of labor payments across occupations.
    Finally, we measure changes in labor productivity as a residual to match changes in
relative wages, expressing equation (7) as
                                                                       1/θ
                                    ŵ(λ)     T̂ (λ)          ŝ (λ)
                                           =                                   .                     (14)
                                   ŵ(λ1 )   T̂ (λ1 )        ŝ (λ1 )

The variable ŝ (λ) is a labor-group-specific weighted average of changes in equipment
  23 In
      calculating changes in relative wages in response to a subset of shocks, we solve for counterfactual
changes in transformed occupation prices and allocations using equations (8) and (9).

                                                    21
productivity and transformed occupation prices, both raised to the power θ,

                                                q̂ (ω )θ q̂(κ )θ
                               ŝ (λ) =   ∑ q̂                      πt0 (λ, κ, ω ),                   (15)
                                          κ,ω    (ω1 )θ q̂ (κ1 )θ

which we can construct using observed allocations and our measures of changes in equip-
ment productivity to the power θ and transformed occupation prices to the power θ. From
equation (14), we also require a value of θ to measure changes in labor productivity; we
describe how we estimate θ below. Note that only our measures of changes in labor pro-
ductivities are directly a function of the observed changes in relative wages that we will
decompose below: given parameters α, ρ, and θ, our measures of wage changes have no
effect on our measures of changes in labor composition or equipment productivity to the
power θ and they only affect our measures of occupation shifters indirectly through their
impact on ζ̂ (ω )/ζ̂ (ω1 ).


4.3    Parameter estimates
Baseline estimation. The Cobb-Douglas parameter α, which matters for our results only
when ρ is different from one, determines payments to all equipment (computers and non-
computer equipment) relative to the sum of payments to equipment and labor. We set
α = 0.24, consistent with estimates in Burstein et al. (2013). Burstein et al. (2013) dis-
aggregate total capital payments (i.e the product of the capital stock and the rental rate)
into structures and equipment using U.S. data on the value of capital stocks and—since
rental rates are not directly observable—setting the average rate of return over the period
1963-2000 of holding each type of capital (its rental rate plus price appreciation less the
depreciation rate) equal to the real interest rate.
   The parameter θ determines the within-worker dispersion of productivity across occupation-
equipment type pairs, and ρ is the elasticity of substitution across occupations in the pro-
duction of the final good. We estimate these two parameters jointly using a method of
moments approach (we conduct sensitivity analyses using a range of values of θ and ρ in
Section 6.1). Equation (14) can be expressed as
                        log ŵ(λ, t) = ς θ (t) + β θ log ŝ (λ, t) + ι θ (λ, t) ,       (16)

where x̂ (t) denotes the relative change in a variable x between any two periods t and
t0 > t.24 We observe log ŵ(λ, t) in our data and construct log ŝ (λ, t) as indicated in equa-
  24 Whilewe have argued—using equation (10)—that the change in average wages in response to given
changes in transformed occupation prices and equipment productivities, q̂ (ω, t) and q̂ (κ, t), does not
depend—to a first-order approximation—on the value of θ, we will measure q̂ (ω, t)θ and q̂ (κ, t)θ . Hence,

                                                       22
tion (15). The parameter ς θ (t) ≡ log q̂ (ω1 , t) q̂ (κ1 , t) is a time effect that is common across
λ, β θ ≡ 1/θ, and ι θ (λ, t) ≡ log T̂ (λ, t) captures unobserved changes in labor group λ pro-
ductivity. As shown in equation (14), measuring changes in labor productivity requires
a value of θ and, therefore, we treat ι θ (λ, t) as unobserved when estimating θ. Similarly,
equation (9) can be expressed as

                                                               q̂ (ω, t)θ
                        log ζ̂ (ω, t) = ς ρ (t) + β ρ log                     + ι ρ (ω, t) .         (17)
                                                               q̂ (ω1 , t)θ

We directly observe log ζ̂ (ω, t) in the MORG CPS and measure log q̂ (ω, t)θ /q̂ (ω1 , t)θ
following the procedure indicated in Section 4.2. The parameter ς ρ (t) is a time effect
that is common across ω and given by ς ρ (t) ≡ log Ê + (1 − α) (1 − ρ) log q̂ (ω1 , t), β ρ ≡
(1 − α) (1 − ρ) /θ, and ι ρ (ω, t) ≡ log â (ω, t) captures unobserved changes in occupation
shifters. As shown in equation (12), measuring changes in occupation shifters requires a
value of ρ and, therefore, we treat ι ρ (ω, t) as unobserved when estimating ρ.
    Equations (16) and (17) may be used to jointly identify θ and ρ. According to our
model, however, using Nonlinear Least Squares (NLS) to estimate θ and ρ would yield
biased estimates of these parameters. The reason is that the observed covariate in equa-
tion (16), log ŝ (λ, t), is predicted to be correlated with its error term, ι θ (λ, t), and the
observed covariate in equation (17), log q̂ (ω, t)θ /q̂(ω1 , t)θ , is predicted to be correlated
with its error term, ι ρ (ω, t).
    Concerning the endogeneity of log ŝ (λ, t) in equation (16), note from equation (15) that
this covariate is a function of changes in transformed occupation prices, q̂ (ω, t), and, ac-
cording to our model, these depend on changes in unobserved labor productivity, ι θ (λ, t).
Specifically, our model implies that the error term ι θ (λ, t) and the covariate log ŝ(λ, t)
are negatively correlated: the higher the growth in the productivity of a particular labor
group, the lower the growth in the price of those occupations that use that type of labor
more intensively. Therefore, we expect the NLS estimate of β θ to be biased downwards
and, consequently, the estimate of θ to be biased upwards. To address the endogeneity of
the covariate log ŝ (λ, t), we construct the following instrument for log ŝ(λ, t),

                                                  q̂(κ, t)θ
                           χθ (λ, t) ≡ log ∑                   ∑ π1984 (λ, κ, ω ),
                                             κ   q̂(κ1 , t)θ    ω

which is a labor-group-specific average of the observed changes in equipment productiv-


the response of wages to measured shocks does depend, even to a first order, on the value of θ. This logic
explains the intuition behind using equation (16) to identify θ.

                                                    23
ity to the power θ, q̂(κ, t)θ /q̂(κ1 , t)θ .25 We use this instrument and equation (16) to build
the following moment condition                                  
                                                1
                        Eλ,t      yθ (λ, t) − xθ (λ, t) × zθ (λ, t) = 0,                    (18)
                                                θ
where: (1) yθ (λ, t) is the (λ, t) OLS residual of a regression that projects the set of de-
pendent variables log ŵ(λ, t), for all λ and t, on a set of year fixed effects; (2) xθ (λ, t)
is the (λ, t) OLS residual of a regression that projects the set of independent variables
log ŝ(λ, t), for all λ and t, on a set of year fixed effects; (3) zθ (λ, t) is the (λ, t) OLS resid-
ual of a regression that projects the set of independent variables χθ (λ, t), for all λ and t,
on a set of year fixed effects.26 In order for the moment condition in equation 18 to cor-
rectly identify the parameter θ, after controlling for year fixed effects the variable χθ (λ, t)
must be correlated with log ŝ (λ, t) and uncorrelated with ι θ (λ, t). Our model predicts
that the conditioning variable χθ (λ, t) will be correlated with the endogenous covariate
log ŝ (λ, t), as an increase in the relative productivity of equipment κ between t0 and t1
raises the wage of group λ relatively more if a larger share of λ workers use equipment
κ in period t0 . Equation (18) implicitly imposes that the shock χθ (λ, t) is mean indepen-
dent of the labor productivity shock log T̂ (λ, t) across labor groups and time periods. A
sufficient condition for this mean independence condition to hold is that, between any
two periods t0 and t1 , the change in unobserved labor productivity, log T̂ (λ, t), and the
weighted changes in equipment productivity are uncorrelated across labor groups.
    Concerning the endogeneity of log q̂ (ω, t)θ /q̂(ω1 , t)θ in equation (17), note that, ac-
cording to our model, changes in equilibrium transformed occupation prices, q̂ (ω, t), de-
pend on changes in unobserved occupation shifters, ι ρ (ω, t). Specifically, we expect the
error term ι ρ (ω, t) and the covariate log q̂(ω, t)θ /q̂ (ω1 , t)θ to be positively correlated: the
higher the growth in the shifter of a particular occupation, the higher the growth in the
occupation price. Therefore, given any value of α and θ, we expect the NLS estimate of
β ρ to be biased upwards and the resulting estimate of ρ to be biased downwards. To ad-
dress the endogeneity of the covariate log q̂(ω, t)θ /q̂ (ω1 , t)θ , we construct the following
Bartik-style instrument for log q̂(ω, t)θ /q̂ (ω1 , t)θ ,


   25 In constructing the instrument for log ŝ ( λ, t ) between any two periods t and t , we could also have
                                                                                  0     1
used the observed labor allocations at period t0 . However, in order to minimize the correlation between a
possibly serially correlated ι θ (λ, t) and the instrument, we construct our instrument for log ŝ(λ, t) between
any two sample periods t0 and t1 using allocations in the initial sample year, 1984.
   26 By projecting first on a set of year effects and using the residuals from this projection in the moment

condition in equation (18), we simplify significantly the computational burden involved in estimating both
the parameter of interest θ and the set of incidental parameters {ς θ (t)}t . The Frisch-Waugh-Lovell Theo-
rem guarantees that the resulting estimate of θ is consistent and has identical asymptotic variance to the
alternative GMM estimator that estimates the year fixed effects {ς θ (t)}t and the parameter θ jointly.

                                                      24
                                          q̂(κ, t)θ             L1984 (λ) π1984 (λ, κ, ω )
                 χρ (ω, t) ≡ log ∑                     ∑∑                    0           0 0
                                                                                                    ,
                                     κ   q̂(κ1 , t)θ   λ    λ0 ,κ 0 L1984 ( λ ) π1984 ( λ , κ , ω )

which is an occupation-specific average of observed changes in equipment productivity
to the power θ, q̂(κ, t)θ /q̂(κ1 , t)θ .27 We use this instrument and equation (17) to build the
following moment  condition                                            
                                                       1
              Eω,t       yρ (ω, t) − (1 − α)(1 − ρ) xρ (ω, t) × zρ (ω, t) = 0,              (19)
                                                       θ
where: (1) yρ (ω, t) is the (ω, t) OLS residual of a regression that projects the set of de-
pendent variables log ζ̂ (ω, t), for all ω and t, on a set of year fixed effects; (5) xρ (ω, t)
is the (ω, t) OLS residual of a regression that projects the set of independent variables
log q̂(ω, t)θ /q̂(ω1 , t)θ , for all ω and t, on a set of year fixed effects; and (6) zρ (ω, t) is the
(ω, t) OLS residual of a regression that projects the set of instruments χρ (ω, t), for all ω
and t, on a set of year fixed effects. In order for the moment condition in equation 19
to correctly identify the parameter ρ, after controlling for year fixed effects the variable
χρ (λ, t) must be correlated with log q̂ (ω, t)θ /q̂(ω1 , t)θ and uncorrelated with ι ρ (λ, t).
Our model predicts that the conditioning variable χρ (ω, t) will be correlated with the en-
dogenous covariate log q̂ (ω, t)θ /q̂(ω1 , t)θ as an increase in the relative productivity of κ
raises occupation ω’s output—and, therefore, reduces its price—relatively more if a larger
share of workers employed in occupation ω use equipment κ in period t0 . Equation (19)
implicitly imposes that the shock χρ (λ, t) is mean independent across occupations and
time periods of the occupation shifter log â (ω, t). A sufficient condition for this mean
independence condition to hold is that, for any given pair of years t0 and t1 , the change in
the (unobserved) occupation shifter and the weighted changes in equipment productivity
are uncorrelated across occupations.28
    We estimate θ and ρ using the sample analogue of the moment conditions in equations
(18) and (19). These two moment conditions exactly identify the parameter vector (θ,ρ).
In order to build these sample analogues, we use data on four time periods: 1984-1989,
1989-1993, 1993-1997, and 1997-2003. We report the point estimates and standard errors

   27 In order to minimize the correlation between a possibly serially correlated ι ( ω, t ) and the instrument,
                                                                                     ρ
we construct χρ (ω, t) using allocations in 1984: L1984 (λ) π1984 (λ, κ, ω ) is the number of λ workers using
equipment κ employed in occupation ω in 1984 and the denominator in the expression for χρ (ω, t) is total
employment in occupation ω in 1984.
   28 Theoretically, if the U.S. specializes in traded sectors that employ a large share of computer-intensive

occupations, then a rise in trade between 1984 and 2003 might generate a demand shift towards computer-
intensive occupations within traded sectors, inducing a potential correlation between occupation shifters
and weighted changes in equipment productivity. In practice, however, we find that computer-intensive
occupations do not grow faster relative to non-computer-intensive occupations in manufacturing than in
non-manufacturing, suggesting that this theoretical concern is not a problem in our setting.

                                                           25
in the top row of Table 1: the resulting estimate of θ is 1.78 with a standard error of 0.29;
the estimate of ρ is also 1.78 but with a slightly larger standard error of 0.35.

                     Parameter     Time Trend?        Estimate          (SE)
                       (θ, ρ)         NO             (1.78, 1.78)   (0.29, 0.35)
                       (θ, ρ)         YES            (1.13, 2.00)   (0.32, 0.71)

                   Table 2: Parameter estimates based on joint estimation

Alternative estimations of θ and ρ. Here we present estimates of θ and ρ that rely on
alternative identification assumptions. In Section 6.1, we show how our results on the de-
composition of observed wage changes are affected if we use these alternative estimates
in our analyses.
    First, we add as controls a labor-group-specific time trend in equation (16) and an
occupation-specific time trend in equation (17). Allowing for these time trends relaxes the
orthogonality restrictions imposed to derive the moment conditions used in our baseline
analysis (equations 18 and 19).
    In particular, in reviewing Krusell et al. (2000), Acemoglu (2002) raises the concern that
the presence of common trends in unobserved labor-group-specific productivity, explana-
tory variables, and instruments may bias the estimates of wage elasticities. In order to ad-
dress this concern, we follow Katz and Murphy (1992), Acemoglu (2002), and the estima-
tion of the canonical model more generally and express T̂ (λ, t) as following a λ-specific
time trend with deviations around this trend, log T̂ (λ, t) = β θ (λ) × (t1 − t0 ) + ι θ1 (λ, t),
and build a moment condition that is identical to that in equation (18) except for the
fact that each of the variables yθ (λ, t), xθ (λ, t), and zθ (λ, t) is now defined as the (λ, t)
OLS residual of a regression that projects log ŵ(λ, t), log ŝ(λ, t), and χθ (λ, t), respectively,
on a set of year fixed effects and on a set of labor-group-specific time trends. The re-
sulting moment condition therefore assumes that, after controlling for year fixed effects,
deviations from a labor-group-specific linear time trend in the labor-group-specific pro-
ductivities log T̂ (λ, t) are mean independent of the deviations from a labor-group-specific
linear time trend in the labor-group specific average of equipment shocks χθ (λ, t). This
orthogonality restriction is weaker than that imposed in our baseline estimation to derive
the moment condition in equation (18). Specifically, explicitly controlling for labor-group
specific time trends in the wage equation guarantees that the resulting estimates of θ
will be consistent even if it were to be true that those labor groups whose productivity,
log T̂ (λ, t), has grown more during the 20 years between 1984 and 2003 also happen to
be the labor groups that in 1984 were more intensively using those types of equipment
whose productivities, q̂(κ, t), have also grown systematically more during the 1984-2003

                                                26
time period. As an example, if it were to be true that (i ) highly educated workers used
computers more in 1984, (ii ) they experienced a large average growth in their productivi-
ties between 1984 and 2003, and (iii ) computers also had a relatively large growth in their
productivity in the same sample period, then our baseline estimates of θ would be biased
but the estimates that control for labor-group-specific time trends would not, unless it
were true that those specific years within the period 1984-2003 with higher growth of the
productivity of educated workers were precisely also the years in which the productivity
of computers also happened to grow above its 1984-2003 trend.
     In the same way in which we allow for a labor-group specific time trend in equa-
tion (16), we also additionally control for an occupation-specific time trend in equation
(17). Specifically, we express the unobserved changes in occupation shifters, log â (ω, t),
as the sum of a ω-specific time trend and deviations around this trend, log â (ω, t) =
β ρ (ω ) × (t1 − t0 ) + ι ρ1 (ω, t). We then build a moment condition that is analogous to that
in equation (19) except for the fact that each of the variables yρ (ω, t), xρ (ω, t), and zρ (ω, t)
are now defined as the residuals of a linear projection of each them on year fixed effects
and an occupation-specific time trend. The orthogonality restriction implied by the result-
ing moment condition is weaker that that in our baseline estimation; specifically, it would
not be violated in the hypothetical case in which those occupations whose idiosyncratic
productivity grew systematically more during the period 1984-2003 happen to also be the
occupations that in 1984 used more intensively the types of equipment whose idiosyn-
cratic productivity also grew more on average during this same period.
     The GMM estimates of θ and ρ that result from adding as controls a labor-group-
specific time trend in equation (16) and an occupation-specific time trend in equation (17)
are, respectively 1.13, with a standard error of 0.32, and 2, with a standard error of 0.71, as
displayed in row 2 of Table 2. The fact that the estimate of θ is smaller than that obtained
without controlling for labor-group specific time trends and the estimate of ρ is larger than
that obtained without controlling for occupation-group specific time trends is consistent
with the hypothesis that our baseline estimates are affected by a weaker version of the
same kind of bias affecting the NLS estimates. However, note that allowing for time
trends does not have a large quantitative impact in our estimates of θ and ρ: the two
estimates of θ are within two standard deviations of each other and the two estimates of ρ
are even within one standard deviation of each other. Furthermore, when computing the
effects of shocks on relative wages, the estimates that result from controlling for worker-
group-specific time trends in equation (16) actually imply a smaller role for changes in
labor productivity (the residual), as we show in Section 6.1.
     Second, whereas in our baseline analysis we derive moment conditions from a wage


                                                27
equation and an occupation-expenditure share equation expressed in time differences (see
equations 16 and 17), in Appendix C.4 we estimate θ and ρ using versions of both equation
(16) and equation (17) in levels. When doing so, we also expand the right-hand side
variables in equation (16) with λ-specific fixed effects and the right-hand side variables
in equation (17) with ω-specific fixed effects. The resulting GMM estimates are θ =1.57,
with a standard error of 0.14, and ρ = 3.27, with a standard error of 1.34. The details of
this alternative estimation procedure are contained in Appendix C.4.
    Third, there is an alternative approach—based on Lagakos and Waugh (2013) and
Hsieh et al. (2013)—to estimate θ under a very different set of restrictions than those im-
posed above. This approach identifies θ from moments of the unconditional distribution
of observed wages within each labor group λ. When following this approach—see Ap-
pendix E—we obtain an estimate θ equal to 2.62.29
Specification tests. As discussed above, one implication of our model is that, if we had
estimated the parameter vector (θ, ρ) using a NLS estimator, we would have obtained
an upward biased estimate of θ and a downward biased estimate of ρ. In fact, when
estimating the parameter vector (θ, ρ) using NLS, we obtain an estimate of θ = 2.61, with
a standard error of 0.57, and an estimate of ρ = 0.21, with a standard error of 0.45. The
fact that the NLS estimate of θ is higher than its GMM counterpart is consistent with
the prediction of our model that the error term ι θ (λ, t) is negatively correlated with the
covariate log ŝ(λ, t). The fact that the NLS estimate of ρ is lower than its GMM counterpart
is consistent with the prediction of our model that the error term ι ρ (ω, t) is negatively
correlated with the covariate log q̂ (ω, t)θ /q̂ (ω1 , t)θ .
    Another implication of our model, described in Section 3, is that labor composition
only affects wages indirectly through occupation prices. We test this prediction by in-
cluding changes in labor supply as an additional explanatory variable in equation (16)
and computing the two-stage least squares estimates of both β θ and the coefficient on la-
bor supply. This yields an estimate of θ = 1.84, which is not statistically different from
our baseline (which was θ = 1.78). Moreover, we cannot reject at the 10% significance
level the null hypothesis that the effect of changes in labor supply on changes in wages,
conditional on the composite term log ŝ(λ, t), is equal to zero.
Relation to the literature. Equation (16) is related to two distinct approaches in the liter-
ature studying the impact of worker allocations (across either computers or occupations)
on worker wages. The first approach regresses wages of different workers on a dummy
for computer usage and worker characteristics; see e.g. Krueger (1993). In critiquing this
  29 InAppendix E we also also apply this alternative estimation approach to obtain estimates of θ that are
λ-specific.

                                                    28
work, DiNardo and Pischke (1997) argue that the coefficient on computers in a regression
of wages of different workers on a dummy for computer usage will combine two effects:
(a) the causal effect of computers on wages and (b) a selection effect according to which
workers of different groups have some unobserved characteristic that both impacts their
wages and their likelihood of using computers; one source of this selection effect may
be workers of different groups selecting into occupations in which computers are more
likely to be used, as is the case in our model. If the unobserved worker characteristic
that makes a worker group more likely to use computers has a direct positive impact on
wages, the coefficient on computers would overestimate the causal effect of computers
on wages. In our empirical approach, we never regress wage levels for different labor
groups at a point in time on the intensity of computer usage by that labor group at the
same point in time and, therefore, the critique in DiNardo and Pischke (1997) does not
directly apply to our estimates. The key difference between equation (16) and the ap-
proach criticized by DiNardo and Pischke (1997) is that—instead of regressing changes in
wages by labor group on changes in the intensity of computer usage by labor group—we
project changes in wages by labor group on fixed-over-time measures of labor-group-
specific computer usage interacted with our measures of changes in computer productiv-
ity (common to all labor groups). Therefore, endogenous changes in idiosyncratic labor
productivity that correlate with changes in labor-group-specific computer usage will not
bias our estimates.30
    Equation (16) is most similar to the estimating equation that Acemoglu and Autor
(2011) offer as a stylized example of how their assignment model might be brought to
the data. Acemoglu and Autor (2011) suggest regressing changes in labor-group-specific
wages on beginning-of-sample measures of the specialization of the different labor groups
across abstract-intensive, routine-intensive, and manual-intensive occupations. A log-
linearized version of equation (16)—our equation (10)—actually provides a micro-foundation
for their regression model—their equation (40). Our approach, however, differs from the
regression suggested by Acemoglu and Autor (2011) in that: (a) the included covariates
measure specialization by worker types not only across three types of tasks but across
thirty occupations and two types of equipment; (b) the included covariates are not just

   30 Two less central differences are as follows. A first difference between equation (16) and that criti-
cized by DiNardo and Pischke (1997) is that equation (16) explores the impact of computerization on wage
changes, instead of levels. As DiNardo and Pischke (1997) mention, this by itself is not likely to solve
the bias due to self-selection: “if the returns to unobserved skills change, then differencing the data will
not eliminate the effect of unobserved wage determinants that might be correlated with computer use.”
Another difference between equation (16) and that criticized by DiNardo and Pischke (1997) is that our re-
gression is performed at the labor group level instead of at the worker level; again, this is unlikely to matter
much if the main concern is self-selection of workers into using computers.

                                                      29
the beginning-of-sample measures of specialization but the interaction of these measures
of specialization with measures of changes in occupation prices and equipment produc-
tivities. While explicitly controlling for these measured changes in aggregate occupation
prices and equipment productivities is not important if the aim is to use equation (16)
as evidence of the importance of comparative advantage for the evolution wages by skill
group (as is the intention of Acemoglu and Autor (2011)), it is key for our purposes. The
reason is that we use equation (16) to identify structural parameters of our model. If we
had not explicitly controlled for observed measures of changes in equipment productiv-
ity and occupation prices and had just introduced measures of comparative advantage as
covariates, the resulting estimates would be a combination of both the structural param-
eters of interest and the particular changes in equipment productivity and occupation
prices that had taken place during our sample period. These reduced-form estimates
would be a function of endogenous variables—the change in occupation prices depends
on all four shocks—and, therefore, would not provide enough information to perform the
wage decompositions and counterfactuals that we provide in Sections 5, 6, and 7. This is
why it is crucial for our exercise that we first obtain measures of changes in equipment
productivity and occupation prices on which we can condition when estimating equation
(16).


5     Results
In this section we summarize our baseline closed economy results, quantifying the impli-
cations for the observed changes in relative wages in the U.S. between 1984 and 2003 of
the changes in labor composition, occupation shifters, equipment productivity, and labor
productivity that took place. We construct various measures of changes in between-group
inequality, each of them aggregating wage changes across our thirty labor groups in dif-
ferent ways (e.g., the skill premium). As is standard, when doing so, both in the model
and in the data, we construct composition-adjusted wage changes; that is, for each aggre-
gated measure we average wage changes across the corresponding labor groups using
constant weights over time, as described in detail in Appendix B. For each measure of
inequality, we report its cumulative log change between 1984 and 2003, calculated as the
sum of the log change over all sub-periods in our data.31 We also report the log change
over each sub-period in our data.
Skill premium. We begin by decomposing changes in the skill premium over the full
    31 We
        obtain very similar results if directly compute changes in wages between 1984 and 2003 instead of
adding changes in log relative wages over all sub-periods.

                                                   30
sample period and over each sub-period. The first column in Table 3 reports the change
in the data, which is also the change predicted by the model when all shocks—in labor
composition, occupation shifters, equipment productivity, and labor productivity—are
simultaneously considered. The skill premium increased by 15.1 log points between 1984
and 2003, with the largest increases occurring between 1984 and 1993. The subsequent
four columns summarize the counterfactual change in the skill premium predicted by the
model if only one of the exogenous shocks is considered (i.e. holding the other exogenous
parameters at their t0 level).

                                               Labor      Occ.      Equip.   Labor
                                      Data     comp.     shifters   prod.    prod.
                        1984 - 1989   0.057    -0.031     0.026     0.052    0.009
                        1989 - 1993   0.064    -0.017    -0.009     0.045    0.046
                        1993 - 1997   0.037    -0.023     0.044     0.021    -0.005
                        1997 - 2003   -0.007   -0.043    -0.011     0.042    0.006
                        1984 - 2003   0.151    -0.114     0.049     0.159    0.056

Table 3: Decomposing changes in the log skill premium (the wage of workers with a
college degree relative to those without)

    Changes in labor composition decrease the skill premium over each sub-period in re-
sponse to the large increase in the share of hours of more educated workers. The increase
in hours worked by those with college degrees relative to those without of 47.4 log points
between 1984 and 2003 decreases the skill premium by 11.4 log points. Changes in rela-
tive demand across labor groups must, therefore, compensate for the impact of changes
in labor composition in order to generate the observed rise of the skill premium in the
data.
    Changes in equipment productivity, i.e. computerization, account for roughly 60% of
the sum of the demand-side forces pushing the skill premium upwards: 0.60 ' 0.159 /
(0.049 + 0.159 + 0.056). Over sub-periods, changes in equipment productivity are par-
ticularly important in generating increases in the skill premium over the years in which
the skill premium rose most dramatically: 1984-1989 and 1989-1993. These are precisely
the years in which the overall share of workers using computers rose most rapidly; see
Table 1. The intuition behind our result that computerization had a large impact on the
skill premium is the following. We measure large growth in computer productivity us-
ing the procedure described in Section 4.2.32 Computerization raises the skill premium

  32 This is consistent with ample direct evidence showing a rapid decline in the price of computers relative

to all other equipment types and structures, which we do not directly use in our estimation procedure. The
decline over time in the U.S. in the price of equipment relative to structures—see e.g. Greenwood et al.

                                                    31
for two reasons, as described in detail in Section 3.4. First, educated workers have a di-
rect comparative advantage using computers within occupations, as shown in Figure 2.
Second, educated workers have a comparative advantage in occupations in which com-
puters have a comparative advantage, which together with an estimate of the elasticity of
substitution across occupations larger than one, implies that computerization raises the
wages of labor groups disproportionately employed in computer-intensive occupations.
    Changes in occupation shifters account for roughly 19% of the sum of the forces push-
ing the skill premium upwards over the full sample. This result is intuitively related to
the expansion of certain occupations. As documented in Figure 1 and in Table 12 in Ap-
pendix B, certain occupations—including, for example, executive, administrative, man-
agerial as well as health assessment and treating—have grown disproportionately over
the last three decades. As discussed in, e.g., Autor et al. (2003), these changes have been
systematically related to the task content of each occupation; for example, there has been
an expansion of occupations intensive in non-routine cognitive analytical, non-routine
cognitive interpersonal, and socially perceptive tasks and a corresponding contraction in
occupations intensive in routine manual and non-routine manual physical tasks, as de-
fined using O*NET constructed task measures following Acemoglu and Autor (2011) (see
Appendix F.1 for details). In our model, occupation shifters generate the largest move-
ments in income shares across occupations, and these movements are biased towards
occupations intensive in certain characteristics, e.g. social perceptiveness, as we show in
Appendix F.1. However, with ρ 6= 1 all shocks other than changes in occupation shifters
also affect income shares across occupations. Specifically, we find that computerization
and labor composition play significant roles in explaining the observed relationship be-
tween occupations’ and growth. For example, both computerization and changes in labor
composition have contributed to the increase in the size of occupations intensive in non-
routine cognitive analytical and non-routine cognitive interpersonal tasks as well as the
decrease in the size of occupations intensive in routine manual and non-routine manual
physical tasks, as we show in Appendix F.1.
    Finally, labor productivity, the residual to match observed changes in relative wages,
accounts for roughly 21% of the sum of the effects of the three demand-side mechanisms.
Gender gap. The average wage of men relative to women, the gender gap, declined
(1997)—is mostly driven by a decline in computer prices. For example, between 1984 and 2003: (i ) the prices
of industrial equipment and of transportation equipment relative to the price of computers and peripheral
equipment have risen by factors of 32 and 34, respectively (calculated using the BEA’s Price Indexes for
Private Fixed Investment in Equipment and Software by Type), and (ii ) the quantity of computers and
peripheral equipment relative to the quantities of industrial equipment and of transportation equipment
rose by a factor of 35 and 33, respectively (calculated using the BEA’s Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Net
Stock of Private Fixed Assets, Equipment and Software, and Structures by Type).

                                                    32
by 13.3 log points between 1984 and 2003. Table 4 decomposes changes in the gender
gap over the full sample and over each sub-period. The increase in hours worked by
women relative to men of roughly 12.6 log points between 1984 and 2003 increased the
gender gap by 4.2 log points. Changes in relative demand across labor groups must,
therefore, compensate for the impact of changes in labor composition in order to generate
the observed fall of the gender gap in the data.

                                            Labor     Occ.      Equip.   Labor
                                   Data     comp.    shifters   prod.    prod.
                     1984 - 1989   -0.056   0.012    -0.009     -0.016   -0.044
                     1989 - 1993   -0.052   0.013    -0.035     -0.014   -0.016
                     1993 - 1997   -0.003   0.006     0.015     -0.005   -0.020
                     1997 - 2003   -0.021   0.012    -0.038     -0.012   0.019
                     1984 - 2003   -0.133   0.042    -0.067     -0.047   -0.061

Table 4: Decomposing changes in the log gender gap (the wage of men relative to women)

   Changes in equipment productivity, i.e. computerization, account for roughly 27% of
the sum of the forces decreasing the gender gap over the full sample in spite of the fact
that women do not have a comparative advantage using computers. This results from
the finding that women have a comparative advantage in the occupations in which com-
puters have a comparative advantage, which together with an estimate of the elasticity of
substitution across occupations larger than one, implies that computerization raises the
wages of labor groups disproportionately employed in computer-intensive occupations.
   Changes in occupation shifters account for roughly 38% of the sum of the forces de-
creasing the gender gap over the full sample. This is driven in part by the fact that
a number of male-intensive occupations—including, for example, mechanics/repairers
as well as machine operators/assemblers/inspectors—contracted substantially between
1984 and 2003; see Table 12 in the Appendix B for details.
   Changes in labor productivity account for a sizable share, roughly 35%, of the im-
pact of the demand-side forces affecting the gender gap and play a central role in each
sub-period except for 1997-2003. This suggests that factors such as changes in gender
discrimination—if they affect labor productivity irrespective of the type of equipment
used and the occupation of employment—may have played a substantial role in reduc-
ing the gender gap, especially early in our sample (in the 1980s and early 1990s); see e.g.
Hsieh et al. (2013).
Five education groups. Table 5 decomposes changes in between-education-group wage
inequality at a higher level of worker disaggregation than what the skill premium cap-


                                                33
tures, studying changes in average wages across the five education groups considered in
our analysis.

                                                    Labor     Occ.      Equip.   Labor
                                           Data     comp.    shifters   prod.    prod.
              HS grad / HS dropout         0.037    -0.049    0.022     0.128    -0.060
              Some college / HS dropout    0.074    -0.095    0.050     0.231    -0.110
              College / HS dropout         0.174    -0.161    0.062     0.296    -0.022
              Grad training / HS dropout   0.232    -0.189    0.104     0.310    0.009

Table 5: Decomposing changes in log relative wages across education groups between
1984 and 2003

   The results are similar to those reported in Table 3 are robust: computerization is the
central force driving changes in between-education group inequality whereas labor pro-
ductivity plays a relatively minor role.
Thirty disaggregated labor groups. One of the advantages of our framework is that we
can solve for wage changes across a large number of labor groups. Whereas above we
quantify the impact of shocks on measures of between-group inequality that aggregate
across a number of labor groups, Table 6 presents evidence on the relative importance
of the three demand-side shocks—occupation shifters, equipment productivity, and labor
productivity—in explaining relative changes in wages across the thirty labor groups that
we consider in our analysis. More precisely, in this table we show the results from de-
composing the variance of the changes in relative wages predicted by our model when
all three demand-side shocks are active into the covariances of these changes with those
that are predicted by our model when only one of the three demand-side shocks is ac-
tivated each time. In order to perform this decomposition, we present three coefficients
that arise from projecting each of the three sets of 30 changes in relative wages predicted
by each of the three demand-side shocks included in our analysis on the 30 changes in
relative wages predicted by our model when all the three demand-side shocks are taken
into account. This decomposition approach is analogous to that previously performed in
Klenow and Rodriǵuez-Clare (1997).
    The results show that, in the period 1984 to 2003, equipment productivity explains
over 50% of the variance in the change in relative wages (implied by the combination of
the 3 demand side shocks) across the thirty labor groups considered in the analysis. In
this same time period, occupation shifters and labor productivity each explain slightly
less than 25%. Whereas equipment productivity is also the most important demand-side
contributor in the periods 1984-1989 and 1997-2003, labor productivity is the most impor-
tant force in 1989-1993 and occupation shifters are the most important force in 1993-1997.

                                               34
                                1984-2003    1984-1989   1989-1993   1993-1997    1997-2003
      Equipment Productivity      52.93%      47.91%      33.15%       27.70%      51.38%
      Occupation Shifter          23.80%      24.57%      10.54%       48.50%      14.92%
      Labor Productivity          23.27%      27.52%      56.30%       23.80%      29.19%

Table 6: Variance Decomposition across 30 labor groups
Let xi (λ) denote the change in the average wage of group λ induced by demand-side shock i and let
y (λ) = ∑3i=1 xi (λ). For each i and time period we report cov( xi (λ) , y (λ)) /var (y (λ)).


6     Robustness and sensitivity analyses
In this section we consider three types of sensitivity exercises. First, we perform sensi-
tivity to different values of ρ and θ. Second, we illustrate the importance of accounting
for all three forms of comparative advantage by performing similar exercises to those de-
scribed in Section 5 in versions of our model that omit some of them. Finally, we allow
for changes in comparative advantage over time.


6.1   Alternative parameter values
We first consider the sensitivity of our results for the skill premium and gender gap over
the period 1984-2003 to alternative estimated values of the parameters θ and ρ. To demon-
strate the role of each parameter, we then show the impact on our results of varying one
parameter at a time.
Alternative estimated values of θ and ρ. In Table 7, we decompose changes in the skill
premium and gender gap between 1984 and 2003 using our alternative estimates of θ
and ρ. The first row uses our benchmark GMM estimates. The second row uses our
GMM estimates of θ and ρ when adding as controls a labor-group-specific time trend in
equation (16) and an occupation-specific time trend in equation (17). The third row uses
our GMM estimates when using versions of both equation (16) and equation (17) in levels
rather than in time differences. The final row uses the value of θ estimated from moments
of the unconditional distribution of observed wages within each labor group λ and the
value of ρ that arises from the moment condition in equation (19) taking as given the
value of θ.
    Our main results are robust for all these alternative estimates of the parameter vec-
tor (θ, ρ). First, computerization is the most important force accounting for the rise in
between-education-group inequality between 1984 and 2003. Alone, it accounts for be-
tween roughly 50% and 99% of the demand-side forces raising the skill premium. Second,
residual labor productivity accounts for no more than one-third of the demand-side forces


                                               35
                                               Skill premium                           Gender gap
                                    Labor      Occ.     Equip.    Labor    Labor      Occ.    Equip.    Labor
 (θ, ρ)                             comp.     shifters prod.      prod.    comp.     shifters prod.     prod.
 Baseline: (1.78, 1.78)             -0.114    0.049      0.159    0.056    0.042     -0.067    -0.047   -0.061
 Time trends: (1.13, 2.00)          -0.159    0.066      0.221    0.021    0.058     -0.097    -0.063   -0.031
 Levels: (1.57, 3.27)               -0.126    -0.018     0.272    0.022    0.046     -0.057    -0.092   -0.031
 Wage distribution: (2.62, 2.15)    -0.084    0.037      0.117    0.080    0.031     -0.048    -0.036   -0.080

Table 7: Decomposing changes in the log skill premium and gender gap between 1984
and 2003 for alternative estimates of (θ, ρ).

raising the skill premium. Third, changes in each of the demand-side forces play an im-
portant role in accounting for the reduction in the gender gap between 1984 and 2003.
Specifically, changes in labor productivity play a larger role in accounting for the reduc-
tion in the gender gap than in accounting for the rise in the skill premium. Alone, they
account for between roughly 16% and 49% of the demand-side forces reducing the gender
gap.
The role of θ and ρ in shaping our decomposition. To provide intuition for the roles of
θ and ρ, we recompute our counterfactuals varying either θ or ρ to take the values that
correspond to the endpoints of the 95% confidence interval that is implied by our baseline
estimation.33 Whereas the first row of Table 8 replicates our baseline decomposition, the
second and third rows fix ρ at our baseline level and vary θ, whereas the fourth and fifth
rows fix θ at our baseline level and vary ρ.

                                     Skill premium                           Gender gap
                           Labor     Occ.     Equip.    Labor     Labor     Occ.    Equip.     Labor
         (θ, ρ)            comp.    shifters prod.      prod.     comp.    shifters prod.      prod.
  Baseline: (1.78, 1.78)   -0.114    0.049      0.159    0.056    0.042     -0.067    -0.047   -0.061
      (1.21, 1.78)         -0.135    0.021      0.236    0.027    0.050     -0.072    -0.075   -0.036
      (2.35, 1.78)         -0.099    0.057      0.121    0.072    0.037     -0.061    -0.034   -0.074
      (1.78, 1.09)         -0.155    0.142      0.111    0.051    0.057     -0.110    -0.019   -0.057
      (1.78, 2.47)         -0.091    -0.005     0.188    0.058    0.034     -0.041    -0.064   -0.062

Table 8: Decomposing changes in the log skill premium and gender gap between 1984
and 2003 for extreme values of θ or ρ.

    As is evident from rows two and three of Table 8, a higher value of θ implies a larger
role for changes in labor productivity and a smaller role for the other shocks in accounting
for changes in the skill premium and the gender gap. The intuition is straightforward.
  33 This
        is intended to provide intuition for how our results vary with alternative values of θ and ρ. The
numbers in Table 8 should not be interpreted as confidence intervals for our decomposition.

                                                   36
According to equation (14), the elasticity of changes in average wages of workers in labor
group λ, ŵ (λ), to changes in the measured labor-group-specific average of equipment
productivities and transformed occupation prices (both to the power θ), ŝ (λ), is 1/θ.
Because our measure of ŝ (λ) is independent of θ, a higher value of θ reduces the impact
on wages of changes in the labor-group-specific average of equipment productivities and
transformed occupation prices and, therefore, increases the impact of changes in labor
productivity, identified as a residual to match observed changes in average wages.
    The value of ρ may potentially affect the contribution of each shock to relative wages
through two channels: by affecting the measured shock itself and by affecting the elastic-
ity of occupation prices to these measured shocks. As shown in Section 4.2, ρ does not
affect our measurement of either the labor composition or equipment productivity shock;
hence, ρ affects the importance of these shocks for relative wages only through the elas-
ticity of occupation prices. Because labor composition only affects relative wages through
occupation prices, a higher value of ρ must reduce the impact of labor composition on rel-
ative wages, as is confirmed in rows four and five of Table 8. As described in Section 3.4,
computerization has two effects. First, it raises the relative wages of labor groups that dis-
proportionately use computers. Second, by lowering the prices of occupations in which
computers are disproportionately used, it lowers the wages of labor groups that are dis-
proportionately employed in these occupations. A higher value of ρ mitigates the second
effect and, therefore, strengthens the impact of computerization on the skill premium and
gender gap, as reported in rows four and five of Table 8.
    On the other hand, the value of ρ impacts occupation shifters both through the magni-
tude of the measured shocks (see equation (12)) and through the elasticity of occupation
prices to these measured shocks. In practice, a higher value of ρ yields measured occu-
pation shifters that are less biased towards educated workers (in fact, occupation shifters
reduce the skill premium for sufficiently high values of ρ) and tends to reduce the effect
of occupation shifters on the gender gap by reducing the elasticity of occupation prices to
shocks.


6.2   Sources of comparative advantage
To demonstrate the importance of including each of the three forms of comparative ad-
vantage, we perform two exercises. We first assume there is no comparative advantage
related to occupations and then we redo the decomposition under the assumption that
there is no comparative advantage related to equipment. In all cases, we hold the values
of α, ρ, and θ fixed to the same values employed in Section 5.


                                             37
    Table 9 reports our baseline decomposition between 1984 and 2003 both for the skill
premium (in the left panel) and the gender gap (in the right panel) as well as decompo-
sitions under the restriction that there is comparative advantage only between labor and
equipment or only between labor and occupations.

                                  Skill premium                        Gender gap
                        Labor     Occ.     Equip.   Labor    Labor    Occ.    Equip.   Labor
                        comp.    shifters prod.     prod.    comp.   shifters prod.    prod.
 Baseline               -0.114    0.049    0.159    0.056    0.042   -0.067   -0.047   -0.061
 Only labor-equip. CA      0        0      0.240    -0.088     0        0     -0.105   -0.029
 Only labor-occ. CA     -0.114    0.116      0      0.149    0.042   -0.056      0     -0.120

Table 9: Decomposing changes in the log skill premium and log gender gap between 1984
and 2003 under different assumptions on the evolution of comparative advantage

    Abstracting from any comparative advantage at the level of occupations (i.e. assuming
away worker-occupation and equipment-occupation comparative advantage) has two ef-
fects. First—because changes in labor composition and occupation shifters affect relative
wages only through occupation prices—it implies that the labor composition and occu-
pation shifters components of our decomposition go to zero. This affects the labor pro-
ductivity component, since changes in labor productivity are identified as a residual to
match observed changes in wages. Second, it implies that worker-equipment compar-
ative advantage is the only force giving rise to the observed allocation of labor groups
to equipment types. This affects the inferred strength of worker-equipment comparative
advantage and, therefore, affects both the equipment and labor productivity components
of the decomposition.
    Row 2 of Table 9 shows that if we were to abstract from any comparative advantage
at the level of occupations, we would incorrectly conclude that all of the rise in the skill
premium has been driven by changes in relative equipment productivities. Similarly,
because we would infer that women have a strong comparative advantage with comput-
ers, we would incorrectly conclude that changes in equipment productivity account for
almost all of the fall in the gender gap.
    Similarly, assuming there is no comparative advantage at the level of equipment im-
plies that the equipment productivity component of our decomposition is zero and that
the only force giving rise to the allocation of labor groups to occupations is worker-
occupation comparative advantage. Row 3 of Table 9 shows that abstracting from any
comparative advantage at the level of equipment magnifies the importance of labor pro-
ductivity in explaining the rise of the skill premium and the fall in the gender gap. The
impact of occupation shifters on the gender gap does not change significantly.

                                             38
   In summary, abstracting from comparative advantage at the level of either occupations
or equipment has a large impact on the decomposition of changes in between-group in-
equality. It does so by forcing changes in labor productivity to absorb the impact of the
missing component(s) and by changing the importance of the remaining source of com-
parative advantage.


6.3   Evolving comparative advantage
In our baseline model we imposed that the only time-varying components of productivity
are multiplicatively separable between labor, equipment, and occupation components.
In practice, over time some labor groups may have become relatively more productive
in some occupations or using some types of equipment, perhaps caused by differential
changes in discrimination of labor groups across occupations, by changes in occupation
characteristics that affect labor groups differentially (e.g. job flexibility, which women
may value relatively more, see e.g. Goldin 2014), or by changes in the characteristics of
equipment.
    In the most general case, we could allow Tt (λ, κ, ω ) to vary freely over time. In this
case, we would match π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) exactly in each time period. The impact of labor com-
position would be exactly the same as in our baseline. However, we would only be able
to report the joint effects of the combination of all λ-, κ-, and ω-specific shocks on relative
wages. Instead, here we generalize our baseline model to incorporate changes over time
in comparative advantage in a restricted manner. Specifically, we consider separately
three extensions of our baseline model:
                                     
                                      T (κ ) Tt (λ, ω ) T (λ, κ, ω ) case 1
                                      t
                                     
                                     
                      Tt (λ, κ, ω ) = Tt (ω ) Tt (λ, κ ) T (λ, κ, ω ) case 2
                                     
                                     
                                      T (λ) T (κ, ω ) T (λ, κ, ω ) case 3
                                     
                                       t      t


We allow for changes over time in comparative advantage between workers and occu-
pations in case 1, workers and equipment in case 2, and equipment and occupations in
case 3. In Appendix H we show how to measure the relevant shocks and how to decom-
pose changes in between-group inequality into labor composition, occupation shifter, and
labor-equipment components in case 2. Details for cases 1 and 3 are similar. Table 10 re-
ports our results from decomposing changes in the skill premium between 1984 and 2003
in our baseline exercise as well as in cases 1, 2, and 3. In all cases, we hold the values of α,
ρ, and θ fixed to the same values employed in Section 5.


                                              39
                              Labor     Occ.       Equip.   Labor   Labor-   Labor-   Equip.-
     Changes in CA            comp.    shifters    prod.    prod.    occ.    equip.    occ.
     None (baseline)          -0.114    0.049      0.159    0.056     -        -         -
     Worker-occ. (case 1)     -0.114      -        0.159      -     0.069      -         -
     Worker-equip. (case 2)   -0.114    0.046        -        -       -      0.223       -
     Equip.-occ. (case 3)     -0.114      -          -      0.013     -        -       0.251

Table 10: Decomposing changes in the log skill premium between 1984 and 2003 allowing
comparative advantage to evolve over time

    The intuition for why our results are largely unchanged is straightforward in cases 1
and 2. In all three cases, our measures of initial factor allocations and changes in labor
composition as well as the system of equations that determines the impact of changes
in labor composition on relative wages are exactly the same as in our baseline model.
Hence, the labor composition component of our baseline decomposition is unchanged if
we incorporate time-varying comparative advantage. Similarly, our measure of changes
in equipment productivity as well as the system of equations that determines their impact
are exactly the same in case 1 as in our baseline model. Hence, the equipment productiv-
ity component in case 1 is unchanged from the baseline. In case 2, whereas our measure
of changes in transformed occupation prices is exactly the same as in our baseline model,
our measure of changes in occupation labor payment shares—and, therefore, our mea-
sure of occupation shifters—differs slightly from our baseline, since predicted allocations
in period t1 differ slightly. However, since these differences aren’t large and since the sys-
tem of equations determining the impact of occupation shifters is the same, our results
on occupation shifters in case 2 are very similar to those in the baseline. Finally, since
(when fed in one at a time) the sum of all four components of our decomposition in the
baseline model match the change in relative wages in the data well and the sum of all
three components of our decomposition in the extensions considered here match the data
reasonably well (in each case they match wage changes perfectly when fed in together),
the change in wages resulting from the sum of the labor productivity and occupation pro-
ductivity components in our baseline (when fed in one at a time) must closely match the
change in wages from the labor-occupation component in case 1; similarly, the sum of the
labor productivity and equipment productivity components in our baseline must closely
match the labor-equipment component in case 2.




                                                  40
7    International trade in equipment
In this section we extend our model to incorporate international trade in equipment, show
theoretically how the degree of openness is reflected in what we have treated—in our
closed-economy model—as exogenous primitive shocks to the cost of producing equip-
ment, and quantify the impact of equipment trade on between-group inequality. Here we
sketch the main elements of the extended model. Additional details are provided in Ap-
pendix I, where we also extend the model to allow for trade in occupations and in sectoral
output.34
Setup. All variables are indexed by country, n, and we omit time subscripts for simplicity.
We use Y to indicate output and D to indicate absorption; this distinction is required in
the open economy but not in the closed economy. Absorption of equipment of type κ in
country n is a CES aggregate of equipment sourced from all countries in the world,
                                                                      !η (κ )/(η (κ )−1)
                                                           η (κ )−1
                             Dn ( κ ) =    ∑ Din (κ )        η (κ )                        ,           (20)
                                            i


where Din (κ ) is absorption in country n of equipment κ sourced from country i, and
η (κ ) > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across source countries for equipment κ.35 Trade
is subject to iceberg transportation costs, where dni (κ ) ≥ 1 denotes the units of equipment
κ output that must be shipped from origin country n in order for one unit to arrive in
destination country i; we impose dnn (κ ) = 1 for all n. Output of equipment κ in country
n satisfies
                                   Yn (κ ) = ∑ dni (κ ) Dni (κ ) .                        (21)
                                                  i

Note that the previous expression limits to the closed economy version, Yn (κ ) = Dnn (κ ),
when dni (κ ) → ∞ for all n 6= i. For simplicity, but without loss of generality for our
results on relative wages, we abstract from trade in the consumption good. Therefore,
the resource constraint for the final good still satisfies equation (2). For the exercises we
consider below, we do not need to specify conditions on trade balance in each country.
   The equations determining the allocations πn (λ, κ, ω ) and the average wage wn (λ), as
well as the (non-traded) occupation market clearing conditions determining occupation

   34 See e.g. Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) for a theoretical analysis of occupation trade and in-

equality and Feenstra and Hanson (1999) for an empirical treatment of offshoring and relative wages. See
Galle et al. (2015), Lee (2015), and Adao (2015) for an analysis of the impact of sectoral trade on between-
group inequality.
   35 We assume an Armington trade model only for expositional simplicity. Our results would also hold in

a Ricardian model as in Eaton and Kortum (2002).

                                                      41
prices are the same as in the baseline model and are given by (3), (4) and (5), respectively,
where every variable now includes an n country-subscript. Therefore, given equipment
prices in country n, the equations to solve for allocations and wages in country n are
the same as in the closed economy. In an open economy, however, we must distinguish
between production prices and absorption prices (which include the price of imported
equipment). Since domestic and imported equipment are inputs in production, absorp-
tion prices are the relevant equipment prices shaping πn (λ, κ, ω ) and wn (λ) in equations
(3) and (4).
    We denote by pin (κ ) the price of country i’s output of equipment κ in country n inclu-
sive of trade costs, given by pin (κ ) = pii (κ ) din (κ ), where pii (κ ) denotes the technologi-
cal cost in terms of units of the final good of producing one unit of equipment κ in country
i. We denote by pn (κ ) the absorption price of equipment κ in country n (the relevant one
in equations (3) and (4)), and it is given by

                                            "                      #      1
                                                                       1− η (κ )
                               p n (κ ) =       ∑ pin (κ )1−η(κ)                   .
                                                 i


Note that the previous expression limits to the closed economy version, pn (κ ) = pnn (κ ),
when dni (κ ) → ∞ for all n 6= i. Taking the ratio between any two time periods t0 and t1 ,
we have
                              "                                           # 1
                                                              1− η ( κ ) 1− η (κ )
                    p̂n (κ ) = ∑ sin (κ ) dˆin (κ ) p̂ii (κ )                        , (22)
                                   i

where sin (κ ) denotes the fraction of expenditures on equipment κ in country n purchased
from country i at time t0 ,
                                             pin (κ ) Din (κ )
                                 sin (κ ) =                         .
                                            ∑ j p jn (κ ) D jn (κ )
The change in country n’s transformed equipment prices in equations (7) and (8) is given
                        −α
by q̂n (κ ) ≡ p̂n (κ ) 1−α T̂n (κ ). Clearly, in this open economy model, changes in equipment
absorption prices in country n depend on changes in equipment producer prices in all
foreign countries and on changes in trade costs between country n and all of its trading
partners.
Counterfactual exercise. Ideally, one might like to use the framework described above
to quantify the impact of changes in trade costs, dˆin (κ ), and equipment producer prices
in all foreign countries, p̂ii (κ ), between 1984 and 2003 on wage inequality in the U.S. In
practice, measuring these changes abroad would require similar data to that described
in Section 4.1 but for foreign countries (as well as equipment trade data). Instead, with

                                                     42
the aim of quantifying the impact of international trade in equipment on country n, we
consider a counterfactual exercise that does not require solving the full world general
equilibrium nor estimating parameters for any country other than n. This counterfactual
answers the following question: what are the differential effects of changes in primitives
(i.e. worldwide technologies, labor compositions, and trade costs) between periods t0
and t1 on wages in country n, relative to the effects of the same changes in primitives if
country n were a closed economy?
    To understand this counterfactuals, define wn (λ; Φt , Φ∗t , dt ) to be the average wage of
labor group λ in country n given that country n fundamentals are Φt , fundamentals in
the rest of the world are Φ∗t , and the full matrix of world trade costs are dt . Define dn,tA

to be an alternative matrix of world trade costs in which country n’s international trade
costs are infinite (din,t = ∞ for all i 6= n). Our counterfactual calculates
                                               ,                        
                         wn λ; Φt1 , Φ∗t1 , dt1    wn λ; Φt1 , Φ∗t1 , dtA1
                                                                        
                         wn λ; Φt0 , Φ∗t0 , dt0    wn λ; Φt0 , Φ∗t0 , dtA0

Defining the impact on the wage of group λ of moving country n to autarky at time t
                 n λ; Φt , Φ.
      A (λ) ≡ w             ∗ , d A /w ( λ; Φ , Φ∗ , d ), our counterfactual can be expressed
                                     
as ŵn,t                    t    n,t   n     t   t    n,t
more simply as ŵn,tA ( λ ) ŵ A ( λ ) . Because this counterfactual amounts to moving to
                       0          n,t1
autarky twice at different points in time, we only describe how to calculate the counter-
factual change in wages when we move to autarky.
     The system of equations to calculate changes in relative wages in some country n at
time t0 when this country moves to autarky corresponds to the same system of equations
in the closed economy version of the model—(7), (8) and (9)—setting T̂n (λ) = L̂n (λ) =
ân (ω ) = 1, and setting changes in transformed equipment prices to

                                                           1    −α
                                    q̂n (κ ) = snn (κ ) 1−η (κ) 1−α                            (23)

where snn (κ ) (one minus the import share) is evaluated at time t0 . Expression (23) is ob-
                                                                                     −α
tained from the definition of transformed equipment prices, q̂n (κ ) = p̂n (κ ) 1−α T̂n (κ ) with
T̂n (κ ) = 1, combined with the change in equipment κ’s absorption price when moving
                                  1
to autarky, p̂n (κ ) = snn (κ ) 1−η (κ) calculated using equation (22) setting dˆin (κ ) = ∞ for all
i 6= n and p̂nn (κ ) = 1.
    The mapping between import shares at time t0 and the corresponding closed-economy
shocks is intuitive. If the import share of equipment type κ is relatively high and trade
elasticities are common across equipment goods, then moving to autarky is equivalent


                                                  43
to decreasing equipment κ productivity (or increasing its domestic cost of production) in
the closed economy. Similarly, for given equipment import shares, if the trade elasticity
is lower, then moving to autarky is equivalent to decreasing equipment productivity by
more in the closed economy.
Results. We conduct our counterfactuals for the U.S. for our sample time period, 1984
and 2003. We need to assign values to snn (κ ) in 1984 and 2003 and to η (κ ). We calculate
                                                        Importn,t (κ )
snn (κ ) for the U.S. as snn (κ ) = 1 − Production (κ )−Export                            . We obtain Pro-
                                                    n,t          n,t (κ )+ Importn,t (κ )
duction, Export, and Import data using the OECD’s Structural Analysis Database (STAN)
which is arranged at the 2-digit level of the third revision of the International Standard
Industrial Classification. We equate computers, κ1 , in the model to industry 30 (Office,
Accounting, and Computing Machinery) and non-computer equipment, κ2 , in the model
to industries 29-33 less 30 (Machinery and Equipment less Office, Accounting, and Com-
puting Machinery) and 34-35 (Transport Equipment). We observe that snn (κ1 ) fell from
0.80 in 1984 to 0.26 in 2003, while snn (κ2 ) fell from 0.83 in 1984 to 0.65 in 2003; that is, the
U.S. import share in computers rose significantly more than in non-computer equipment
goods. We assume η (κ1 ) = η (κ2 ) and consider values of the trade elasticity, η (κ ) − 1,
ranging between 1.5 and 5.5.
    Table 11 reports the results from the counterfactual that quantifies how important was
trade in equipment in generating relative wage changes between 1984 and 2003. The rise
in the U.S. skill premium between 1984 and 2003 was 2 percentage points higher (with
η (κ ) − 1 = 3.5) than the counterfactual rise in the skill premium had the U.S. been in au-
tarky over this time period for the same changes in worldwide primitives. The increase in
the returns to college and graduate training (relative to a high school dropouts) accounted
for by trade in equipment was roughly 3.5 percentage points, and the decrease in the gen-
der gap was 0.5 percentage points. These numbers roughly double if we consider a lower
trade elasticity of η (κ ) − 1 = 1.5.
    To summarize, the large rise in the import share of computers relative to non-computer
equipment reduces the relative price of computers to non-computer equipment, and this
change in the relative price of computers to non-computer equipment affects relative
wages in exactly the same way as an increase in computer productivity in the closed
economy.


8    Conclusions
In this paper we study how changes in workforce composition, occupation shifters, com-
puterization, and labor productivity shape the evolution of between-group inequality

                                                   44
                                                   Value of η (κ ) − 1
                                                  1.5     3.5       5.5
                   Skill premium                0.050 0.021 0.013
                   HS grad / HS dropout         0.026 0.012 0.008
                   Some college / HS dropout    0.047 0.021 0.013
                   College / HS dropout         0.078 0.034 0.021
                   Grad training / HS dropout   0.080 0.034 0.022
                   Gender Gap                   -0.011 -0.005 -0.003

Table 11: Impact of trade in equipment between 1984 and 2003 calculated for a range of
equipment trade elasticities.

across many labor groups. We parameterize and estimate an assignment model to match
observed factor allocations and wages in the United States between 1984 and 2003. We
show that computerization alone accounts for the majority of the observed rise in between-
education-group inequality over this period (e.g. 60% of the rise in the skill premium).
The combination of observables—computerization and occupation shifters—explain roughly
80% of the rise in the skill premium, almost all of the rise in inequality across more disag-
gregated education groups, and the majority of the fall in the gender gap.
    Our framework remains tractable in spite of its high dimensionality, lending itself to a
variety of extensions and applications. This tractability is attained by using strong para-
metric assumptions (e.g. Fréchet distribution of workers’ productivity across equipment
types and occupations), which would be interesting to relax in future work. We have
extended our model to incorporate international trade in equipment and sector output
as well as offshoring of occupations and have shown that changes in import and export
shares in each of these markets shape what we treat, in our baseline closed-economy
model, as exogenous primitive shocks. One challenge in bringing this general model to
the data is the lack of available data on trade in occupation-specific export and import
shares.
    Finally, the focus of this paper has been on the distribution of labor income between-
groups of workers with different observable characteristics. A fruitful avenue for future
research is to extend our framework to address the changing distribution of income ac-
cruing to labor and capital, as analyzed in e.g. Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) and
Oberfield and Raval (2014), as well as the changing distribution of income across work-
ers within groups, as analyzed in e.g. Huggett et al. (2011), Hornstein et al. (2011), and
Helpman et al. (2012).




                                           45
References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market,” Journal of Economic Lit-
  erature, March 2002, 40 (1), 7–72.

   and David Autor, Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings, Vol. 4
  of Handbook of Labor Economics, Elsevier,

Adao, Rodrigo, “Worker Heterogeneity, Wage Inequality, and International Trade: Theory and
 Evidence from Brazil,” mimeo, 2015.

Autor, David, “Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality Among the ‘Other 99 Per-
 cent‘,” Science, May 2014, 344 (6186), 843–851.

Autor, David H. and David Dorn, “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of
 the US Labor Market,” American Economic Review, August 2013, 103 (5), 1553–97.

  , Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane, “The Skill Content Of Recent Technological Change: An
  Empirical Exploration,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2003, 118 (4), 1279–1333.

  , Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger, “Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed
  The Labor Market?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1998, 113 (4), 1169–1213.

Beaudry, Paul and Ethan Lewis, “Do Male-Female Wage Differentials Reflect Differences in the
  Return to Skill? Cross-City Evidence from 1980-2000,” American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, April 2014, 6 (2), 178–94.

Buera, Fracisco J., Joseph P. Kaboski, and Richard Rogerson, “Skill-Biased Structural Change
  and the Skill-Premium,” Working Paper, 2015.

Burstein, Ariel and Jonathan Vogel, “Factor Prices and International Trade: A Unifying Perspec-
  tive,” March 2011, (16904).

   and    , “International Trade, Technology, and the Skill Premium,” mimeo Columbia University,
  2012.

  , Javier Cravino, and Jonathan Vogel, “Importing Skill-Biased Technology,” American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2013, 5 (2), 32–71.

Bustos, Paula, “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Skill Upgrading Evidence from Argentina,”
  April 2011, (559).

Card, David and Alan B Krueger, “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A Direct
  Assessment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1992, 107 (1), 151–200.

Costinot, Arnaud and Jonathan Vogel, “Matching and Inequality in the World Economy,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 08 2010, 118 (4), 747–786.

   and , “Beyond Ricardo: Assignment Models in International Trade,” Annual Review of Eco-
  nomics, Forthcoming.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, “Global Rebalancing with Gravity: Mea-
 suring the Burden of Adjustment,” IMF Staff Papers, July 2008, 55 (3), 511–540.

                                                46
DiNardo, John E and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, “The Returns to Computer Use Revisited: Have Pen-
  cils Changed the Wage Structure Too?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1997, 112
  (1), 291–303.

Dustmann, Christian, Johannes Ludsteck, and Uta Schonberg, “Revisiting the German Wage
 Structure,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2009, 124 (2), 843–881.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Trade in capital goods,” European Economic Review, 2001,
  45 (7), 1195–1235.

  and    , “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, September 2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.

Entorf, Horst, Michel Gollac, and Francis Kramarz, “New Technologies, Wages, and Worker
  Selection,” Journal of Labor Economics, July 1999, 17 (3), 464–491.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, “The Impact Of Outsourcing And High-Technology
  Capital On Wages: Estimates For The United States, 1979-1990,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, August 1999, 114 (3), 907–940.

Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Occupational Tasks and Changes in the
  Wage Structure,” February 2011, (5542).

Galle, Simon, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and Moises Yi, “Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the Aggre-
 gate and Distributional Effects of Trade,” Working Paper, 2015.

Goldin, Claudia, “A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter,” American Economic Review,
 April 2014, 104 (4), 1091–1119.

  and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s Career and
  Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, August 2002, 110 (4), 730–770.

Gordon, Robert J., The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices, National Bureau of Economic Research
 Research Monograph Series, 1990.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell, “Long-Run Implications of Investment-
  Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review, June 1997, 87 (3), 342–62.

Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Off-
  shoring,” American Economic Review, December 2008, 98 (5), 1978–97.

Heckman, James J and Guilherme Sedlacek, “Heterogeneity, Aggregation, and Market Wage
 Functions: An Empirical Model of Self-selection in the Labor Market,” Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, December 1985, 93 (6), 1077–1125.

Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc-Andreas Muendler, and Stephen J. Redding, “Trade
 and Inequality: From Theory to Estimation,” NBER Working Papers 17991, National Bureau of
 Economic Research, Inc April 2012.

Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Frictional Wage Dispersion in
 Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment,” American Economic Review, December 2011, 101
 (7), 2873–98.


                                               47
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow, “The Allocation of Tal-
  ent and U.S. Economic Growth,” NBER Working Papers 18693, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc January 2013.

Huggett, Mark, Gustavo Ventura, and Amir Yaron, “Sources of Lifetime Inequality,” American
 Economic Review, December 2011, 101 (7), 2923–54.

Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii, “Occupational Mobility and Wage Inequality,” Re-
  view of Economic Studies, 2009, 76 (2), 731–759.

   and , “Occupational Specificity Of Human Capital,” International Economic Review, 02 2009,
  50 (1), 63–115.

Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,” The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (1), 61–103.

Katz, Lawrence F and David H. Autor, “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality,”
  in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3 of Handbook of Labor
  Economics, Elsevier, 1999, chapter 26, pp. 1463–1555.

  and Kevin M Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1992, 107 (1), 35–78.

Klenow, Peter and Andrés Rodriǵuez-Clare, “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics:
  Has It Gone Too Far?,” in “NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Volume 12” NBER Chapters,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, september 1997, pp. 73–114.

Krueger, Alan B, “How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from Microdata,
  1984-1989,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1993, 108 (1), 33–60.

Krusell, Per, Lee E. Ohanian, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Capital-Skill
  Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica, September 2000,
  68 (5), 1029–1054.

Lagakos, David and Michael E. Waugh, “Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Productivity
  Differences,” American Economic Review, April 2013, 103 (2), 948–80.

Lee, Donghoon and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Accounting for wage and employment changes in the
  US from 1968-2000: A dynamic model of labor market equilibrium,” Journal of Econometrics,
  May 2010, 156 (1), 68–85.

Lee, Eunhee, “Trade, Inequality, and the Endogenous Sorting of Heterogeneous Workers,” mimeo,
  2015.

Lemieux, Thomas, “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects, Noisy Data, or
  Rising Demand for Skill?,” American Economic Review, June 2006, 96 (3), 461–498.

Oberfield, Ezra and Devesh Raval, “Micro Data and Macro Technology,” NBER Working Papers
 20452, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc September 2014.

Parro, Fernando, “Capital-Skill Complementarity and the Skill Premium in a Quantitative Model
  of Trade,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2013, 5 (2), 72–117.

                                              48
Ramondo, Natalia and Andrés Rodriǵuez-Clare, “Trade, Multinational Production, and the
  Gains from Openness,” Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (2), 273 – 322.

Saez, Emmanuel, “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,” Review of Economic
  Studies, January 2001, 68 (1), 205–29.

Yeaple, Stephen Ross, “A simple model of firm heterogeneity, international trade, and wages,”
  Journal of International Economics, January 2005, 65 (1), 1–20.




                                             49
A      Derivations
Here we derive the equations in Section 3.2 for (i ) the wage per efficiency unit of labor
λ when teamed with equipment κ in occupation ω, vt (λ, κ, ω ); (ii ) the probability that
a randomly sampled worker, z ∈ Zt (λ), uses equipment κ in occupation ω, πt (λ, κ, ω );
and (iii ) the average wage of workers in group λ teamed with equipment κ in occupation
ω, wt (λ, κ, ω ). We also show that wt (λ) = wt (λ, κ, ω ) for all (κ, ω ).
Wage per efficiency unit of labor λ: vt (λ, κ, ω ). An occupation production unit hiring k
units of equipment κ and l efficiency units of labor λ earns revenues pt (ω ) kα [ Tt (λ, κ, ω ) l ]1−α
and incurs costs pt (κ ) k + vt (λ, κ, ω ) l. The first-order condition for the optimal choice of
k per unit of l for a given (λ, κ, ω ) yields

                                                                      1
                                                        pt (ω )        1− α
                            k t (l; λ, κ, ω ) =       α                       Tt (λ, κ, ω ) l,
                                                        p t (κ )

where the second-order condition is satisfied for any α < 1. This implies that the pro-
                                                              1
                                                                               α
                                                                             −1 1− α
duction unit’s revenue can be expressed as pt (ω )          1 − α   αpt (κ )         Tt (λ, κ, ω ) l and its
                 −α             1
       h                                                          i
cost as pt (κ ) 1−α (αpt (ω )) 1−α Tt (λ, κ, ω ) + vt (λ, κ, ω ) l. Hence, the zero profit condition
requires that

                                                      α            −α                1
                    vt (λ, κ, ω ) = (1 − α) α 1−α pt (κ ) 1−α pt (ω ) 1−α Tt (λ, κ, ω )

                                                                                                     α
which is equivalent to the value in Section 3.2 given the definition of ᾱ ≡ (1 − α) α 1−α .
Labor allocation: πt (λ, κ, ω ). In what follows, denote by ϕ ≡ (κ, ω ). A worker z ∈ Zt (λ)
chooses equipment-occupation pair ϕ if

                           vt (λ, ϕ) ε (z, ϕ) > max vt λ, ϕ0 ε z, ϕ0 ,
                                                                  
                                                       ϕ0 6= ϕ


which is independent of e (z). The probability that a randomly sampled worker in group




                                                          50
λ chooses ϕ is
                   ˆ   ∞
                                        ε (z, ϕ0 ) vt (λ, ϕ0 )
                                                               
     πt (λ, ϕ) =     Pr ε > max                                      dG (ε)
                  0           ϕ0 6= ϕ         vt (λ, ϕ)
                 ˆ ∞                                          
                                               εvt (λ, ϕ)
                      ∏ Pr ε z, ϕ < vt (λ, ϕ0 ) dG (ε)
                                        0
                                          
               =
                  0 ϕ0 6= ϕ
                 ˆ ∞       "                          −θ (λ) #
                                        εvt (λ, ϕ)                                                
               =     exp − ∑                                     θ (λ) ε −1− θ ( λ )
                                                                                     exp −ε −θ (λ)
                                                                                                     dε
                  0          ϕ0 6= ϕ
                                        vt (λ, ϕ0 )
                 ˆ ∞       "                                  −θ (λ) !#
                                                v    ( λ, ϕ  )
                     exp −ε−θ (λ) ∑
                                                   t
               =                                            0)
                                                                          θ (λ) ε−1−θ (λ) dε
                  0                        ϕ0
                                                v t  ( λ, ϕ

                                                           
                                          vt (λ,ϕ) −θ (λ)
                                                    
Defining nt (λ, ϕ) ≡           ∑ ϕ0       vt (λ,ϕ0 )
                                                                , we have

                                          ˆ    ∞                            
                                                            −θ (λ)
                 πt (λ, ϕ) = −                     exp −ε    nt (λ, ϕ) (−θ (λ)) ε−1−θ (λ) dε
                                           0
                                     1                                   
                               =                    exp −ε−θ (λ) nt (λ, ϕ) |∞
                                                                            ε =0
                                 nt (λ, ϕ)
                                     1
                               =
                                 nt (λ, ϕ)

Substituting back in for nt (λ, ϕ), we have

                                                                  vt (λ, ϕ)θ (λ)
                                               πt (λ, ϕ) =                  θ (λ)
                                                                                                           (24)
                                                              ∑ vt (λ, ϕ0 )
                                                                 ϕ0


Finally, substituting back for ϕ and for vt (λ, κ, ω ) and setting θ (λ) = θ for all λ, we
obtain equation (3) in Section 3.2.


Average wages: wt (λ, κ, ω ) and wt (λ). As in the previous derivation, denote by ϕ ≡
(κ, ω ). The average efficiency units of each worker in Zt (λ, ϕ), which denotes the set of
workers z ∈ Zt (λ) who choose ϕ, is

  E [e (z) ε (z, ϕ) |z ∈ Zt (λ, ϕ)] = E [e (z) |z ∈ Zt (λ, ϕ)] × E [ε (z, ϕ) |z ∈ Zt (λ, ϕ)]
                                                   = E [e (z) |z ∈ Zt (λ)] × E [ε (z, ϕ) |z ∈ Zt (λ, ϕ)]
                                                   = E [e (z, ϕ) |z ∈ Zt (λ, ϕ)] .

where the first two equalities follow from both the assumption that e (z) is independent


                                                                51
of ε (z, ϕ) and the result above that the choice ϕ of each individual z does not depend on
the value of e (z) and the third equality follows from normalizing E [e (z) |z ∈ Zt (λ)] to
be equal to 1.36 In what follows let ε̄ t (λ, ϕ) ≡ E [ε (z, ϕ) |z ∈ Zt (λ, ϕ)]. We have
                                      ˆ   ∞
                                                                       ε (z, ϕ0 ) vt (λ, ϕ0 )
                                                                                              
                              1
            ε̄ t (λ, ϕ) =                     ε × Pr ε ≥ max                                         × dG (ε)
                          πt (λ, ϕ)   0                  ϕ0 6= ϕ             vt (λ, ϕ)

Hence, we have
                             ˆ   ∞
                                          "                       −θ (λ) #
                  1                       εvt (λ, ϕ)                                                      
ε̄ t (λ, ϕ) =               exp − ∑                                    θ (λ) ε  −θ (λ)
                                                                                           exp −ε   −θ (λ)
                                                                                                             dε
              πt (λ, ϕ)  0        ϕ0 6= ϕ
                                          vt (λ, ϕ0 )
                        ˆ ∞    "                                      −θ (λ) #
                   1                                   εv     ( λ, ϕ )
                            exp −ε−θ (λ) − ∑
                                                           t
             =                                                      0)
                                                                                     θ (λ) ε−θ (λ) dε
               πt (λ, ϕ) 0                   ϕ0 6= ϕ
                                                       v t  ( λ,  ϕ
                        ˆ ∞    "                                                    −θ (λ) #
                   1                                                        1
             =              exp −ε−θ (λ) vt (λ, ϕ)−θ (λ) ∑                       0
                                                                                                 θ (λ) ε−θ (λ) dε
               πt (λ, ϕ) 0                                      ϕ0
                                                                       v t( λ, ϕ   )
                        ˆ ∞    "                                                         #
                   1
                                                               ∑0 vt λ, ϕ0
                                                     −   (   )                     (   )
                            exp −ε−θ (λ) vt (λ, ϕ)                                         θ (λ) ε−θ (λ) dε
                                                       θ   λ                    θ   λ
             =
               πt (λ, ϕ) 0                                      ϕ

                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                         vt (λ,ϕ) −θ (λ)
                                                                                                                   
Let j =     ε−θ   and, as in the previous derivation, let nt (λ, ϕ) ≡                         ∑ ϕ0       vt (λ,ϕ0 )
                                                                                                                               .
Hence, we have
                                               ˆ 0
                                          1
                        ε̄ t (λ, ϕ) =              exp (− jz) j−1/θ (λ) (−dj)
                                      πt (λ, ϕ) −∞
                                               ˆ ∞
                                          1
                                    =              j−1/θ (λ) exp (− jz) dj
                                      πt (λ, ϕ) 0

Let yt (λ, ϕ) = nt (λ, ϕ) j. Hence, we have
                          ˆ ∞
                                  yt (λ, ϕ) −1/θ (λ)
                                                
                    1                                                       dyt (λ, ϕ)
  ε̄ t (λ, ϕ) =                                          exp (−yt (λ, ϕ))
                πt (λ, ϕ) 0       nt (λ, ϕ)                                 nt (λ, ϕ)
                                      −
                                                 ˆ ∞
                    1               1   θ ( λ )
              =           nt (λ, ϕ) θ (λ) ×          yt (λ, ϕ)−1/θ (λ) exp (−yt (λ, ϕ)) dyt (λ, ϕ)
                πt (λ, ϕ)                         0
                    1               1− θ ( λ )
              =           nt (λ, ϕ) θ (λ) × γ (λ)
                πt (λ, ϕ)


  36 This   is a normalization because, for any value of Tt0 (λ) and E [et0 (z) |z ∈ Zt (λ)] 6= 1, we can
always define an alternative Tt (λ) and e (z) such that Tt (λ) = Tt0 (λ) × E [et0 (z) |z ∈ Zt (λ)] and
E [e (z) |z ∈ Zt (λ)] = 1.

                                                       52
                               
where γ (λ) ≡ Γ 1 −        1
                        θ (λ)
                                    and Γ (·) is the Gamma function

                                                  ˆ     ∞
                                      Γ (x) ≡               t x−1 exp (−t) dt.
                                                    0

Substituting in for nt (λ, ϕ), we obtain

                                                                            −1
                                    ε̄ t (λ, ϕ) = γ (λ) πt (λ, ϕ) θ (λ) .

Hence, the total income of workers in Zt (λ) choosing ϕ, Lt (λ) πt (λ, ϕ) ε̄ t (λ, ϕ) vt (λ, ϕ),
                                     θ (λ)−1
becomes γ (λ) Lt (λ) πt (λ, ϕ)         θ (λ)   vt (λ, ϕ). Dividing by the mass of these workers, Lt (λ) πt (λ, ϕ),
we obtain the wage rate

                          wt (λ, ϕ) = γ (λ) vt (λ, ϕ) πt (λ, ϕ)−1/θ (λ) .                                (25)

Substituting in for vt (λ, ϕ) and for ϕ and setting θ (λ) = θ and γ (λ) = γ for all λ, we
obtain the un-numbered equation from Section 3.2:
                                                                 −α         1
              wt (λ, κ, ω ) = ᾱγTt (λ, κ, ω ) pt (κ ) 1−α pt (ω ) 1−α πt (λ, κ, ω )−1/θ .

Finally, substituting in for πt (λ, ϕ) from equation (24) into equation (25), we obtain
                                                                                          !1/θ (λ)
                                                                 ∑0 vt          0 θ (λ)
                                                                                 
                    wt (λ) = wt (λ, ϕ) = γ (λ)                           λ, ϕ                        .
                                                                 ϕ


Substituting in for vt (λ, ϕ) and for ϕ and setting θ (λ) = θ and γ (λ) = γ for all λ, we
obtain equation (4) from Section 3.2.


B    Data details
Throughout, we restrict our sample by dropping workers who are younger than 17 years
old, do not report positive paid hours worked, are self-employed, or are in the military.
MORG. We use the MORG CPS to form a sample of hours worked and income for each
labor group. Specifically, we use the “hour wage sample” from Acemoglu and Autor
(2011). Hourly wages are equal to the reported hourly earnings for those paid by the
hour and the usual weekly earnings divided by hours worked last week for non-hourly
workers. Top-coded earnings are multiplied by 1.5. Workers earning below $1.675/hour


                                                            53
in 1982 dollars are dropped, as are workers whose hourly wages exceed the number aris-
ing from multiplying the top-coded value of weekly earnings by 1/35 (i.e., workers paid
by the hour whose wages are sufficiently high so that their weekly income would be top-
coded if they worked at least 35 hours and were not paid by the hour). Observations
with allocated earnings are excluded. Our measure of labor composition, Lt (λ), is hours
worked within each labor group λ (weighted by sample weights).
October Supplement. In 1984, 1989, 1993, 1997, and 2003, the October Supplement asked
respondents whether they “have direct or hands on use of computers at work,” “directly
use a computer at work,” or “use a computer at/for his/her/your main job.” Using a
computer at work refers only to “direct” or “hands on” use of a computer with typewriter-
like keyboards, whether a personal computer, laptop, mini computer, or mainframe.
Occupations. The occupations we include are listed in Table 12, where we also list the
share of hours worked in each occupation by college educated workers and by women as
well as the occupation share of labor payments in 1984 and in 2003. Our concordance of
occupations across time is based on the concordance developed in Autor and Dorn (2013).
Composition-adjusted wages. We construct thirty labor groups defined by the intersec-
tion of five education, two gender, and three age categories. When we construct measures
of changes in relative wages between broader groups that aggregate across our most dis-
aggregated labor groups—e.g. the group of college educated workers combines ten of
our thirty labor groups—we composition adjust wages by holding constant the relative
employment shares of our thirty labor groups across all years of the sample. Specifically,
after calculating mean log wages within each labor group (either from the model or the
data), we construct mean wages for broader groups as fixed-weighted averages of the
relevant labor group means, using an average share of total hours worked by each labor
group over 1984 to 2003 as weights. This adjustment ensures that changes in average
wages across broader groups are not driven by shifts in the education × age × gender
composition within these broader groups.
O*NET. We follow Acemoglu and Autor (2011) in our use of O*NET and construct six
composite measures of O*NET Work Activities and Work Context Importance scales:
(i ) non-routine cognitive analytical, (ii ) non-routine cognitive interpersonal, (iii ) routine
cognitive, (iv) routine manual, (v) non-routine manual physical, and (vi ) social percep-
tiveness. We aggregate their measures up to our thirty occupations and standardize each
to have mean zero and standard deviation one.




                                              54
                                                                  College intensity         Female intensity          Income share
 Occupations                                                       1984      2003            1984     2003            1984   2003
 Executive, administrative, managerial                             0.48      0.58            0.32     0.40             0.12   0.16
 Management related                                                0.53      0.61            0.43     0.54             0.05   0.05
 Architect                                                         0.86      0.88            0.15     0.24             0.00   0.00
 Engineer                                                          0.71      0.79            0.06     0.11             0.03   0.03
 Life, physical, and social science                                0.65      0.55            0.30     0.30             0.01   0.02
 Computer and mathematical                                         0.86      0.91            0.31     0.41             0.01   0.01
 Community and social services                                     0.76      0.73            0.46     0.58             0.01   0.02
 Lawyers                                                           0.98      0.98            0.24     0.35             0.01   0.01
 Education, training, etc...*                                      0.90      0.87            0.63     0.68             0.05   0.06
 Arts, design, entertainment, sports, media                        0.49      0.57            0.39     0.45             0.01   0.01
 Health diagnosing                                                 0.96      0.98            0.20     0.33             0.01   0.01
 Health assessment and treating                                    0.51      0.64            0.85     0.84             0.02   0.04
 Technicians and related support                                   0.30      0.43            0.46     0.43             0.04   0.05
 Financial sales and related                                       0.31      0.33            0.31     0.40             0.04   0.05
 Retail sales                                                      0.17      0.24            0.54     0.50             0.05   0.05
 Administrative support                                            0.12      0.16            0.78     0.74             0.14   0.12
 Housekeeping, cleaning, laundry                                   0.01      0.03            0.83     0.83             0.01   0.00
 Protective service                                                0.16      0.21            0.11     0.19             0.02   0.02
 Food preparation and service                                      0.05      0.06            0.61     0.51             0.02   0.02
 Health service                                                    0.04      0.08            0.90     0.90             0.01   0.01
 Building, grounds cleaning, maintenance                           0.04      0.05            0.20     0.21             0.02   0.01
 Miscellaneous**                                                   0.12      0.17            0.67     0.63             0.01   0.01
 Child care                                                        0.11      0.12            0.91     0.94             0.00   0.01
 Agriculture and mining                                            0.05      0.06            0.10     0.16             0.01   0.00
 Mechanics and repairers                                           0.04      0.07            0.03     0.04             0.05   0.01
 Construction                                                      0.04      0.05            0.01     0.02             0.05   0.04
 Precision production                                              0.07      0.08            0.15     0.25             0.04   0.03
 Machine operators, assemblers, inspectors                         0.03      0.06            0.40     0.34             0.08   0.04
 Transportation and material moving                                0.03      0.05            0.06     0.09             0.05   0.04
 Handlers, equip. cleaners, helpers, laborers                      0.03      0.04            0.17     0.18             0.03   0.02

Table 12: Thirty occupations, their college and female intensities, and the occupational
share of labor payments
*Education, training, etc... also includes library, legal support/assistants/paralegals
**Miscellaneous includes personal appearance, misc. personal care and service, recreation and hospitality
College intensity (Female intensity) indicates hours worked in the occupation by those with college degrees (females) relative to total
hours worked in the occupation. Income share denotes labor payments in the occupation relative to total labor payments. Each is
calculated using the MORG CPS.




                                                                   55
C      Measurement
Equations (7), (8), and (9) can be written so that changes in relative wages, ŵ (λ) /ŵ(λ1 ),
relative transformed occupation price changes, q̂ (ω ) /q̂(ω1 ), and allocations, π̂ (λ, κ, ω ),
depend on relative shocks to labor composition, L̂ (λ) / L̂(λ1 ), occupation shifters, â (ω ) / â(ω1 ),
equipment productivity, q̂ (κ ) /q̂(κ1 ), and labor productivity, T̂ (λ) / T̂ (λ1 ):
                                                                                                            1/θ
                                                                    q̂(ω ) q̂(κ ) θ
                                                                                  
                                                      ∑κ,ω         q̂(ω1 ) q̂(κ1 )
                                                                                         πt0 (λ, κ, ω )
                             ŵ(λ)     T̂ (λ)
                                    =                                                                             1/θ ,
                            ŵ(λ1 )   T̂ (λ1 )
                                               
                                                                   q̂(ω 0 ) q̂(κ 0 ) θ
                                                                                   
                                                   ∑κ 0 ,ω 0       q̂(ω1 ) q̂(κ1 )
                                                                                         π t0   (λ, κ 0 , ω 0 )


                                                                    q̂(ω ) q̂(κ ) θ
                                                                                  
                                                                   q̂(ω1 ) q̂(κ1 )
                                π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) =                                              ,
                                                             q̂(ω ) q̂(κ 0 ) θ
                                                             0             
                                                                                      0   0
                                                   ∑κ 0 ,ω 0 q̂(ω1 ) q̂(κ1 ) πt0 (λ, κ , ω )

and
                                                                                                                           ŵ(λ) L̂(λ)
                                         ζ t (ω ) ∑λ,κ wt0 (λ) Lt0 (λ) πt0 (λ, κ, ω ) ŵ(λ1 ) L̂(λ1 ) π̂ (λ, κ, ω )
                         (1−α)(1−ρ)
 â (ω )        q̂ (ω )
                                        = 0 1                                                                                  .
â (ω1 )       q̂ (ω1 )                   ζ t0 (ω ) ∑ 0 0 w (λ0 ) L (λ0 ) π (λ0 , κ 0 , ω ) ŵ(λ0 ) L̂(λ0 ) π̂ (λ0 , κ 0 , ω )
                                                           λ ,κ        t0           t0               t0                    ŵ(λ1 ) L̂(λ1 )


C.1        Baseline
Here we describe in detail the steps that we follow to obtain our measures of changes in
labor composition, occupation shifters, equipment productivity and labor productivity.
   First, the relative shocks to labor composition L̂ (λ) / L̂(λ1 ) are directly observed in
the data.
   Second, we measure relative changes in equipment productivity (to the power θ) using
equation (11) as
                                                                                                            !
                                q̂(κ2 )θ                  1                π̂ (λ, κ2 , ω )
                                q̂(κ1 )θ
                                         = exp                     ∑
                                                      N (κ1 , κ2 ) λ,ω
                                                                       log
                                                                           π̂ (λ, κ1 , ω )
                                                                                                                  ,

dropping all (λ, ω ) pairs for which πt (λ, κ1 , ω ) = 0 or πt (λ, κ2 , ω ) = 0 in either period
t0 or t1 . N (κ1 , κ2 ) is the number of (λ, ω ) pairs over which we average; in the absence of
any zeros in allocations we have N (κ1 , κ2 ) = 900, which is the number of labor groups
multiplied by the number of occupations.
    Third, we measure changes in transformed occupation prices relative to occupation



                                                                    56
ω0 (to the power θ) using equation (13) as
                                                                             !
                       q̂(ω )θ               1               π̂ (λ, κ, ω )
                      q̂(ω0 )θ
                               = exp                ∑
                                         N (ω, ω0 ) λ,κ
                                                        log
                                                            π̂ (λ, κ, ω0 )
                                                                                 .


dropping all (λ, κ ) pairs for which πt (λ, κ, ω0 ) = 0 or πt (λ, κ, ω ) = 0 in either period t0
or t1 . N (ω, ω0 ) is the number of (λ, κ ) pairs over which we average; in the absence of
any zeros in allocations we have N (ω, ω0 ) = 60, which is the number of labor groups
multiplied by the number of equipment types. In our model, the estimates of the relative
occupation shifters for any two occupations ω A and ω B should not depend on the choice
of the reference category ω0 . However, even if this prediction of the model is right, the
fact that some of the values of πt (λ, κ, ω0 ) are equal to 0 in the data implies that the
estimates of changes in relative transformed occupation prices (to the power θ) vary with
the choice of ω0 . In order to avoid this sensitivity to the choice of ω0 , we compute changes
in relative transformed occupation prices using the following geometric average
                                                                          !
                     q̂(ω )θ           1            q̂(ω )θ       q̂(ω1 )θ
                                       30 ∑
                             = exp             log          − log
                    q̂(ω1 )θ              ω0       q̂(ω0 )θ       q̂(ω0 )θ

where, for each ω and ω0 , q̂(ω )θ /q̂(ω0 )θ is calculated as described above. This expression
yields estimates that do not depend on the choice of ω1 . Furthermore, as Section C.2.
shows, this approach yields measures of relative changes in occupation shifters that are
very similar to those that arise from projecting changes in allocations on a set of fixed
effects.
    Third, given our measures of changes in equipment and transformed occupation prices
(both to the power θ), we construct ŝ (λ) using equation (15). Given ŝ (λ), we estimate θ
using equation (16) as described in Section 4.3.
    Fourth, given the measures of changes in equipment productivity and transformed
occupation prices (both to the power θ) in equations (11) and (13), the estimate of θ, and
observed values both of the initial allocation πt0 (λ, κ, ω ) and changes in relative wages
ŵ (λ) /ŵ (λ1 ), we measure changes in labor productivity T̂ (λ) / T̂ (λ1 ) using equation
(14).
    Fifth, using data on changes in payments to occupations, ζ̂ (ω ), the measures of changes
in equipment productivity and transformed occupation prices (both to the power θ) in
equations (11) and (13), and an estimate of θ, we estimate ρ as described in Section 4.3.
    Finally, we measure changes in occupation shifters, â (ω ) / â (ω1 ), using equation (12).
A variable in this equation is the relative changes in total payments to occupations ω


                                                57
relative to those in a benchmark occupation ω1 , ζ̂ (ω )/ζ̂ (ω1 ). We construct this variable
as follows. The initial levels, ζ t0 (ω ) /ζ t0 (ω1 ), are calculated directly using the observed
values of πt0 (λ, κ, ω ), wt0 (λ), and Lt0 (λ). The terminal levels, ζ t1 (ω ) /ζ t1 (ω1 ), are con-
structed as
                                                                                  ŵ(λ)
          ζ t1 ( ω )         ∑λ,κ wt0 (λ) Lt0 (λ) πt0 (λ, κ, ω ) ŵ(λ1 ) L̂ (λ) π̂ (λ, κ, ω )
                      =                                                   ŵ(λ0 )
                                                                                                               ,
          ζ t1 ( ω1 )   ∑λ0 ,κ 0 wt0 (λ0 ) Lt0 (λ0 ) πt0 (λ0 , κ 0 , ω1 ) ŵ(λ1 ) L̂ (λ0 ) π̂ (λ0 , κ 0 , ω1 )

where π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) are those constructed by the model given the measures of q̂ (ω )θ /q̂ (ω )θ
and q̂ (κ )θ /q̂ (κ1 )θ . The correlation between log(ζ̂ (ω )/ζ̂ (ω1 )) implied by the model and
in the data is 0.77 between 1984 and 2003; the correlation between log(ζ̂ (ω )/ζ̂ (ω1 )) im-
plied by the model using the alternative approach in Appendix C.3 and in the data is 1
and the quantitative results we obtain from these two approaches are very similar.


C.2    Alternative approach 1: Regression based
Instead of using the expressions in equations (11) and (13), we can measure q̂(ω )θ /q̂(ω1 )θ
and q̂(κ )θ /q̂(κ1 )θ using the coefficients of a regression of the observed changes in the
log of factor allocations on labor group, occupation, and equipment type fixed effects.
Specifically, we can express equation (8) as

                                      π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) = q̂ (λ) q̂ (ω )θ q̂ (κ )θ

where we define
                                            ∑        ω0        q̂ κ 0        πt0 λ, κ 0 , ω 0
                                                          θ            θ                      
                                q̂ (λ) ≡        q̂
                                            0 0
                                           κ ,ω

Hence, in the presence of multiplicative measurement error ι t (λ, κ, ω ) in the observed
changes in allocations, we have

               log π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) = log q̂ (λ) + log q̂ (ω )θ + log q̂ (κ )θ + ι t (λ, κ, ω ) .

Using this equation, we regress observed values of log π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) on labor group, equip-
ment, and occupation effects. Exponentiating the resulting occupation and equipment
fixed effects, we obtain estimates of q̂ (ω )θ /q̂ (ω1 )θ and q̂ (κ )θ /q̂ (κ1 )θ . Using these es-
timates instead of those derived from equations (11) and (13), we can recover measures
of occupation shifters, â (ω ) / â(ω1 ), and labor productivity, T̂ (λ) / T̂ (λ1 ), as well as esti-
mate ρ and θ, following the same steps outlined in Appendix C.1.


                                                           58
    Our alternative and baseline approaches are identical in the absence of zeros in the
allocation data. In practice, the correlation between the measures obtained using these
two approaches is above 0.99 for both equipment productivity and transformed occupa-
tion prices (both to the power θ). We use the procedure described in Appendix C.1 as our
baseline approach simply because, in our opinion, it more clearly highlights the variation
in the data that is being used to identify the changes in occupation prices and equipment
productivity (to the power θ).


C.3        Alternative approach 2: Matching income shares
                                                               q̂(ω )θ            q̂(κ )θ
Our baseline approach yields estimate of q̂(ω )θ and q̂(κ )θ that do not exactly match ob-
                                             1            1
served changes in total labor income by occupation, ζ t (ω ) ≡ ∑λ,κ wt (λ) Lt (λ) πt (λ, κ, ω ),
and by equipment type, ζ t (κ ) ≡ ∑λ,ω wt (λ) Lt (λ) πt (λ, κ, ω ). In this alternative ap-
                           q̂(ω )θ             q̂(κ )θ                     ζ̂ (κ )
                                                                      ζ̂ (ω )
proach we calibrate       q̂(ω1 )θ
                                       and    q̂(κ1 )θ
                                                          to match   ζ̂ (ω1 )
                                                                                and
                                                                          ζ̂ (κ1 )
                                                                                   exactly.
                                                                       q̂(ω )θ             q̂(κ )θ
     For each time period           we solve simultaneously for q̂(ω )θ and q̂(κ )θ                     to match observed
                                                                             1                 1
             ζ̂ (ω )     ζ̂ (κ )                                  q̂(ω )θ            q̂(κ )θ
values of ζ̂ ω and ζ̂ κ .           Specifically, for every t0 , q̂(ω )θ and q̂(κ )θ is                 the solution to the
            ( )      ( )                                              1                  1
following non-linear system of equations:

             ζ̂ (ω )  ζ t (ω1 ) ∑λ,κ wt0 (λ) Lt0 (λ) πt0 (λ, κ, ω ) ŵ (λ) L̂ (λ) π̂ (λ, κ, ω )
                     = 0
            ζ̂ (ω1 )  ζ t0 (ω ) ∑λ,κ wt0 (λ) Lt0 (λ) πt0 (λ, κ, ω1 ) ŵ (λ) L̂ (λ) π̂ (λ, κ, ω1 )

             ζ̂ (κ )  ζ t (κ1 ) ∑λ,ω wt0 (λ) Lt0 (λ) πt0 (λ, κ, ω ) ŵ (λ) L̂ (λ) π̂ (λ, κ, ω )
                     = 0
            ζ̂ (κ1 )  ζ t0 (κ ) ∑λ,ω wt0 (λ) Lt0 (λ) πt0 (λ, κ1 , ω ) ŵ (λ) L̂ (λ) π̂ (λ, κ1 , ω )
                         ζ̂ (ω )          ζ̂ (κ )                                                                             (q̂(ω )q̂(κ ))θ
where ŵ (λ) L̂ (λ),               and ζ̂           are observed in the data, and π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) =
                                                                                                                ∑κ 0 ,ω 0 (q̂(ω 0 )q̂(κ 0 )) πt0 (λ,κ 0 ,ω 0 )
                        ζ̂ (ω1 )           (κ1 )                                                                                            θ

                             q̂(ω )θ                q̂(κ )θ                                 q̂(ω )θ   q̂(κ )θ
is constructed given q̂(ω )θ and q̂(κ )θ . After solving for q̂(ω )θ and q̂( )θ , the remaining
                         1           1                           1          1
shocks and parameters are determined exactly as in our baseline procedure. We also con-
                                               q̂(κ )θ
sider a variation in which we first measure q̂(κ )θ using our baseline procedure, and then
                                                                     1
 q̂(ω )θ                            ζ̂ (ω )
      in order to match
q̂(ω1 )θ
                               in the data. Results using these alternative approaches are
                                   ζ̂ (ω1 )
very similar to our baseline results.


C.4        Estimation of θ and ρ using equations in levels
In Section 4.3, we describe approaches to estimate θ and ρ that derive moment conditions
from equilibrium equations of our model expressed in time differences. One could also
estimate θ and ρ using moment conditions derived from the same equilibrium equations


                                                                59
expressed in levels instead of in time differences. In order to derive an estimating equa-
tion in levels that is analogous to equation 16, note that we can express wages as

                               wt (λ) = ᾱγ × Tt (λ) × St (λ)1/θ                                             (26)

where St (λ) is a labor-group-specific average of equipment productivities and trans-
formed occupation prices (both to the power θ),

                                         ∑ (T (λ, κ, ω )qt (κ ) qt (ω ))
                                                                                       θ
                            St ( λ ) ≡                                                     .                 (27)
                                         κ,ω


To derive an estimating equation from expressions (26) and (27), we decompose log Tt (λ)
into a labor group effect, a time effect, and labor-group-time-specific deviations and ex-
press equation (26) as

                  log wt (λ) = ς θ2 (t) + β θ2 (λ) + β θ log st (λ) + ι θ2 (λ, t) ,                          (28)

where st (λ) ≡ St (λ) qt (ω1 )−θ qt (κ1 )−θ . In order to use this expression to estimate θ,
we require an instrument for log st (λ) for the same reason we require an instrument for
log ŝ (λ, t) in our baseline approach. We use a similar instrument,
                                                                  θ
                                                        q t (κ )
                      χθ2 (λ, t) ≡ log ∑                                ∑ π1984 (λ, κ, ω ),
                                               κ       q t (κ1 )        ω

which is a labor-group-time-specific productivity shifter generated by the level rather
than change in equipment productivity, qt (κ )θ /qt (κ1 )θ . A higher value of equipment κ
productivity in period t raises the wage of group λ relatively more if a larger share of λ
workers use equipment κ.
   Similarly, we can derive an estimating equation in levels that is analogous to equation
(17) by decomposing log at (ω ) into an occupation effect, a time effect, and an occupation-
time-specific deviation and expressing equation (5) as

                                                                            qt (ω )θ
                log ζ t (ω ) = ς ρ2 (t) + β ρ2 (ω ) + β ρ log                              + ι ρ2 (ω, t) .   (29)
                                                                            q t ( ω1 ) θ

In order to use this expression to identify θ and ρ, we require an instrument for qt (ω )θ /qt (ω1 )θ
for the same reason we require an instrument for q̂ (ω, t)θ /q̂ (ω1 , t)θ in our baseline ap-




                                                         60
proach. We use a similar instrument

                                           q t (κ ) θ    L1984 (λ) π1984 (λ, κ, ω )
                  χρ2 (ω, t) ≡ log ∑                                                           ,
                                     λ,κ   qt (κ1 ) ∑λ0 ,κ 0 L1984 (λ0 ) π1984 (λ0 , κ 0 , ω )
                                                     θ


which is an occupation-time-specific productivity shifter generated by the level, rather
than change, in qt (κ )θ /qt (κ1 )θ . A higher value of equipment κ productivity in period t
lowers the price of occupation ω relatively more if a larger share of workers use equip-
ment κ in occupation ω.
    Using the estimating equations (28) and (29) and the instruments χθ2 (λ, t) and χρ2 (ω, t)
to estimate θ and ρ requires measures of (i ) qt (ω )θ /qt (ω1 )θ for all ω; (ii ) qt (κ )θ /qt (κ1 )θ
                                    −α
for all κ, where qt (κ ) ≡ pt (κ ) 1−α Tt (κ ); and (iii ) T (λ, κ, ω )θ for all (λ, κ, ω ). In order to
construct these measures, note that equation (3) can be expressed as

             log πt (λ, κ, ω ) = log qt (κ )θ + log qt (ω )θ + log qt (λ) + ι tL (λ, κ, ω )        (30)

where                                                                                 ! −1
                                      ∑         λ, κ 0 , ω qt κ
                                                           0       0 θ          0 θ
                                                                               
                        qt (λ) ≡          T                              qt ω
                                      0 0
                                     κ ,ω

and
                                   ι tL (λ, κ, ω ) = log T (λ, κ, ω )θ .

Hence, regressing observed values of log πt (λ, κ, ω ) on labor group, equipment, and oc-
cupation effects and exponentiating the resulting occupation and equipment fixed effects,
we obtain estimates of qt (ω )θ /qt (ω1 )θ and qt (κ )θ /qt (κ1 )θ . Finally, exponentiating the
average across time of the resulting residual within (λ, κ, ω ), we obtain an estimate of
T (λ, κ, ω )θ .
   Given equations (28) and (29) and measures of both all their covariates and the instru-
ments χθ2 (λ, t) and χρ2 (ω, t), we estimate θ and ρ using a GMM estimator. We derive
the two moments needed for identification of these two parameters by assuming that
Eλ,t [ι θ2 (λ, t) × χθ2 (λ, t)] = 0 and Eω,t ι ρ2 (ω, t) × χρ2 (ω, t) = 0. The resulting esti-
                                                                    

mates are θ =1.58, with a standard error of 0.14, and ρ = 3.27, with a standard error of
1.34.




                                                      61
D     Factor allocation in Germany
Constructing factor allocations, πt (λ, κ, ω ), using U.S. data from the October Supplement
faces certain limitations. For example, (i ) our view of computerization is narrow, (ii )
our computer-use variable is zero-one at the individual level, (iii ) we are not using any
information on the allocation of non-computer equipment, and (iv) the computer use
question was discontinued after 2003. Here, we use data on the allocation of German
workers to different types of equipment in order to address possible concerns raised by
limitations (ii ) and (iii ).
    We use the 1986, 1992, 1999, and 2006 waves of the German Qualification and Working
Conditions survey, which asks detailed questions about usage of different types of equip-
ment (i.e. tools) at work. Specifically, respondents are asked which tool, out of many,
they use most frequently at work. In 1986, 1992, and 1999, respondents are also asked
whether or not they use each tool, regardless of whether it is the tool they use most fre-
quently, whereas in 2006 respondents are asked about the share of time they spend using
computers. The list of tools changes over time (discussed below) and is extensive. For
instance, workers are asked if they use simple transportation tools such as wheel barrows
or fork lifts, computers, and writing implements such as pencils. After cleaning, there are
between 10,700 and 21,150 observations, depending on the year.
    We group workers into twelve labor groups using three education groups (low edu-
cation workers who do not have post-secondary education or an apprenticeship degree,
medium education workers who have either post-secondary education or an apprentice-
ship degree, and high education workers who have a university degree), two age groups
(20-39 and 40-up), and two genders. We consider twelve occupations. We drop work-
ers who do not report using any tool most frequently. Because the list of tools changes
over time, we allocate workers to computer usage (using the question about most used
equipment type or the questions about whether a worker uses a type of equipment at
all) as follows. In 1986 and 1992, we allocate a worker to computer usage if she reports
using a computer terminal, computer-controlled medical instrument, electronic lists or
forms, personal computer, computer, screen operated system, or CAD graphics systems.
In 1999 we allocate a worker to computer usage if she reports using computerized control
or measure tools, personal computers, computers with connection to intranet or internet,
laptops, computers to control machines, or other computers. In 2006 we allocate a worker
to computer usage if she reports using computerized control or measure tools, comput-
ers, personal computers, laptops, peripheries, or computers to control machines. We have
considered a range of alternative allocations and obtained similar results.


                                            62
   According to our baseline definition, the share of workers for whom computers are
the most-used tool rose from roughly 5% to 50% between 1986 and 2006. Clearly, no other
equipment type reported in the data either grew or shrank at a similar pace.
Computer-education and computer-gender comparative advantage. We first use the
question about the most used equipment type to study comparative advantage in Ger-
many. This question helps address limitation (iii ) in the U.S. data, since here we are us-
ing information on the allocation of non-computer equipment, both by dropping workers
who do not report a most used equipment type and by including in the group of computer
users only those workers who report that they use computers more than any other type of
equipment. Specifically, we construct histograms in Figure 3 for Germany—analogous to
Figure 2 for the U.S.—detailing education × computer and gender × computer compar-
ative advantage. The left panel of Figure 3 shows that German workers with a high level
of education have a strong comparative advantage using computers relative to workers
with a low level of education, the middle panel shows that German workers with a high
level of education have a mild comparative advantage using computers relative to work-
ers with a medium level of education, and the right panel shows that women have no
discernible comparative advantage with computers relative to men, where each of these
patterns is identified within occupation and holding all other worker characteristics fixed.
These patterns in Germany resemble the patterns we document in the U.S. in Figure 2.




Figure 3: Computer relative to non-computer usage (constructed using the question about
whether computers are the most used tool) for high relative to low education, high rela-
tive to medium education, and female relative to male workers, respectively, in Germany.
Outliers have been truncated.

    Second, we study the extent to which allocating workers to computers using the most-
used or the used-at-all-question matters for measuring comparative advantage, since we
only have access to the second type of question in the U.S. In the three years with avail-
able data (1986, 1992, and 1999) we construct allocations separately using these two ques-
tions. We then construct the share of hours worked with computers within each (λ, ω ),
      Comp                   πt (λ,κ    ,ω )
i.e. πt    (λ, ω ) ≡ π λ,κ ,ω +πCompλ,κ                 , separately using each type of question.
                       t( Comp )     t(   Non−comp ,ω )



                                               63
                    Comp
The correlation of πt     (λ, ω ) constructed using the two different questions is high: 0.86,
0.78, and 0.55 in 1999, 1992, and 1986, respectively. To further understand the similarities
and differences in measures of comparative advantage constructed using these questions,
in Figure 4 we replicate the histograms in Figure 3 using the question on whether com-
puters are used at all. The patterns of comparative advantage of education groups with
computers, the left and middle panels of Figure 4, replicate the patterns in Figure 3: high
education German workers have a strong and mild comparative advantage using com-
puters relative to low and medium education German workers, respectively. However,
constructing allocations using the used-at-all-question we measure a mild comparative
advantage between men and computers in the right panel in Figure 4, unlike what we
observe in Figure 3 in Germany or in Figure 2 in the U.S.




Figure 4: Computer relative to non-computer usage (constructed using questions about
whether computers are used at all) for high relative to low education, high relative to
medium education, and female relative to male workers, respectively, in Germany. Out-
liers have been truncated.

   Finally, we use the question asked only in 2006 about the share of a worker’s time
spent using a computer. When constructing allocations using this question, we allocate
the share of each worker’s hours to computer or non-computer accordingly, whereas in
our baseline approach we must allocate all of each worker’s hours either to computers or
non-computer equipment. Hence, this question helps address limitation (ii ) in the U.S.
data. Since figures like 2, 3, and 4 are noisy when constructed using a single year of data
(using any question to determine allocations), here we focus instead on the correlation in
                                                                  Comp
the share of hours worked with computers within each (λ, ω ), πt       (λ, ω ), constructed
using the most-used equipment type question and the share of hours worked with com-
puters question. This correlation is above 0.9.


E    Multivariate Fréchet
Recall that in our baseline approach, a worker z ∈ Zt (λ) supplies e (z) × ε (z, κ, ω ) ef-
ficiency units of labor if teamed with equipment κ in occupation ω. Hence, in spite of

                                             64
the fact that each worker z ∈ Zt (λ) draws ε (z, κ, ω ) across (κ, ω ) pairs from a Fréchet
distribution with CDF G (ε) = exp ε−θ , the introduction of e (z) allows for correlation
                                            

in efficiency units across (κ, ω ) pairs within a given worker in an unrestricted way.
    A more typical approach to allow for correlation—see e.g. Ramondo and Rodriǵuez-
Clare (2013) and Hsieh et al. (2013)—assumes away e (z) (i.e. assumes its distribution
across z is degenerate) and instead uses a more parametric assumption: each worker
z ∈ Zt (λ), draws the vector {ε (z, κ, ω )}κ,ω from a multivariate Fréchet distribution,
                                                                     !1− ν ( λ ) 
                G (ε (z) ; λ) = exp −    ∑ ε (z, κ, ω )−θ̃(λ)/1−ν(λ)             .
                                          κ,ω


The parameter θ̃ (λ) > 1 governs the λ−specific dispersion of efficiency units across
(κ, ω ) pairs; a higher value of θ̃ (λ) decreases this dispersion. The parameter 0 ≤ ν (λ) ≤
1 governs the λ−specific correlation of each worker’s efficiency units across (κ, ω ) pairs;
a higher value of ν (λ) increases this correlation. We define θ (λ) ≡ θ̃ (λ) / (1 − ν (λ)). In
what follows, we use this generalized distribution.
Imposing a common θ (λ) across λ. It is straightforward to show that our baseline equa-
tions, parameterization strategy, and results hold exactly in the case in which a worker
z ∈ Zt (λ) supplies e (z) × ε (z, κ, ω ) efficiency units of labor if {ε (z, κ, ω )}κ,ω is drawn
from a multivariate Fréchet distribution and if θ (λ) is constant across λ. Hence, given
θ = θ (λ) for all λ, all of our results are independent of the values of θ̃ (λ) and ν (λ).
Our baseline assumption that ν (λ) = 0 is, therefore, without loss of generality under the
common assumption, see e.g. Hsieh et al. (2013), that θ (λ) is constant across λ. Note that
under the assumption that θ (λ) is common across λ, we can incorporate both a multi-
variate Fréchet distribution of {ε (z, κ, ω )}κ,ω and an arbitrary distribution of e (z).
Allowing θ (λ) to vary across λ. In what follows, we describe the model, parameteriza-
tion, and results allowing θ (λ) to vary across λ. In this section, we assume away e (z)
(that is, we assume that its distribution is degenerate).
    Our baseline equilibrium equations in levels—(3), (4), and (5)—and in changes—(7),
(8), and (9)—are unchanged except for θ (λ) replacing θ. The key distinction between our
baseline and extended model is the parameterization.
    When θ (λ) varies across λ, we parameterize θ (λ) first, following the approaches in
Lagakos and Waugh (2013) and Hsieh et al. (2013). Our assumption on the distribution
of idiosyncratic productivity implies that the distribution of wages within labor group
λ is Fréchet with shape parameter θ̃ (λ), where θ (λ) ≡ θ̃ (λ) / (1 − ν (λ)). We, there-
fore, use the empirical distribution of wages within each λ to estimate θ̃ (λ), separately

                                                65
for each labor group λ, using maximum likelihood. Specifically, we jointly estimate the
shape and scale parameter for each λ in each year t using maximum likelihood (MLE).
Figure 5 plots the empirical and predicted wage distributions for all middle-aged work-




Figure 5: Empirical and predicted (Fréchet distribution estimated using maximum likeli-
hood) wage distributions for all middle-aged labor groups in 2003

ers in 2003. We average across years our estimates of the shape parameter to obtain θ̃ (λ).
Finally, we obtain an estimate of θ (λ) from θ̃ (λ) using Hsieh et al.’s (2013) implied esti-
mate of ν ≡ ν (λ) ≈ 0.1. Consistent with the observation that higher earning labor groups
have more within-group wage dispersion, see e.g. Lemieux (2006), we find that θ (λ) is
lower for more educated groups than less educated groups—averaging within each of
the five education groups across age and gender, we obtain estimates that fall mono-

                                             66
tonically from 3.46 amongst high school dropouts to 2.21 amongst those with graduate
training—for men than women—averaging within each gender across age and education,
we obtain an estimate of 2.41 for men and 2.82 for women—and for older than younger
workers—averaging within each age group across education and gender we obtain es-
timates that fall monotonically with age from 2.96 to 2.37. The average across λ varies
non-monotonically across years from a low of 2.56 to a high of 2.69. Finally, averaging
across all groups and years yields an estimates of θ = 2.62.
    Given values of θ (λ), we measure changes in equipment productivity and trans-
formed occupation prices, not to the power θ (λ), using the following variants of equa-
tions (11) and (13)
                                            π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) 1/θ (λ)
                                                          
                                q̂(κ )
                                       =
                               q̂(κ1 )     π̂ (λ, κ1 , ω )
and                                                                   1/θ (λ)
                                       q̂(ω )          π̂ (λ, κ, ω )
                                              =                                   .
                                      q̂(ω1 )         π̂ (λ, κ, ω1 )
Given changes in transformed occupation prices, we measure changes in occupation
shifters using equation (12). Finally, we could also estimate ρ using the following variant
of equation (17)
                                                ρ      q̂ (ω )
                       log ζ̂ (ω ) = βρ (t) + β 1 log          + ιρ (ω ) ,
                                                      q̂ (ω1 )
            ρ
where β 1 ≡ (1 − α) (1 − ρ) is the coefficient of interest, using the same instrument as in
our baseline approach.37
    Table 13 reports the results of our decomposition of the skill premium and the gender
gap over the period 1984-2003 under three alternative specifications. The first row reports
our baseline results in which θ is constant across all groups and estimated as described
in Section 4.3. The second row reports results in which θ (λ) is estimated separately for
each λ, but we use the average value θ for each λ. Finally the final row reports results
using distinct values of θ (λ) across each λ. The key message of Table 13 is that our results
are robust. This is particularly true comparing between the second and the third rows of
Table 13, in which the average value of θ (λ) is constant by construction.




  37 In   practice, we will impose the same ρ as in our baseline in our exercises below.

                                                         67
                               Skill premium                       Gender gap
                     Labor     Occ.     Equip.   Labor   Labor    Occ.    Equip.   Labor
                     comp.    shifters prod.     prod.   comp.   shifters prod.    prod.
          Baseline   -0.114    0.049    0.159    0.056   0.042   -0.067   -0.047   -0.061
          θ = 2.62   -0.094    0.058    0.108    0.078   0.035   -0.058   -0.030   -0.079
          θ (λ)      -0.098    0.046    0.110    0.093   0.036   -0.061   -0.036   -0.070

Table 13: Decomposing changes in the log skill premium and gender gap between 1984
and 2003 allowing θ (λ) to vary with θ

F     Additional details

F.1   Occupation characteristics
Here we use the standardized characteristics of our thirty occupations, derived from
O*NET as described in Appendix B, to understand how each shock shapes the observed
evolution of labor income shares across occupations. The first row of Table 14 shows
that, if we regress the change in the share of labor income earned in each occupation
between 1984 and 2003, measured using the MORG CPS, separately on six occupation
characteristics, we find a systematic contraction in occupations that are intensive in rou-
tine manual as well as non-routine manual physical tasks and a systematic expansion of
occupations that are intensive in non-routine cognitive analytical, non-routine cognitive
interpersonal, and socially perceptive tasks. This growth pattern of different occupations
depending on their task content has been previously documented in a large literature.
Rows two through five replicate this exercise, but instead of using the change in labor in-
come shares across occupations from the data, we use the change predicted by our model
in response to each shock separately. Because ρ 6= 1, shocks other than occupation shifters
generate changes in occupation income shares. We find that these other shocks play a sig-
nificant role in accounting for the observed systematic evolution of occupation income
shares over the years 1984-2003.


F.2   Worker aggregation
In theory we could incorporate as many labor groups, equipment types, and occupations
as the data permits without complicating our measurement of shocks or our estimation of
parameters. In practice, as we increase the number of labor groups, equipment types, or
occupations, we also increase both the share of (λ, κ, ω ) triplets for which πt (λ, κ, ω ) = 0
and measurement error in factor allocations in general.
    Our objective here is to understand the extent to which our particular disaggregation

                                                 68
                                  Non-routine            Non-routine           Routine         Routine         Non-routine   Social
                                  cogn. anlyt.           cogn. inter.          cogn.           man.            man. phys.    perc.
 Data                             0.173∗∗∗               0.257∗∗∗              -0.035          -0.273∗∗∗       -0.214∗∗∗     0.244∗∗∗
 Labor composition                0.038∗∗∗               0.052∗∗∗              0.010           -0.042∗∗∗       -0.042∗∗∗     0.032∗∗∗
 Occupation shifters              -0.044                 0.061                 -0.072          -0.093          -0.030        0.147∗∗∗
 Equipment prod.                  0.068∗∗∗               0.059∗∗∗              0.042∗∗         -0.063∗∗∗       -0.073∗∗∗     0.026
 Labor productivity               0.002∗∗                0.004∗∗∗              -0.001          -0.004∗∗∗       -0.005∗∗∗     0.004∗∗∗

Table 14: The evolution of labor income shares across occupations in the data and pre-
dicted separately by each shock. Each cell represents the coefficient estimated from a
separate OLS regression across thirty occupations of the change in the income share be-
tween 1984 and 2003—either in the data or predicted in the model by each shock—on a
constant and a single occupation characteristic derived from O*NET.
Non-routine cogn. anlyt. refers to Non-routine cognitive analytical; Non-routine cogn. inter. refers to Non-routine cognitive inter-
personal; Routine cogn. refers to Routine cognitive; Non-routine man. phys. refers to Non-routine manual physical; and Social perc.
refers to Social perceptiveness
*** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level



may be driving our results. To do so, we decrease the number of labor groups from 30
to 10 by dropping age as a characteristic. In this case, the share of (λ, κ, ω ) observations
for which πt (λ, κ, ω ) = 0 falls from (roughly) 27% to 12%. Because, in our baseline, we
composition adjust the skill premium and the gender gap using gender, education, and
age, whereas here we only use gender and education, we find slightly different changes
in the skill premium, 16.1 instead of 15.1 log points, and the gender gap, -13.2 instead of
-13.3 log points, between 1984 and 2003.

                                                         Skill premium                                          Gender gap
                                           Labor         Occ.     Equip.            Labor        Labor         Occ.    Equip.    Labor
                                           comp.        shifters prod.              prod.        comp.        shifters prod.     prod.
 Baseline                                  -0.114         0.049         0.159        0.056        0.042        -0.067   -0.047   -0.061
 10 groups baseline θ, ρ                   -0.097         0.064         0.157        0.037        0.041        -0.068   -0.048   -0.055
 10 groups re-estimate θ, ρ                -0.116         0.073         0.190        0.013        0.048        -0.081   -0.057   -0.040

Table 15: Decomposing changes in the log skill premium and gender gap between 1984
and 2003 with 10 rather than 30 labor groups

    We conduct our decomposition with 10 labor groups using two different approaches.
In both approaches we re-measure all shocks. However, in one approach we use our
baseline values of θ and ρ estimated with 30 labor groups, θ = 1.78 and ρ = 1.78, whereas
in the other approach we re-estimate these parameters with 10 labor groups using our
baseline estimation approach, yielding θ = 1.39 and ρ = 1.63. We report results for both
approaches and our baseline in Table 15. Our baseline results are robust to decreasing the


                                                                      69
number of labor groups.


G        Average wage variation within a labor group
Our baseline model implies that the average wage of workers in group λ is the same
across all equipment-occupation pairs. This implication is rejected by the data. In Sec-
tion G.1, we argue that these differences in average wages across (κ, ω ) do not drive our
results. In Section G.2, we show that incorporating preference shifters for working in dif-
ferent occupations makes our model consistent with differences in average wages across
occupations within a labor group and indicate how to decompose changes in wages in
this case.


G.1      Between-within decomposition
Here, we conduct a between-within decomposition of changes in the average wage of
group λ, wt (λ)/wt , where wt is the composition-adjusted average wage across all labor
groups. We consider variation in average wages within a labor group across occupations
but not across equipment types, wt (λ, ω ), because the October CPS contains wage data
for only a subset of observations (those respondents in the Outgoing Rotation Group).
Measures of average wages across workers employed in particular (κ, ω ) pairs would
therefore likely be noisy.
    The following accounting identity must hold at each t,

                                        wt ( λ )         wt (λ, ω )
                                         wt
                                                 =   ∑      wt
                                                                    πt (λ, ω ) ,
                                                     ω

and, therefore, we can write

                       wt ( λ )          wt (λ, ω )                 wt (λ, ω )
                   ∆
                        wt
                                =   ∑∆      wt
                                                    π̄t (λ, ω ) + ∑
                                                                       wt
                                                                               ∆πt (λ, ω ) ,            (31)
                                    ω                             ω

where ∆xt = xt1 − xt0 and x̄t = ( xt1 + xt0 ) /2. The first term on the right-hand side
of the equation (31) is the within component whereas the second term is the between
component. According to the model, the contribution to changes in wages of the within
component should be 100% for each labor group.38 We conduct this decomposition using
the MORG CPS data between 1984 and 2003 for each of 30 labor groups and find that the
  38 Of course,   this does not mean that changes in occupation shifters do not drive changes in wages in our
model.

                                                           70
median contribution across labor groups of the within component is above 86%. Hence,
while in practice there are large differences in average wages for a labor group across
occupations, these differences do not appear to be first order in explaining changes in
labor group average wages over time.


G.2       Compensating differentials
Here we extend our model to incorporate heterogeneity across labor groups in workers’
preferences for working in each equipment-occupation pair. This simple extension im-
plies that the average wage of workers in group λ varies across equipment-occupation
pairs. We show how to use data on average wages across equipment-occupation pairs to
identify the parameters of the extended model.
Environment and equilibrium. The indirect utility function of a worker z ∈ Z (λ) earn-
ing income It (z) and employed in occupation ω with equipment κ is

                                  U (z, κ, ω ) = It (z) ut (λ, κ, ω )                             (32)

where ut (λ, κ, ω ) > 0 is a time-varying preference shifter.39 We have normalized the
price index to one. We normalize ut (λ, κ1 , ω1 ) = 1 for all λ and t. This model limits to
our baseline model when ut (λ, ω, κ ) = 1 for all t and (λ, κ, ω ).
   A occupation production unit hiring k units of equipment κ and l efficiency units of
labor λ earns profits pt (ω ) kα [ Tt (λ, κ, ω ) l ]1−α − pt (κ ) k − vt (λ, κ, ω ) l. Conditional on
positive entry in (λ, κ, ω ), the profit maximizing choice of equipment quantity and the
zero profit condition yield
                                                   −α           1
                         vt (λ, κ, ω ) = ᾱpt (κ ) 1−α pt (ω ) 1−α Tt (λ, κ, ω ) .

Facing the wage profile vt (λ, κ, ω ), each worker z ∈ Z (λ) chooses (κ, ω ) to maximize
her indirect utility, ε t (z, κ, ω ) ut (λ, κ, ω ) vt (λ, κ, ω ).
    In our extended model, preference parameters ut (λ, κ, ω ) and productivity parame-
ters, Tt (λ, κ, ω ), affect worker utility in the same way. Hence, they also affect worker
allocation in the same way: the probability that a randomly sampled worker, z ∈ Z (λ),




  39 Inthis extended environment it is straightforward to allow for ut (λ, κ, ω ) = 0, in which case no
workers in group λ would choose (κ, ω ) in period t.

                                                    71
uses equipment κ in occupation ω is
                                        h                                      −α                 1
                                                                                                        iθ (λ)
                                      ut (λ, κ, ω ) Tt (λ, κ, ω ) pt (κ )   pt (ω )
                                                                              1− α               1− α

          πt (λ, κ, ω ) =                                                                        iθ (λ) .                         (33)
                                                                              −α             1
                                      h
                                                0   0          0    0     0
                             ∑κ 0 ,ω 0 ut (λ, κ , ω ) Tt (λ, κ , ω ) pt (κ ) 1 − α      0
                                                                                   pt (ω ) 1 − α



On the other hand, preferences and productivities affect wages differently. The average
wage of workers z ∈ Z (λ) teamed with equipment κ in occupation ω is now given by

                                                                                                                       θ (λ) !1/θ (λ)
                   γ (λ)                                                                   −α                    1
                                    ∑           ut λ, κ 0 , ω Tt (λ, κ 0 , ω 0 ) pt κ
                                                             0                          0                  0
                                                                                                            
                                                                                          1− α                   1− α
wt (λ, κ, ω ) =                                                                                  pt ω
                ut (λ, κ, ω )       0 0
                                   κ ,ω
                                                                                                (34)
If ut (λ, κ, ω ) > ut(λ, κ 0 , ω 0 ),   then the average wage of group λ is lower in (κ, ω ) than in
(κ 0 , ω 0 ) in period t.
      The general equilibrium condition is identical to our baseline model and is given by
equation (5), although total labor income in occupation ω is now given by

                             ζ t (ω ) ≡     ∑ wt (λ, κ, ω ) Lt (λ) πt (λ, κ, ω ) .
                                                λ,κ



Parameterization. Here, we focus on measuring preference shifters and shocks under the
restriction that θ (λ) = θ for all λ, taking θ as given.
    From equation (34), we have
                                   wt (λ, κ, ω )          1
                                                   =               .              (35)
                                  wt (λ, κ1 , ω1 )   ut (λ, κ, ω )
Hence, we measure preference shifters directly from average wages.
  Equations (6) and (33) give us,

                                  πt (λ, κ2 , ω )   ut (λ, κ2 , ω )θ qt (κ2 )θ
                                                  =
                                  πt (λ, κ1 , ω )   ut (λ, κ1 , ω )θ qt (κ1 )θ

which, together with equation (35), gives us

                                 q t (κ2 ) θ   πt (λ, κ2 , ω ) wt (λ, κ2 , ω )θ
                                             =
                                 q t (κ1 ) θ   πt (λ, κ1 , ω ) wt (λ, κ1 , ω )θ




                                                             72
Hence, we obtain

                       q̂(κ2 )θ            πt1 (λ, κ2 , ω )       πt (λ, κ2 , ω )
                log                = log                    − log 0
                      q̂κ (κ1 )θ           πt1 (λ, κ1 , ω )       πt0 (λ, κ1 , ω )
                                               wt (λ, κ2 , ω )          wt (λ, κ2 , ω )
                                       +θ log 1                 − θ log 0
                                               wt1 (λ, κ1 , ω )         wt0 (λ, κ1 , ω )

We can then average over all (λ, ω ) and then exponentiate, exactly as in our baseline, to
obtain a measure of changes in equipment productivity (to the power θ). We obtain a
measure of changes in transformed occupation prices to the power θ similarly and use
this to measure changes in occupation shifters using equation (12), as in our baseline
approach. Finally, we have
                                                                                        !1/θ
             wt (λ, κ1 , ω1 ) = Tt (λ) γ (λ)       ∑ [ut (λ, κ, ω ) qt (κ ) qt (ω )]θ
                                                   κ,ω


so that                                                                                     !1/θ
           ŵ (λ, κ1 , ω1 ) = T̂ (λ)    ∑ (û (λ, κ, ω ) q̂ (κ ) q̂ (ω ))θ πt0 (λ, κ, ω )
                                        κ,ω

Hence, given measures of changes in transformed occupation prices (to the power θ),
changes in equipment productivity (to the power θ), and changes in preference shifters as
well as observed changes in wages and observed allocations in period t0 , we can measure
changes in relative labor productivities using the previous expression for group λ relative
to group λ1 .


H     Evolving comparative advantage: Details
Here we study case 2 described in Section 6.3, where

                             Tt (λ, κ, ω ) ≡ Tt (ω ) Tt (λ, κ ) T (λ, κ, ω ) .                     (36)

Cases 1 and 3 are similar and available upon request.
   The equilibrium conditions are unchanged: equations (3), (4), and (5) hold as in our
baseline model. However, we can re-express the system in changes as follows. Defining
                                                                   −α
                                   qt (λ, κ ) ≡ Tt (λ, κ ) pt (κ ) 1−α ,




                                                    73
equations (7) and (8) become
                                                                                             !1/θ (λ)
                     ŵ (λ) =     ∑ πt0 (λ, κ, ω ) (q̂ (λ, κ ) q̂ (ω ))θ(λ)                               ,                  (37)
                                  κ,ω


                                                        (q̂ (ω ) q̂ (λ, κ ))θ (λ)
                    π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) =                                           θ (λ)
                                                                                                              ,              (38)
                                        ∑κ 0 ,ω 0 (q̂ (ω 0 ) q̂ (λ, κ 0 ))            πt0 (λ, κ 0 , ω 0 )
whereas equation (9) remains unchanged. Expressing equation (37) in relative terms
yields
                                                                                                      1/θ (λ)
                                                                           q̂(λ,κ ) q̂(ω ) θ (λ)
                                                                                           
                                             ∑κ,ω πt0 (λ, κ, ω )          q̂(λ,κ1 ) q̂(ω1 )
            ŵ (λ)     q̂ (λ, κ1 )
                    =                                                                                         1/θ (λ1 ) .   (39)
           ŵ (λ1 )   q̂ (λ1 , κ1 )                                      
                                                                              q̂(λ1 ,κ 0 ) q̂(ω 0 ) θ (λ1 )
                                                                                                   
                                        ∑κ 0 ,ω 0 πt0 (λ1 , κ 0 , ω 0 )       q̂(λ1 ,κ1 ) q̂(ω1 )


Hence, the decomposition requires that we measure q̂ (λ, κ ) /q̂ (λ, κ1 ) for each (λ, κ ) as
well as q̂ (λ, κ1 ) /q̂ (λ1 , κ1 ) for each λ.
   Here we provide an overview—similar in structure to that provided in Section 4.2—of
how we measure shocks taking as given the parameters α, ρ, and θ. Equations (3) and (36)
give us
                                         q̂ (λ, κ1 )θ    π̂ (λ, κ1 , ω )
                                                       =
                                         q̂ (λ, κ2 ) θ   π̂ (λ, κ2 , ω )

for each λ and ω. Hence, we can measure q̂ (λ, κ1 )θ /q̂ (λ, κ2 )θ for each λ as the exponen-
tial of the average across ω of the log of the right-hand side of the previous expression.
We can recover changes in transformed occupation prices to the power θ and use these
to measure changes in occupation shifters exactly as in our baseline. Finally, given these
measures, we can recover q̂ (λ, κ1 )θ /q̂ (λ1 , κ1 )θ to match changes in relative wages using
equation (39).


I   Model with international trade: details
In Section 7 we extended our closed economy model to allow for international trade in
equipment goods. We now additionally extend the model to allow for trade in occupa-
tions and in sectoral output. To do so, we must first include sectors in our model. We do
so in a closed economy version of our model first. We then consider the fully extended
open economy model. We show how to compute the two types of counterfactuals dis-


                                                          74
cussed in Section 7 (which do not require solving for the full world general equilibrium
or estimating parameters in any country other than the U.S) in this model.


I.1    Sectors in a closed economy
Whereas in our baseline model the final good was produced using a CES combination of
different occupations, here we assume that the final good is produced using a CES com-
bination of different sectors (indexed by σ) with elasticity ρσ and that sectoral output is
produced using a CES combination of different occupations with elasticity ρ. Specifically,
the final good combines sectoral output, Yt (σ), according to a CES production function,
                                                                     ! ρ σ / ( ρ σ −1)
                          Yt =     ∑ µt (σ)1/ρσ Yt (σ)(ρσ −1)/ρσ                         .               (40)
                                    σ


Sectoral output is itself a CES combination of the output of different occupations,
                                                                           !ρ/(ρ−1)
                        Yt (σ) =     ∑ µt (ω, σ)1/ρ Yt (ω, σ)(ρ−1)/ρ                         ,           (41)
                                        ω


where Yt (ω, σ) ≥ 0 denotes absorption (equal to output in a closed economy) of occu-
pation ω in the production of sector σ, µt (ω, σ ) ≥ 0 is an exogenous demand shifter for
occupation ω in sector σ, and ρ > 0 is the elasticity of substitution across occupations
within each sector. Total absorption and output of occupation ω is equal to its demand
across sectors, Yt (ω ) = ∑σ Yt (ω, σ). Occupations are produced exactly as in our baseline
specification: a worker’s productivity depends only on her occupation ω, and not on her
sector of employment σ.40 Total output of occupation ω, Yn (ω ), is equal to the sum of
output across all workers employed in ω.
    Because the partial equilibrium is the same as in our baseline model, the equations in
levels determining the allocations πt (λ, κ, ω ) and the average wage wt (λ) are the same
as in the baseline model and are given by (3) and (4), respectively. That is, for given pro-
ductivities and occupation prices, allocations and wages are the same as in our baseline
model. The occupation market clearing conditions, which pin down occupation prices,
   40 Accordingly, for example, an individual worker provides the same efficiency units of labor as an execu-

tive in an airplane-producing sector or as an executive in a textile-producing sector; although the airplane-
producing sector may demand relatively more output from the executive occupation. It is straightfor-
ward to assume, alternatively, that worker productivity depends both on occupation and sector of employ-
ment, Tt (λ, κ, ω, σ) ε (z, κ, ω, σ). Our estimation approach extends directly to this alternative assumption;
however, in practice, the data become sparser, in the sense that there are many (λ, κ, ω, σ, t) for which
πt (λ, κ, ω, σ) = 0.

                                                     75
become
                                                                   1
                                             ∑ Et (ω, σ) = 1 − α ζ t (ω ) ,                                     (42)
                                             σ

where Et (ω, σ ) denotes income (or expenditure) on occupation ω in sector σ,

                       Et (ω, σ ) = µt (σ) µt (ω, σ) pt (ω )1−ρ pt (σ)ρ−ρσ Et ,

and pt (σ ) denotes the price index of sector σ

                                                                               !     1
                                                                                    1− ρ

                                pt (σ ) =             ∑ µt (ω, σ) pt (ω )1−ρ                 .                  (43)
                                                       ω


We now provide the system of equations in changes, analogous to equations (7)-(9) with
which to calculate wage changes that result from changes in the primitives between pe-
riods t0 and t1 . The expressions for changes in wages and in allocations are given, as
in the baseline model, by equations (7) and (8), respectively. The right hand side of the
occupation market clearing condition in changes is the same as in the baseline model,

                            1
                       ζ t0 ( ω ) ∑
           ζ̂ (ω ) =                  wt0 (λ) Lt0 (λ) πt0 (λ, κ, ω ) ŵ (λ) L̂ (λ) π̂ (λ, κ, ω ) .              (44)
                                  λ,κ


The left hand side of the occupation market clearing condition in changes and the change
in the sectoral price index are, respectively,

                    p̂ (ω )1−ρ Ê ∑ νt0 (σ |ω ) µ̂ (σ ) µ̂ (ω, σ) p̂ (σ)ρ−ρσ = ζ̂ (ω )                          (45)
                                         σ

and                                                                                           1
                                             "                                           #
                                                                                             1− ρ

                           p̂ (σ) =              ∑ νt0 (ω |σ) µ̂ (ω, σ) p̂ (ω )   1− ρ
                                                                                                    .           (46)
                                                 ω

                      Et (ω,σ )
Here, νt (σ|ω ) ≡   ∑σ0 Et (ω,σ0 )
                                     denotes the share of expenditure on occupation ω that occurs
                                                  E (ω,σ )
within sector σ and νt (ω |σ ) = ∑ 0 tE (ω 0 ,σ) denotes the share of expenditure on occupation
                                  ω    t
ω employed within sector σ. Defining, as in the baseline model, changes in transformed
within-sector occupation shifters â(ω, σ ) = µ̂ (ω ) T̂ (ω )(1−α)(ρ−1) and changes in trans-
formed occupation prices q̂(ω ) = p̂(ω )1/(1−α) T̂ (ω ) we can write (45) and (46) as

                                                               â (ω, σ )
         q̂ (ω )(1−α)(1−ρ) Ê ∑ νt0 (σ|ω ) µ̂ (σ)                          â (ω1 , σ) p̂ (σ)ρ−ρσ = ζ̂ (ω ) ,
                                     σ                        â (ω1 , σ )


                                                              76
and                                                                                                                 1
                                               "                                                               #
                                                                                                                   1− ρ
                                         1                       â (ω, σ)
                 p̂ (σ) = â (ω1 , σ)   1− ρ
                                                   ∑ νt0 (ω |σ) â (ω1, σ) q̂ (ω )(1−ρ)(1−α)                              .
                                                   ω
                                                                                                                              −1
Furthermore, defining changes in transformed sector prices q̂ (σ ) = p̂ (σ) â (ω1 , σ) 1−ρ and
                                                                                   1− ρ σ
changes in transformed sector shifters â (σ ) = â (ω1 , σ)                        1− ρ    µ̂ (σ ) we can re-write these
two equations as

                                                                     â (ω, σ )
                 q̂ (ω )(1−α)(1−ρ) Ê ∑ νt0 (σ|ω ) â (σ)                        q̂ (σ )ρ−ρσ = ζ̂ (ω ) ,                           (47)
                                          σ                         â (ω1 , σ )

                                  "                                                             #    1
                                                                                                    1− ρ
                                                â (ω, σ )
                        q̂ (σ) = ∑ νt0 (ω |σ )                q̂ (ω )(1−ρ)(1−α)                            .                       (48)
                                 ω             â ( ω 1 , σ )
Therefore, we can solve for changes in relative wages ŵ (λ) /ŵ (λ1 ), relative occupation
prices q̂ (ω ) /q̂ (ω1 ) and relative sectoral prices q̂ (σ ) /q̂ (σ1 ) using equations (7), (8), (44),
(47) and (48), given shocks L̂ (λ) / L̂ (λ1 ), T̂ (λ)/ T̂ (λ1 ), q̂ (κ ) /q̂ (κ1 ), â (ω, σ ) / â (ω1 , σ) and
â (σ) / â (σ1 ) .
     Two special cases of our model are as follows. First, if ρ = ρσ , then q̂ (σ ) drops out
from equation (47) and the model with sectors is equivalent to the baseline model where
the occupation shifter, â (ω ), is replaced by ∑σ νt0 (σ|ω ) â (σ) ( â (ω, σ ) / â(ω1 , σ)). Sec-
ond, if νt0 (ω |σ ) = νt0 (ω ) and â (ω, σ) / â (ω1 , σ) = â (ω ) / â (ω1 ), then irrespective of the
value of ρ and ρσ , the model with sectors is equivalent to the baseline model where the
occupation shifter is given by â (ω ) / â (ω1 ).
     We can measure T̂ (λ)/ T̂ (λ1 ), q̂ (κ ) /q̂ (κ1 ) and q̂ (ω ) /q̂ (ω1 ) between any two time
periods using the same procedure and data as in our baseline model. To measure changes
in transformed within-sector occupation shifters and transformed sector shifters, and to
construct νt (σ |ω ) and νt (ω |σ ) we need data on Et (ω, σ) in t0 and t1 . To measure within-
sector occupation shifters, â (ω, σ) / â (ω1 , σ ), we start from the equilibrium relationship
                                                                                   1− ρ
                                  Ê (ω, σ )    â (ω, σ )               p̂ (ω )
                                             =                                              ,
                                 Ê (ω1 , σ)   â (ω1 , σ)              p̂ (ω1 )

which can be re-expressed in terms of transformed shifters as
                                                                             (1−α)(1−ρ)
                              Ê (ω, σ)      â (ω, σ)              q̂ (ω )
                                          =                                                     .                                  (49)
                             Ê (ω1 , σ )   â (ω1 , σ )           q̂ (ω1 )




                                                            77
                                                                                             µ̂(σ )
We use equation (49) to back out â (ω, σ) / â (ω1 , σ). To estimate                       µ̂(σ1 )
                                                                                                    ,    we start from the
equilibrium relationship
                                                                         1− ρ σ
                                     Ê (σ)     µ̂ (σ)         p̂ (σ)
                                             =                                      ,                                 (50)
                                    Ê (σ1 )   µ̂ (σ1 )       p̂ (σ1 )

or, in terms of transformed variables,
                                                                         1− ρ σ
                                     Ê (σ)     â (σ )        q̂ (σ)
                                             =                                      .
                                    Ê (σ1 )   â (σ1 )       q̂ (σ1 )

The previous expression and equation (48) yield

                                                                                                    1− ρ σ
                                                       â(ω,σ )           (1−ρ)(1−α)      1− ρ
                Ê (σ )      µ̂ (σ )  ∑ω νt0 (ω |σ) â(ω1 ,σ) q̂ (ω )
                        =                                                                                     .      (51)
               Ê (σ1 )     µ̂ (σ1 ) ∑ 0 νt (ω 0 |σ1 ) â(ω 0 ,σ1 ) q̂ (ω 0 )(1−ρ)(1−α)
                                       ω   0           â(ω1 ,σ1 )


We use equation (51) to back out â (σ) / â (σ1 ).


I.2   Full trade model
We now consider a world economy with many countries that trade occupational, sectoral,
and equipment output subject to iceberg costs. As in Section 7, we omit time subscripts.
The final good and sector production functions in country n, the open economy counter-
parts of equations (40) and (41), are given by


                                                                                ! ρ σ / ( ρ σ −1)
                      Yn =           ∑ µn (σ)1/ρσ Dn (σ)(ρσ −1)/ρσ
                                      σ

                                                                                        !ρ/(ρ−1)
                    Yn (σ) =        ∑ µn (ω, σ)1/ρ Dn (ω, σ)(ρ−1)/ρ                                  .                (52)
                                     ω

Total absorption of occupation ω is given by Dn (ω ) = ∑σ Dn (ω, σ ). Each country pro-
duces equipment, sector, and occupation output: Yn (κ ), Yn (σ), and Yn (ω ), respectively.
Absorption of each of these goods is a CES aggregate of these goods sourced from all
countries in the world, as in expression (20), which now also applies to σ and ω (with
elasticities η (σ) and η (κ ), respectively). Each of these goods is subject to iceberg trans-
portation costs, dni ( x ) ≥ 1 (for x = κ, σ, ω), and faces a resource constraint analogous


                                                      78
to expression (21), with σ and ω in place of κ. The resource constraint for the final good
still satisfies equation (2). For the exercises we consider below, we do not need to specify
conditions on trade balance in each country.
    The equations determining the allocations πn (λ, κ, ω ) and the average wage wn (λ)
are the same as in the baseline model and are given by (3), (4) and (5), respectively. There-
fore, given equipment prices in country n, the equations to solve for allocations and wages
in country n are the same as in the closed economy. As discussed in Section 7, in an open
economy we must distinguish between production prices and absorption prices. We use
the analogous notation for prices that we used in Section 7. For example, we denote by
pin (ω ) the price of country i’s output of occupation ω in country n (inclusive of trade
costs) and by pn (ω ) the absorption price of occupation ω in country n, given by

                                        "                      #      1
                                                                   1− η ( ω )
                            pn (ω ) =       ∑ pin (ω )1−η(ω)                    .
                                            i

Production and absorption prices of individual sectors σ are defined analogously. The
relevant prices shaping allocations and average wages, πn (λ, κ, ω ) and wn (λ) in equa-
tions (3) and (4), are absorption prices for equipment, pn (κ ) (since equipment is an input
in production) and domestic production prices for occupations, pnn (ω ) (since occupa-
tions are produced in each country). In the expressions for the change in the average
wage and allocations in country n, given by (7) and (8) where all variables contain a
subscript n, the relevant expression for the change in transformed equipment prices is
                     −α
q̂n (κ ) ≡ p̂n (κ ) 1−α T̂n (κ ) and the expression for the change in transformed occupation
prices is q̂n (ω ) ≡ p̂nn (ω )1/(1−α) T̂n (ω ). Occupation prices can be solved for using the
open-economy versions of the occupation-market clearing condition (42) and the sectoral
price index (the analog of equation 43), which we display below. In general, solving for
the level of occupation prices requires solving for prices in the full world equilibrium
(which are functions of worldwide technologies, endowments, and trade costs).
    We consider the two type of counterfactual exercises described in Section 7, which
do not require solving the full world general equilibrium or assigning parameters in any
country other than n.
    We derive the system of equations (analogous to equations (7), (8), and (9) in the closed
economy model without sectors) that can be used to calculate changes in relative wages
in some country n at time t0 when this country moves to autarky (dni ( x ) becomes infinite
for all i 6= n and all other primitives remain constant). We show that, moving to autarky,
the equilibrium system of equations in an open economy is equivalent to the system that


                                                 79
characterizes a closed economy with sectors, as detailed in Appendix I.1. Here, however,
changes in equipment productivity, sector shifters, and within-sector occupation shifters
are induced by moving to autarky.
    Variables with the superscript A refer to counterfactual autarky values (holding all
other parameters fixed—such as productivities, primitive occupation and sector shifters,
and labor composition—at their time t0 levels) and variables without the superscript A
refer to factual values in period t0 . Variables with hats denote the ratio of the value of
this variable in autarky relative to the value of this variable at time t0 : ŷ = ytA0 /yt0 . For
simplicity, in this section we omit time indices.
    Wages and allocations in autarky relative to time t0 (the counterpart to equations (7)
and (8)) are
                                 (                                                                            )1/θ (λ)
                                           h                1                 −α
                                                                                    iθ (λ)
                     ŵn (λ) =       ∑         p̂nn (ω )   1− α   p̂n (κ )   1− α            πn (λ, κ, ω )                ,                (53)
                                     κ,ω

                                                           h                   1                     −α
                                                                                                           iθ (λ)
                                                               p̂nn (ω )      1− α    p̂n (κ )      1− α

               π̂n (λ, κ, ω ) =                                                                     iθ (λ)                            .    (54)
                                                                       1                      −α
                                                  h
                                  ∑ω 0 ,κ 0 p̂nn            ( ω 0 ) 1− α      p̂n    ( κ 0 ) 1− α            πn     (λ, κ 0 , ω 0 )

We now derive an expression for the occupation-market clearing in changes, the counter-
part to equation (9) in our baseline closed-economy model (or equations (45) and (46) in
the model with sectors).
   The right-hand side of equation (9) remains unchanged, so we focus on the left-hand
side only. The level of worldwide absorption expenditure on country n’s produced oc-
cupation ω is ∑i Eni (ω ), where Eni (ω ) denotes country i’s absorption expenditure of
occupation ω from country n,
                                                                                                1− η ( ω )
                                                                                pni (ω )
                   Eni (ω ) = pni (ω ) Dni (ω ) =                                                               Ei (ω ) .
                                                                                pi ( ω )

In autarky, Eni (ω ) = 0 for i 6= n. Hence, the ratio of ∑i Eni (ω ) between autarky and t0
(the left hand side of equation (9)) is

                A (ω )                                                                                        1− η ( ω )
            ∑i Eni
                                                                                        
                              Enn (ω ) EnnA (ω )                                             p̂nn (ω )
                        =    ∑i Eni (ω ) Enn (ω )
                                                               = f nn (ω )                                                    Ên (ω ) ,
            ∑i Eni (ω )                                                                       p̂n (ω )

where f nn (ω ) = Enn (ω ) / ∑i Eni (ω ) denotes the share of domestic sales of occupation ω
relative to its total sales (one minus the export share).
    We now calculate an expression for Ên (ω ), the change in total expenditure on absorp-



                                                                    80
tion of occupation ω in country n. The level of En (ω ) is given by

                                      En (ω ) =           ∑ En (ω, σ) ,                                                            (55)
                                                           σ

where En (ω, σ) denotes country n’s absorption expenditures on occupation ω in sector σ
and is given by
                                                                     1− ρ
                                                          pn (ω )
                     En (ω, σ) = µn (ω, σ )                                   Yn (σ ) pnn (σ ) ,                                   (56)
                                                          pnn (σ )
                                                       1/(1−ρ)
                                                 1− ρ
where pnn (σ ) =       ∑ω µn (ω, σ ) pn (ω )                          . The value of sector σ production in
country n is
                   Yn (σ ) pnn (σ) =   ∑ Yni (σ) din (σ) pnn (σ) = ∑ Eni (σ) ,                                                     (57)
                                        i                                                  i

where Eni (σ) denotes expenditures on absorption in country i of country n’s sector σ
output, given by
                                                               1− η ( σ )                1− ρ σ
                                                 pni (σ)                        pi ( σ )
                    Eni (σ) = µi (σ)                                                                  Ei ,                         (58)
                                                 pi ( σ )                         pi

and Ei denotes total expenditures on the final good in country i. Combining equations
(56), (57), and (58) yields
                                            1− ρ
                                  pn (ω )                                                                          1− ρ σ
     En (ω, σ ) = µn (ω, σ)
                                  pnn (σ)            ∑ µi (σ) pni (σ)1−η(σ) pi (σ)η(σ)−ρσ pi                                Ei .
                                                      i

The ratio of En (ω, σ) in autarky relative to its level at time t0 is then
                                                                                 η (σ)−ρσ
                                      1− ρ                 ρ−ρσ        p̂n (σ)
             Ên (ω, σ ) = p̂n (ω )          p̂nn (σ )                                            f nn (σ) Ên ,
                                                                      p̂nn (σ)

where f nn (σ) denotes the share of domestic sales of sector σ relative to its total sales,
defined analogously to f nn (ω ). Equation (55) therefore yields
                                                                                                                       η (σ)−ρσ
                                                                                                              p̂n (σ)
Ên (ω ) =   ∑ νn (σ|ω ) Ên (ω, σ) = ∑ νn (σ|ω ) p̂n (ω )                 1− ρ
                                                                                   p̂nn (σ )   ρ−ρσ
                                                                                                             p̂nn (σ)
                                                                                                                                     f nn (σ) Ên .
              σ                              σ




                                                          81
Combining these results, we have

    A (ω )                                             1− η ( ω )                                                             η (σ)−ρσ
∑i Eni
                                                                                                              
                                          p̂nn (ω )                                                                 p̂n (σ)
∑i Eni (ω )
            = f nn (ω ) p̂n (ω )1−ρ
                                           p̂n (ω )                  ∑ νn (σ|ω ) p̂nn (σ)               ρ−ρσ
                                                                                                                   p̂nn (σ )
                                                                                                                                           f nn (σ) Ên
                                                                     σ
                                                                                                                                  (59)
where the change in the production sectoral price index is
                                                                                   !1/(1−ρ)
                          p̂nn (σ) =        ∑ νn (ω |σ) p̂n (ω )1−ρ                                .                              (60)
                                            ω


     Finally, we calculate the differential change in absorption and production prices, p̂n (ω ) / p̂nn (ω ),
p̂n (κ ) / p̂nn (κ ), and p̂n (σ ) / p̂nn (σ) . When moving to autarky at time t0 , the change in
import prices is infinite. The change in the absorption price of occupation ω, for example,
is
                                            A ( ω ) /p ( ω )
                                           pnn                                                         p̂nn (ω )
                                                      nn
              p̂n (ω ) =                                                          1
                                                                                              =                1
                                                                                                                                  (61)
                                                               1− η ( ω )        1− η ( ω )       snn (ω ) η (ω)−1
                              ∑i ( pin (ω ) /pnn (ω ))

where snn (ω ) denotes expenditure on domestic occupation ω relative to total expenditure
on occupation ω in country n (one minus the import share),

                                                   pnn (ω ) Dnn (ω )
                                  snn (ω ) =                           .
                                                  ∑i pin (ω ) Din (ω )

The second equality in (61) uses the following relationship between the prices of domestic
and imported goods

             ( pin (ω ) /pnn (ω ))1−η (ω ) = ( pin (ω ) Din (ω )) / ( pnn (ω ) Dnn (ω )) .

Similarly, changes in absorption prices of sector σ are

                                                              p̂nn (σ)
                                          p̂n (σ) =                      1
                                                                                                                                  (62)
                                                         snn (σ ) η (σ)−1

where snn (σ) is defined analogously to snn (ω ). Finally, the change in the absorption price
of κ is simply
                                                                         1
                                          p̂n (κ ) = snn (κ ) 1−η (κ) ,                                                           (63)

as derived in Section 7, where snn (κ ) was defined analogously to snn (ω ) and where have


                                                         82
used the fact that p̂nn (κ ) = 1 given our choice of numeraire.
    We can substitute equation (63) directly into equations (53) and (54). Similarly, substi-
tuting (61) and (62) into (59) and (60) we have

          A (ω )
      ∑i Eni                                                f nn (ω )                                         f nn (σ)
      ∑i Eni (ω )
                  = p̂nn (ω )1−ρ                                    η (ω )−ρ    ∑ νn (σ|ω )                         η (σ)−ρσ
                                                                                                                               p̂nn (σ )ρ−ρσ Ên
                                                    snn (ω )        η (ω )−1     σ                     snn (σ )      η (σ)−1



and                                                                                                                !1/(1−ρ)
                                                                                        ρ −1
                    p̂nn (σ) =              ∑ νn (ω |σ) snn (ω )                     η (ω )−1   p̂nn (ω )1−ρ                      .                (64)
                                             ω

   In sum, the system of equation to solve for changes in factor allocations and relative
prices when moving to autarky is given by
                                                      h      1                        α       iθ (λ)
                                            ( p̂nn (ω )) 1−α snnt0 (κ ) (1−α)(η (κ)−1)
         π̂n (λ, κ, ω ) =                                                                iθ (λ)
                                                      1                        α
                                  h
                          ∑ω ,κ
                            0   0   ( p̂    ( ω 0 )) 1− α s      ( κ 0 ) (1−α)(η (κ )−1)        πnt0 (λ, κ 0 , ω 0 )
                                         nn                 nnt0

                              (                                                                                              )1/θ (λ)
                                        h                    1                        α           iθ (λ)
                  ŵn (λ) =       ∑         ( p̂nn (ω ))    1− α   snnt0 (κ )   (1−α)(η (κ )−1)            πnt0 (λ, κ, ω )
                                  κ,ω

                                                                                                                       !1/(1−ρ)
                                                                                         ρ −1
                  p̂nn (σ) =            ∑ νnt0 (ω |σ) snnt0 (ω )                      η (ω )−1    ( p̂nn (ω ))1−ρ
                                        ω

and the occupation market clearing condition

                                  f nnt0 (ω )                                              f nnt0 (σ )
         ( p̂nn (ω ))1−ρ                         η (ω )−ρ   ∑ νn (σ|ω )                              η (σ)−ρσ
                                                                                                                 ( p̂nn (σ))ρ−ρσ Ê
                            snnt0 (ω )           η (ω )−1    σ                       snnt0 (σ)        η (σ)−1

                           1
                      ζ t0 ( ω ) ∑
                  =                  wt0 (λ) Lt0 (λ) πt0 (λ, κ, ω ) ŵ (λ) L̂ (λ) π̂ (λ, κ, ω )
                                 λ,κ


All variables in the previous four equations that are indexed by t0 represent either their
observed level or are constructed based on estimates. Note that this system of equations
corresponds to the system of equations in the closed economy version of the model with
sectors, where within-sector occupation shifters, ân (ω, σ), and between-sector shifters,




                                                                          83
ân (σ), are equal to

                                                                            ρ−η (ω )
                              ân (ω, σ) ≡ f nnt0 (ω ) snnt0 (ω ) η (ω)−1 ,                            (65)
                                                                         ρσ −η (σ)
                                  ân (σ) ≡ f nnt0 (σ ) snnt0 (σ)         η (σ)−1      ,               (66)

and changes in equipment costs are equal to

                                                               1     α
                                      q̂n (κ ) = snnt0 (κ ) η (κ)−1 1−α .

    The mapping between import and export shares at time t0 and the corresponding
closed-economy shocks is intuitive. First, as discussed in Section 7, if the import share of
equipment type κ is relatively high and trade elasticities are common across equipment
goods, then moving to autarky is equivalent to decreasing equipment κ productivity in
the closed economy. Second, if sector σ has a relatively low export share and/or a high
import share relative to sector σ0 then, under mild parametric restrictions, moving to
autarky is equivalent to increasing the sector shifter for σ relative to σ0 in the closed econ-
omy. Finally, if occupation ω has a relatively low export share and/or a high import share
relative to occupation ω 0 then, under mild parametric restrictions, moving to autarky is
equivalent to increasing the within-sector occupation shifter for ω relative to ω 0 in the
closed economy.41
Factor content of trade. In a special case of the model, the impact of moving to autarky on
between-group inequality is captured by measures of the factor content of trade. It is use-
ful to study this special case to understand the role of model assumptions and parameter
values.
    In a general accounting framework—see Burstein and Vogel (2011) and Burstein and
Vogel (2012) for details—we can express the wage in country n of a given factor as

                                               FCTn (λ) −1
                                                      
                                     1
                        wn ( λ ) =        × 1−             × FPDn (λ)
                                   Ln (λ)       Ln (λ)

where FCTn (λ) and FPDn (λ) are the factor content of trade and the factor payments for
domestic absorption of factor λ, both defined below. Letting Xnj (σ ) and Xnj (ω ) denote

  41 Our extended model does not capture some of the mechanisms that have been studied in the literature

linking international trade to between-group inequality. For example, as studied in Yeaple (2005), Bustos
(2011), and Burstein and Vogel (2012), trade liberalization increases the measured skill bias of technology
by reallocating resources from less to more skill-intensive firms within industries and/or inducing firms to
increase their skill intensity. Extending the model to capture these mechanisms and mapping them into the
components of our decomposition is a promising area for future work.

                                                     84
sales from country n to country j in sector σ and occupation ω and αnj (λ, σ ) and αnj (λ, ω )
denote the share of this revenue that is paid to factor λ, we define FCTn (λ) and FPDn (λ)
as follows. The factor content of trade is

                   1                                      1
    FCTn (λ) ≡           ∑    ∑
                 wn (λ) z∈Σ,Ω j6=n
                                   αnj (λ, z) Xnj (z) −
                                                        wn (λ) z∈∑   ∑ αnn (λ, z) Xjn (z) ,
                                                                 Σ,Ω j6=n


where the first term is the factor content of exports, which is the amount of λ embodied in
country n’s exports across all sectors and occupations, and the second term is the factor
content of imports, which is the counterfactual amount of λ that would be used in country
n to produce for itself the value of imports across all sectors and occupations. The factor
payments for domestic absorption is

                           FPDn (λ) ≡         ∑ ∑ αnn (λ, z) Xjn (z) ,
                                             z∈Σ,Ω j


which is the counterfactual payments to factor λ if domestic absorption in all sectors and
occupations were produced domestically.
    In the trade model in this Appendix, if we impose no trade in equipment goods,
dnj (κ ) = ∞ for all n 6= j; Cobb-Douglas sector and aggregate production functions,
ρσ = ρ = 1; and θ → 1, then only the factor content of trade is impacted by foreign
shocks (e.g., moving to autarky). In this special case, the impact on the average wage of
λ of moving to autarky at period t is simply

                      A (λ)
                    ŵn,t                  FCTn,t (λ0 )
                                                                             
                                                                    FCTn,t (λ)
                                =       1−                       1−
                      A (λ0 )
                    ŵn,t                   Ln,t (λ0 )               Ln,t (λ)

since neither factor supply nor the factor payments for domestic absorption of λ relative
to λ0 are affected by moving to autarky.
    Here we describe the role of each of the three restrictions above. If there is no trade
in equipment goods, then moving to autarky affects wages in country n only through
sector shifters and within-sector occupation shifters. If ρσ = ρ = 1, then the share of
expenditure in country n on each sector and each occupation is fixed and determined
purely by demand parameters µn (σ ) and µn (ω, σ ), which are unaffected by moving to
autarky. Finally, if θ → 1, then the share of revenue earned in each sector and occupation
that is paid to each factor is also a function of parameters that is unaffected by moving to
autarky. Hence, the factor payments for domestic absorption for any one factor relative to
any other are pinned down by domestic parameters and are unaffected by foreign shocks.


                                                  85
    Of course, when θ > 1, the share of revenue in each occupation and sector paid to λ
is a function of foreign shocks. Moreover, when ρ 6= 1 or ρσ 6= 1, the share of country n’s
income that accrues to each occupation or sector is affected by foreign shocks. In this case,
the factor content of trade is not a sufficient statistic for calculating the impact of foreign
shocks on domestic wages.




                                              86
