                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        GROWING IN DEBT:
              THE 'FARM CRISIS' AND PUBLIC POLICY




                      Charles W. Calomiris

                        R. Glenn Hubbard

                         James H. Stock




                     Working Paper No. 2085




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 1986




We are grateful to participants in the Brookings Panel on Economic
Activity, the 1986 NBER Summer Institute Workshop on Contracting in
Financial Markets, and seminars at the John F. Kennedy School of
Government and Northwestern University, and to Francis Bator, Ben
Bernanke, William Brainard, Steve Fazzari, Benjamin Friedman, Lewis
Kochin, George Perry, Bruce Petersen, James Poterba, Robert Weiner,
and Richard Zeckhauser for helpful comments and suggestions; and to
Julie Lopez, John Shea, John Simpson, and Raidza Torres for
excellent research assistance. We have benefited extensively from
advice and information from Gary Benjamin at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, Cala Fsasz at the Farmers Home Administration,
Jerry Hansen at the Center for Rural Affairs, Robert Jensen, James
Schurr, and their colleagues at the Farm Credit Corporation of
America, Emanuel Metichar at the Federal Reserve Board, James Roll
at the Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation, and Peter
Timmer at the Harvard Business School. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2085
                                                November 1986




                             Growing in Debt:

                   The 'Farm Crisis' and Public Policy




                                 ABSTRACT



U.S. farms, and with them agricultural lending institutions, are currently
experiencing their most severe stress since the 1930s. As international
trade in farm products has expanded, so has the sensitivity of farm incomes
to fluctuations in domestic and world economic conditions. Thus, while price
stabilization, acreage reduction, and related policies in place since the
1930s were relatively successful in stabilizing farm income during the
1950s and 1960s, they are likely to be less effective in achieving this goal
in the future.

Our analysis of state—level panel data indicates that disruptions in
agricultural credit markets can have real effects on farm output. That finding
is consistent with the conventional wisdom that, unlike credit markets for
large firms or for firms for which monitoring is less costly, agricultural
financial markets require close customer arrangnients. Local financial
institutions, for which such relationships are best developed, are often unable
for institutional reasons to diversify their loan risks either within agriculture
or across other geographically separated activities. The deviations from perfect
markets indicate an economic rationale —— in addition to the usual political,
social, and national defense rationales —— for government intervention in
agricultural credit markets. Our empirical evidence supports the view that
maintaining customer relationships in agricultural finance is important.
Because of the Farm Credit System's ability to pool agricultural loan risks
nationally and its access to national capital markets, it will continue to
be an important lender in agricultural credit markets.




Charles Calomiris              Glenn Hubbard                James Stock
Department of Economics        Department of Economics      Hoover Institution
Northwestern University        Northwestern University      Stanford University
2003 Sheridan Road             2003 Sheridan Road           Stanford, California 94305
Evanston, Illinois 60201       Evanston, Illinois 60201     (415) 723—9157
(312) 491—8210                 (312) 491—8224
     U.S farms, and with them agricultural lending institutions, are

currently experiencing their most severe stress since the 1930s. From

1980 to 1984, the average real value of U.S. farmland dropped by 29

percent. This sharp decline has been most pronounced In the corn and

wheat belts; in Nebraska, for example, the real value of farmland is

half what it was in 1980. The erosion in the value of equity has had

the effect of increasing the leverage of many farm borrowers.

Delinquent loans have increased substantially, hitting 7.5 percent of

total loans at small agricultural banks by mid—1985.

     Agricultural bank earnings are down and bank failures are up: In

1983, seven of the insured commerical agricultural banks failed, while

in 1984 and 1985, this figure rose to 32 and 68 respectively.

Agricultural bank failures accounted for 41 percent of the insured

commercial banks that failed in 1984; in every quarter since,

agricultural bank failures have accounted for more than half of total

bank failures. In addition to these banks that have failed, the

fragility of agricultural banking In general has risen substantially.

For example, in 1984, over 20 percent of total agricultural loans

outstanding at banks were to borrowers with a debt—equity ratio in

excess of 70 percent and a negative cash flow. Another major farm

lender ——   the Cooperative Farm Credit System (FCS) —— has   suffered

similar portfolio deterioration and now faces an Imminent threat of

insolvency, though recent legislation provides for stop—gap assistance

from the federal government. Total outstanding farm loans likely to

default have been estimated at between $80 and $100 billion.'
                                     —2—

         This paper provides evidence supporting the argument that credit

 markets are an important element in the propagation of shocks in the

 farm sector.2 We emphasize potential imperfections in agricultural

 credit markets based on •agency" and "information" considerations. A

 central message is that localized customer borrowing relationships,

 rather than the use of impersonal debt and equity markets, are important

 in agricultural finance. Reliance on local relationships is further

 complicated by restrictions on the ability of those intermediaries to

diversify risks. Hence deflationary shocks disturb the balance sheets

of both borrowers and lenders, and can have real effects through

fluctuations in credit availability.

     When loans are made with imperfect information on the part of the

lender, the availability of credit necessary to finance operations

depends on the health of local financial intermediaries, on farmers'

cash flow, and on the collateral available to secure loans. Reduction

in available credit due to increased borrower leverage, reduced cash

flow, and increased hank vulnerability have amplified the recent

troubling developments of increased foreign agricultural output and

capacity, real exchange rate appreciation, and (except for 1983) years

of large harvests. Both anecdotal evidence and research discussed below

suggest that efficient farm producers may find themselves going

bankrupt, reducing investment and maintenance expenditures, or selling

out to farmers or land speculators with greater access to loanable

funds.

     The current economic upheaval in the U.S. farm sector ——   dramatic
reductions in farm incomes and land values, increased farm

agglomeration, a wave of farm bankruptcies, and farm bank failures
                                  —3--


unprecedented since World War II ——   raises   important questions

concerning public expenditures on domestic agriculture. While it is

widely recognized that current agricultural programs (mainly dating from

the 1930s) are poorly suited to addressing the problems of the 1980s,

there is much less consensus about which new policy directions are

likely to be the most efficient. Careful consideration of agricultural

credit markets is important when evaluating these new directions.



Plan of the Paper



     The paper is organized as follows. To put the current farm

situation in perspective, we begin with a brief review of postwar U.S.

agricultural market conditions. Next we discuss the effects of credit

supply restrictions on farm production. In our empirical work, we

examine a panel data base from farm income statements and balance sheets

at the state level covering approximately the last decade. We find

economically significant effects of changes in collateral value, debt—

service burdens, and the availability of credit from commercial banks on

farm output.

     The importance of local customer relationships in farm lending

suggests roles for government intervention. To provide a framework for

realistic policy analysis, we discuss salient features of the

institutions of farm finance, in particular reviewing recent

developments in commercial banks, the Farm Credit System, and the

Farmers Home Administration, three major lenders. Our empirical results

suggest that the institutional setting in agriculture credit markets is

important both for the short—run and long—run viability of efficient
                                     —4—

farms. This importance suggests a need for a reevaluation of the

current emphasis on agricultural price and incomes programs.



A Review of U.S. Postwar Agricultural Conditions



U.S. AGRICULTURE IN PERSPECTIVE



     Six facts serve to place U.S. agriculture in perspective.

     1. For most of the postwar period, farming has been a declining

         sector when expressed as a percentage of the gross national

         product.

     2. Total farm income in 1984 was $160 billion, or about 4.4

        percent of GNP.

    3. Productivity growth in the industry has been phenomenal; for

        example, over the period from 1955 to 1984, the U.S.D.A.

        measure of total output per hour of farm labor has increased

        fivefold and average crop production per acre has increased by

        75 percent.

    4. Farm production and government assistance are unevenly divided

        among farmers. In 1985, half of all farms had total sales

        under $10,000 per year, produced roughly 3 percent of farm

        output, and received 7     percent of federal cash payments to
        farmers. The largest 112,000 (roughly the top 5 percent) had

        sales in excess of $200,000, produced half of total output and

        received 22 percent of federal cash payments. Farms in

        between ——    with   annual sales between $10,000 and $200,000 ——
                                   —5—

         were responsible for 48 percent of total farm output and

         receive 71 percent of federal cash payments. Expenditures on

         price supports and acreage—reduction programs In 1986 are

         projected to amount to between $26 billion and $30 billion —— a

         per—farmer average of between $11,000 and $12,500.

     5. As of June 30, 1985, roughly 50 percent of the loan portfolio

         of the Farmers Home Administration, a malor governmental

         lender, was delinquent. At both the Farm Credit System and

         commercial banks, on December 31, 1984, approximately 21

         percent of all outstanding debt was to farmers having both

         negative cash flow and a debt—equity ratio of more than 70
                    4
         percent.

     6. The current crisis is highly crop— and region—specific. Farms

         producing cash grains, general livestock, or dairy products

         account for the overwhelming majority of financially stressed

         farms, and these farms are concentrated in the Corn Belt and

         Northern Plains states.



     Postwar economic conditions of U.S. agriculture can conveniently be

divided into three distinct periods.5 The 1950s and 1960s were years of

growing real farm incomes, although this growth lagged well behind the

growth of overall U.S. economic activity. The 1970s saw a dramatic

reversal of this trend of relative decline, with rising commodity prices

and sharply expanded exports leading to increasing farm incomes. During

this decade, farmers expanded production and assumed substantial amounts

of new debt to finance this expansion. Finally, during the 1980s farm

prices declined and, faced with an appreciating dollar, exports fell
                                  —6--


sharply. Accordingly, farm incomes, and with them farmland values,

declined at rates unprecedented En the postwar period. This sharp

decline in income, coupled with the high levels of debt acquired during

the expansion of the 1970s, has led to a sharp decline in the ability of

farmers to meet their debt obligations and to the corresponding rise In

farm bank failures.

     These patterns are illustrated in Tables 1 and 2, which contain

selected series describing farm income and the balance sheet of the farm

sector. Relative to aggregate economic activity, farming has been on

the decline throughout the postwar period. This decline was slow but

continual through the 1950s and 1960s: In 1954, agricultural income was

8.3 percent of GNP; by 1970, this fraction had dropped to 5.4 percent.

Over this same period, farm income increased by only 0.6 percent

annually. With the exception of 1958, between 1954 and 1970 the rate of

return on farming activities fluctuated between 1.0 and 6.3 percent.

     This prolonged period of steady decline was reversed with the

increase In farm exports and the rise in relative commodity prices

during the 1970s. Between 1970 and 1979, real U.S. agricultural exports

more than doubled and real gross farm income rose at an annual rate of

4.1 percent. The return on farm assets and the value of farm equity

rose, reflecting the Improved market conditions. Nationally, real farm

equity rose by 74 percent and real farmland values rose by 88 percent

from 1971 to 1980. These increases were most pronounced in the West and

Middle West; between 1976 and 1980 alone, land values rose by 53

percent in Indiana, 49 percent in Minnesota, and by 46 percent In

Wisconsin and Iowa.6 Backed by this increased "paper value" of

farniland, real farm debt rose by a total of 65 percent from 1971 to

1980, compared to the 21.3 percent from 1961 to 1970.
                                   —7—

       This expansion halted abruptly in the 1980s as interest rates rose,

the dollar appreciated, the Soviet grain embargo had its effect on U.S.

farmers, and commodity prices fell. From 1979 to 1983, the agricultural

sector suffered an absolute as well as a relative decline that was

largely unanticipated by agricultural borrowers and lenders. The U.S.

experienced a loss in market share in many crops during the 1980s. Farm

Income as a fraction of GNP dropped from 5.8 percent to 4.2 percent, and

aggregate real farm income fell in each year from 1980 to 1984. The

previous trend of increasing equity values also reversed as land prices

fell;7 real national farm equity in 1984 was only 72 percent of its

peak in 1980. With the fall In farm income and equity values came

increased payments on the debt accrued during the 1970s and the lowest

levels of investment In buildings and machinery since the early 1960s.



CHANGING VOLATILITY OF FARM INCOMES



      The increased volatility of farm incomes during the 1970s and 1980s

Is   summarized in the first columns of Table 3. Combining the expansion
of the 1970s with the contraction of the 1980s, real farm income since

1973 grew at a slightly slower rate than it did from 1954 to 1972. In

addition, throughout the postwar period farm income has been volatile;

as a comparison, the standard deviations of the growth rate in real

national income were 2.79 percent for 1954—1972 and 3.76 percent for

1973—1984, respectively. However, the most striking feature of this row

of Table 3 is the dramatic Increase in the volatility of farm income,

with the standard deviation of annual growth rates almost tripling.
                                     —8—

     This Increased volatility of farm income since 1973 has also been

associated with an increase in the comovements of agricultural income

with U.S. aggregate economic conditions. This increased sensitivity is

reflected in the regressions reported in the remaining rows of Table 3,

in which the growth rate In farm income is regressed against the

contemporaneous and lagged values of the growth rates of various income

aggregates. Two   features   of this changing relationship between move-

ments in farm incomes and in various economic aggregates are evident

from these regressions. First, while the multiple correlation between

farm income and lags of national income was only 3 percent for the 1954—

1972 period, after 1973 this correlation rose to 55 percent. Second,

fluctuations in the various aggregates were associated with very

different changes in farm Incomes in the two periods. For example, in

the early period, the cumulative change In real farm income associated

with a one percent change in real national income was only 0.27 percent,

while in the later period this cumulative change was about 3 percent.

     As has been discussed extensively elsewhere, the changing relation-

ships elaborated above reflect an increased importance of world trade

and of the exchange rate in determining domestic commodity prices and

therefore farm incomes. Indeed, while farm exports constituted only

14.5 percent of agricultural cash receipts in 1970, by 1980 this

fraction had jumped to 29.5 percent. To the extent that the U.S.

continues to compete in international agricultural markets, this

markedly increased sensitivity of agricultural incomes to world economic

fluctuations seems likely to persist.

    This increased sensitivity is important. When the prices received

by farmers were relatively stable, agricultural income risk was likely
                                 —9—

to be uncorrelated with risk in other major sectors in the economy

(i.e., since weather would be the dominant source of fluctuations in

farm output). As shown in Table 3, however, agricultural incomes have

become more highly volatile, and fluctuations in farm incomes are

becoming more highly correlated with income fluctuations in other

sectors (because of the increased volatility of interest rates and

exchange rates). This change need not be of critical importance if

farmers are able to diversify risk by holding part of their net worth in

assets whose returns perform differently given fluctuations in interest

rates and exchange rates. However, for reasons we discuss in detail

later, farmers' wealth is held almost exclusively in farm—specific

capital (e.g., farmland). Hence, individual farmers are bearing more

significant risks of income fluctuations.8



PUBLIC POLICIES TOWARD AGRICULTURE



     Public policies have evolved over the last fifty years or so

through commodity programs and credit—market programs, the second

category of which we take up later in the paper. The foundation of

federal farm commmodlty programs has been price supports and concomitant

acreage—reduction efforts. The latter were implemented through a set of

incentive programs put in place in the 1960s, by which time it had

become clear that, since the support price was effectively a floor

price, farmers who chose not to reduce their acreage reaped the benefit

of both higher production and higher prices. The support and acreage—

reduction programs were not overly costly in the 1970s, as rapid

expansion and market price increases took place.
                                 — 10   —




     By the 1980s, world farm prices declined, and more farmers chose to

participate in government commodity programs. The budgetary costs were

increased by expansion of agricultural productive capacity abroad

(particularly in grains in Argentina and the European Economic

Community). The 1981 farm bill was predicted to cost $11 billion over

the ensuing four years, but actually cost $63 billion. The Reagan

Administration's 1983 Payment—In—Kind program attempted large acreage

reductions at a huge budgetary cost of $30,000 per commercial farm in

1983. Discussions of "bailouts" have figured prominently in 1985 and

1986 legislative efforts.9



Agricultural Credit Markets and Farm Production



     Is the crisis in agricultural credit markets merely a symptom of

the recent adverse shocks farmers have suffered, or do credit channels

play a role in propagating exogenous adverse shocks? Does the

availability of credit per se provide an additional influence on

agricultural income and investment?

     To motivate empirical work which addresses these questions, we

begin with a simple model of links between credit markets and farm

output. Suppose that domestic farm output Q5 is determined according to

a production function defined over a set of inputs (chosen before

production takes place) subject to random disturbances (e.g., the

weather). The associated derived demands for inputs and financing

depend on expected returns on investment R (i.e., expected prices and
                                          S 10
yields) and on the shadow price of funds I •      Individual   farmers

invest until the expected return on the margin just equals the shadow

price of funds.
                                   — 11 —



      The shadow price of funds involves much more than the loan interest

rate; even casual observation of existing loan contracts reveals the

importance of requirements for collateral, debt—service, and other "non—

price" covenants. Three aspects of credit market imperfections are of

particular relevance here——(i) the importance of collateral and

projected cash flow for obtaining loans (and the attendant problems

associated with reductions in the value of collateral), (ii) agency

problems limiting the ability of individual farmers to raise new capital

externally, and (iii) problems of credit rationing given lenders'

imperfect information about borrowers' conditions.'' We discuss these

in turn below; they certainly need not be mutually exclusive.

      First, collateral requirements provide a way for lenders to

overcome their limited information about the ability of individual

farmers to pay back loans. Since the large volatility in farm cash

receipts implies nontrivial probabilities of default, lenders will

receive either the total repaid principal plus interest or, if the

farmer defaults, the value of the collateral plus any additional

recoverable cash flow. That is, lenders can be thought of as maximizing

their gross return p, which is related to the loan interest rate r

according to



(1)      p = minER + C, (1+r)L],



where L is the loan amount and C is the borrower's collateral.

Deterioration of borrowers' collateral or in the projected ability to

service existing debts out of current cash flow exacerbates the

information problems in the loan market (see discussion below). Were
                                      — 12 —



collateral    substantial enough, It might be possible to approximate loan

contracts equivalent to those that could be written were the lenders

fully informed, since only those borrowers confident of not losing their

collateral (i.e., the less risky of the potential borrowers) would seek

loans.

        Particularly important for agriculture, farmers' collateral is

composed largely of an industry—specific asset, farmland. Fluctuations

in the value of farmland are, of course, highly positively correlated

with realizations of returns on farming projects. The risk of default

is even more substantial than in the case wherein the value of

collateral is fixed and independent of project returns.'2 Hence the

ability to service debt out of projected cash flow is an important

additional consideration for the lender. Another channel through which

cash flow influences credit availability Is the surplus funds of

individual farmers who lend to neighbors and relatives since reduced

cash flow restricts the supply of private intermediation capital. These

private sources of funds accounted for 34 percent of total farm debt in

1984.

        Consideration of collateral and cash flow can also be justified

institutionally by appealing to the criteria which lenders actually use

in deciding upon loans. For example, until 1971 Federal Land Banks were

effectively limited to loaning no more than 50 percent of the market

value of real estate for which the loan was taken. In 1971, this limit

was increased to 85 percent. However, since member banks recognized

that loaning up to this limit was risky, this greater discretion in

terms of debt—equity ratios led to an increased emphasis on the cash
                         13
flow of the applicant.        In addition, cash—flow analysis and real
                                     — 13 —



estate   appraisal have always figured prominently in the loan supply

decisions of commercial banks and in the Farmers Home Administration's

evaluation of a potential borrower's "Farm and Home Plan."

       Second, for credit restrictions to individual borrowers to have

aggregate real effects, it must be the case that individual projects are

imperfect substitutes. There are several channels through which a lack

of farm credit could have these aggregate effects. A farm that suffers

foreclosure and is not brought back into operation ——    or,   even more

dramatically, a for sale farm on which standing crops are not harvested

——   will,   of course, result in an aggregate drop in planted acreage and

production. More subtely, a lack of credit can result in decreased

productivity by forcing the sale of farm equipment, by reducing

maintenance in building and equipment, by reductions in fertilizer or

seed qualities, or by shifting to suboptimal crop or feed mixes to

reduce operating expenses. Each of these channels result In output

losses on specific farms. Since the farmland can, of course, only be

farmed at any one time by a single operator, credit restrictions can in

theory result in aggregate reductions in output.

       Because of the complexity of modern farming operations, these and

similar subtle changes in production can be difficult to monitor by

outside parties. This difficulty of monitoring can result in losses of

efficiency arising from dissociating farm ownership from farm management

or, more generally, from "agency" problems.'4 Attempts to raise

collateral levels by mergers of existing farm operations by owner—

operators would not be useful so long as debt—equity ratios are similar

across farmers. One possible alternative solution is, of course, to

take on new equity from nonfarmers. Potential agency costs are the
                                        — 14 —



 likely       explanation of why this option has historically been seldom
         15
 used.

      Third, theoretical research involving models of loan markets in

 which information (between borrowers and lenders) is imperfect has shown

 that the loan interest rate and the shadow price of credit are not

 equivalent. Agricultural projects correspond to such "information—

 intensive" investments to the extent that monitoring of projects (and

associated treatment of the land) and returns is difficult. In these

information—intensive credit markets, credit rationing to some borrowers

is likely.'6

     In the simplest possible model, no information problems exist, and

the competitive equilibrium involves the agricultural credit markets

clearing through adjustments in the rate of intere3t. However, when

agricultural borrowers have private information about their project

returns, lenders cannot distinguish the riskiness of individual

projects, so that adverse selection will lead to credit rationing in a

credit—market equilibrium in which loan contracts specify only the

interest rate.'7 Again, with a nonzero probability of default, lenders

consider the potential for loan repayment as well as the interest rate

to be charged when assessing the profitability of a loan. Past some

critical level of the interest rate, high—quality borrowers will either

seek loanable funds elsewhere or will leave the market for credit. As a

result, banks will find themselves with a preponderance of borrowers who

have a high probability of default.

    A corollary to agency arguments is that changes in the ability of

lenders specializing in monitoring information—intensive projects——here

commercial banks——to supply credit can have real effects. The present
                                    — 15 —



situation     in agricultural banking is serious. There were more failures

in 1985 than in any year since the 1930s; approximately two—thirds of

these were in rural areas. In addition, rural and agricultural banks

have constituted an increasing fraction of failed banks; 70 percent of

bank failures in 1985 were in rural banks, up from 34 percent in 1983,

and more than 55 percent (a total of 68) were in agricultural banks, up

from 16 percent in 1983. Conditions in heavily agricultural areas were

more stark. Fully three—fourths of agricultural banks failures occurred

in the Corn Belt and Plains states; no agricultural banks failed in the
              18
Northeast •

     A number of potential concerns arise here (we discuss these in more

detail later). First, limitations on branch banking impede loan

diversification, making farm banks particularly vulnerable to changes in

local conditions. Second, a recent evaluation of farm bank failures by

Gregory Gajewski19 notes that banks taking over failed banks tend to be

more conservative than average, making a smaller proportion of funds

available for loans. Furthermore, the F.D.I.C. has had difficulty

finding suitable banks willing to take over failed rural banks. While

the F.D.I.C. was unable to obtain an acceptable bid to take over failed

banks (and therefore used the "payoff" method of liquidation) in only 33

out of 239 bank failures over the period from 1983 to 1985, fully 24

such closings occurred in rural banks. These rural payoff closings were

concentrated in such agricultural states as Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma,

and Texas. From the perspective of credit supply constraints these

failures are particularly worrisome since local commercial banks have

specialized in making and monitoring information—intensive loans

(exploiting their customer relationships); the recent increase in bank

failures is likely to disrupt the availability of credit to farmers.
                                                   — 16 —



        Based on these credit—market imperfections, we emphasize four

potentially important components of the shadow price of credit to

agricultural borrowers ——              the   interest rate charged (r), the value of

farm real estate (RE) as collateral, the projected debt—service burden

(DS) measured as the ratio of interest payments relative to cash

receipts, and disruptions En the availability of information—intensive

credit measured by bank failures (FAILS). That is, the shadow price of

funds En period t—1 is



(2)            i1 =      f(rj,    REi, t_iDSt, FAILS_i),


        The proper model, Is, of course, for investment. As we do not have

data on investment, we consider a reduced—form equation for farm
          20
output:



                    =
                        f(_iR,   r1, REt1, t_lDSt, FAILSt1).
                          (+)    (-)         (+)      (—)   (—)

where               represents the expectation of Rt (the total return on the
farm project) at time t—1 and where the predicted signs underscore the
               21
variables



Empirical Evidence on Credit Supply Restrictions in U.S. Agriculture



TEST OF CREDIT EFFECTS ON FARM OUTPUT



      Macroeconomic time—series data are not likely to be particularly

useful for testing the impact of proxies for credit supply restrictions
                                  — 17 —



on farm output and income, because they cannot permit consideration of

the large variation across farmers in terms of crop mix (and hence

expected prices to be received), debt—service capability, collateral,

and situations in local credit markets. An alternative would be to

examine microeconomic data on individual borrower—lender relationships

over time. While data on Individual borrowers would permit estimation

of microeconomic features of credit supply restrictions, such data would

not, however, permit measuring directly the net aggregate effect of

credit rationing, on aggregate agricultural supply. As an intermediate

step, we constructed a panel data base on farm income statements and

balance sheets and commercial bank performance at the state level

covering 24 states (including all of the principal agricultural

states)22 from 1977 to 1984.

     Observations in this panel data set consist of state—level totals

or averages for a given year. For example, the real estate variable Is

the value of farmland in the state as of January 1 of the year In

question. Given these data, we estimate equations of the form



     (4)      =
                  f(_iRj   r1_1, REIt1, t_1 DSit, FAILSIt_i


where I and t denote the state and year, respectively, and X and Z

denote a set of fixed state and time effects. The dependent variable

used in the econometric work Is a quantity Index, constructed as the

(logarithm of the) quotient of state cash receipts from marketings and a

state—specific commodity price index.

     No expected price term per se appears in our estimation of (4).

Variables describing the demand for agricultural output will in general
                                  — 18   —




appear in any reduced—form equation. Rather than attempting to model

annual aggregate demand shifts, we have included dummy variables for

each year in our regression equations. Expected price changes are

captured by the year dummies, which reflect changes in aggregate

economic activity and the exchange rate, and by the state fixed effects,

which capture state—level variation in the crop mix.

     As we do not have data on farm interest rates state by state, no

loan interest rate is included directly (because of the inclusion of the

fixed time effects). Collateral is measured by the log of (constant—

dollar) real estate values, and debt—service burdens are proxied by the

ratio of interest payments to total cash flow (including government

payments and nonfarm income). The bank failures measure is the total

number of bank failures in that state in that year. As another proxy

for supply restrictions we include net loan chargeoffs as a percentage

of total loans at agricultural banks in that state in that year.

     In addition to the specification in (4), we also considered various

interactions with the debt—service variable to test whether (I) effects

of debt service on credit availability vary according to initial

leverage (as measured by the debt—equity ratio DIE), and whether (ii) given

levels of debt—service burdens are more severe for farms of moderate

size (FS) than for large farms. For this second interaction, we define

FS as the fraction of output produced in each state by farms of moderate

size (specifically, with total sales of between $40,000 and $100,000

dollars In 1982). The farm—size variable is a proxy for the

distribution of debt burden within a particular state. Given that large

farms tend to have higher than average debt—equity ratios (see the

discussion below), a high proportion of moderate—sized farms in a given
                                   — 19   —




state   indicates a more even distribution of debt across farmers, and

hence less vulnerability in the aggregate to shocks which increase the

debt—equity ratio.

     Our estimation strategy is designed to avoid two potential pitfalls

that would arise were one to use ordinary least squares in an attempt to

identify the credit supply effects embodied in the theoretical

relationship (3). First, persistent differences in crop and livestock

mixes (and thus in credit requirements as inputs to production

functions) across states could lead to spurious significance of the

credit variables; we avoid this potential problem by estimating the

regressions using fixed state effects. Second, because of the obvious

potential simultaneity of credit demand and the supply of output, we

estimate our output equations using two—stage least squares. We used as

instruments lagged endogenous variables and their interactions with

survey responses of agricultural bankers indicating whether their

expectations were for increased or decreased loan demand in the next

quarter.23 The latter is designed to capture pure demand effects.

Though not reported here, our results are robust to the use instead of

lagged values of the independent variables.

     Our two—stage least squares estimation results using fixed state

and time effects appear in Table 4. The estimated regression

coefficients and their t—statistics are reported in the first six

columns. The seventh and eighth columns contain the F—statistics (and

their p—values) for tests that the credit supply variables equal zero,

and the final three columns contain measures of the serial correlation

present in the residuals. The Box—Pierce Q statistics and the estimated

serial correlation coefficients indicate slight but statistically
                                   — 20 —



significant   serial correlation in the residuals, which is unsurprising

since we omitted some variables (e.g., factor prices) either because

they were unavailable or because they were not germane to this investi-

gation. The reported standard errors have been adjusted to correct for

this serial correlation.24

     Several patterns in these results are of particular interest. The

impact on output of changes in collateral values or in the local

provision of information—intensive credit (as measured by real estate

values and commercial bank failures, respectively) have the expected

sign and are precisely estimated. Increases in debt—service burdens

(interest payments relative to cash receipts) are associated with

reductions in output, though the coefficient is in some cases

imprecisely measured. As one would expect, given levels of debt—service

burdens have a more substantial effect when debt—equity ratios are high

(although this effect is not statistically significant).25

     Local bank failures reduce output (through restricting the

available supply of credit); we discuss this point in more detail later

In the context of regulatory restrictions on commercial bank lending.

Estimated coefficients on the loan—chargeoffs measure are never

statistically significantly different from zero, though their inclusion

sharpens the precision of the estimates of the effects of the debt—

service variable. While the coefficient on the bank failures variable

may seem large at first glance, it is important to note that it Is a

discrete proxy for many continuous and persistent changes (for example

in the quality of bank loan portfolios).

    Debt—service burdens have a less severe impact for medium—sized

farms than for other farms. If credit constraints are less relevant for
                                 — 21 —



borrowers with "deep pockets" and if the large farms in our sample

became large because of higher—than—average leveraging, then, for a

given statewide average debt—service ratio, the more moderate—sized

farms will have less binding credit constraints. This interpretation of

the coefficient on DS*FS is consistent with the high debt—equity ratios

of large and moderate sized farms in the boom years of the 1970s pre-

sented En Table 5.



ISSUES OF INTERPRETATION



     There are, of course, issues of interpretation of any empirical

results attempting to separate credit supply and demand effects. For

example, in addition to serving as collateral, land values will tend to

reflect market expectations of future farm cash flows, thus agri-

cultural prices.26 If, however, agricultural prices for particular

commodities are common across states, if expectations of prices are

similar across states, and if each state's crop mix is relatively stable

over time, than, as argued above, fixed state and time effects will

capture both expected prices and realized agricultural demand.

     A possible confusion between supply and demand effects arises in

the debt—service measure, where high values of debt service may indicate

sanguine expectations. Here, the demand—side effect leads one to expect

a positive coefficient, which is opposite to the negative coefficient

implied by the credit—supply effect and the negative coefficients

estimated by two—stage least squares reported in Table 4.

     Finally, there is independent evidence of credit supply

restrictions on the part of commercial banks. Results from quarterly
                                  — 22 —



surveys of credit conditions at commercial banks by the regional Federal
Reserve Banks (Chicago, Kansas City, Dallas, Minneapolis, and

Richmond)27 indicate a marked decline in 1982 in the number of banks

reporting a "higher" availability of funds for new farm loans and a

substantial increase in the percentage of banks reporting that higher

collateral would be required relative to loan size.

     Another possible explanation for our empirical results not

involving credit rationing is that farm output declines result in bank

failures, and that farm output is serially correlated. According to

this interpretation, the bank—failures variable might spuriously he

capturing this dependence in farm output. To check for this

possibility, we examined the time series relationship between the credit

variables and the output variable. In both a bivariate model of bank

failures and log output and a trivariate model of bank failures, the

logarithm of loan chargeoffs, and the logarithm of output, the output

variable failed to Grariger—cause the banking variables at a 15 percent

level. (Both models included state and time fixed effects.) In

contrast, as expected, real farm income does Granger—cause bank failures

at the 5 percent level in both the bivarlate and trivarlate models,

although the link from farm Income to loan chargeoffs is, somewhat

surprisingly, weaker. Taken together, these results suggest that this

alternative explanation will not explain the results in Table 4, despite

the link between current farm income and the future viability of

agricultural banks.
                                    — 23 —



Financial   Variables and the Trend Toward Larger Farms



     An important characteristic of U.S. agriculture in the postwar

period has been a trend toward larger and more productive farms. Farm

size statistics are reported in intervals of nominal dollars (e.g. the

number of farms with sales between $20,000 and $39,999). We have

deflated these nominal dollar values using the farm price index to
                                                          28
compute selected farm size statistics in 1984 dollars.         These

statistics are reported in Table 6. By 1984 real sales of farms had

risen to a level almost three times that of 1960, with the fastest rate

of growth occurring in the 1960s.

     The literature on farm production suggests two reasons for

increasing farm sizes. The most important is surely the tremendous

increase En productivity in agriculture (in terms of output per acre)

over the period. Technological advances tend to increase the minimum

scale for efficient farming operations, although this minimum efficient

scale necessarily varies across crop mixes. A detailed review of the

evidence concerning the minimum efficient scale for farming operations

is given by Bruce Hall and Phillip Le Veeen.29 Most of the studies they

review suggest that the long run average—cost curve is "L—shaped," so

that most of the benefits of technology are achieved by modestly sized

farms of from 100—320 acres (depending on the crop). These studies

suggest that the technological advantages of very large farms are

relatively small in relation to farms of moderate size. This evidence

is echoed for cash grain farms in Illinois by Philip Garcia, Steven

Sonka, and Man y.30 In addition to these considerations related to

the physical production process, several authors have argued that the
                                     — 24 —



realization     of managerial economies and economies of scope require

moderate farm size.3'

       The second explanation for increased economic viability of larger

farms is that farmers have differential access to credit, depending on

cash—flow histories and collateral. This would lead growth to occur

with a disproportionate expansion of the farms of the "credit—worthy."

Though Hall and Le Veeen note the possibility that financial factors

could lead to an increase in farm size, they do not present any

empirical evidence on this point. Indirect evidence of the importance

of access of credit for farm investment comes from the work of Linda Lee

and William Stewart. Credit constraints may lead farmers to reduce

long—run investments that would otherwise maintain the quantity or

quality of the topsoil and land.32 Lee and Stewart present empirical

evidence in support of an effect of farm income on soil conservation;

they conclude that large farms or farms with significant uncommitted

cash flows were more active in soil—conservation practices.33 One would

expect credit supply effects to be especially pronounced for investments

which require a relatively long time horizon ——     like   soil conservation

——   since   short—run credit supply restrictions increase the effective

discount rates of constrained borrowers.

       Modeling links between such credit variables as collateral, debt—

service ratios, or debt—equity ratios and farm agglomeration is

problematic because of the multiplicity of potential relationships.

First, a farmer who expects increased product demand (or Increased

productivity) will be tempted to expand his operation. While a farmer's

prediction of more severe debt—service burdens In the future may enter

negatively into his decision to enter into new loan contracts, the
                                    — 25 —



observed debt service and debt—equity ratios in the next period will

reflect these new loans. Thus increased DS and DIE would be associated

with increased expansion of output and of farm sizes, an explanation

consistent with the expansion of output and debt in the 1970s.

     A second reason that increased debt service and debt—equity ratios

might lead to increased farm size is that, as these variables increase,

more farmers are exposed to the risk of failure. Depending upon the

size of the failed farms and their disposition (i.e., whether they are

subdivided and sold as smaller farms or are sold to already large and

expanding enterprises), the effect of farm failures could either be to

increase or to decrease average farm size.

     While increasing average farm size may reflect the increasing

productivity of all existing farmers, a widening of differences in farm

size among farmers indicates differences in the ability or desire to

grow, providing evidence consistent with the importance of credit

availability. Table 6 shows that aggregate farm size growth occurred

primarily through an expansion of the very largest farms. The fraction

of income of farms of moderate size (with real sales between $50,000 and

$150,000) fell from 1960 to 1984. Over this period, while mean farm

sales and the sales of the ninetieth percentile tripled, median farm

sales grew by only 23 percent. Thus the increase in the average scale

of production has not been accomplished through proportional increases

in all farms' output; rather, the variance of farm size has increased

dramatically along with the mean.
                                           — 26 —



 Public   Policy and   the   Farm Crisis



MAKING POLICY IN THE CURRENT INSTITUTIONAL SETTING



     Existing forms of credit intermediation offer special challenges

and opportunities for interventions designed to alleviate stress in

credit markets. Such institution—specific recommendations require a

brief survey of the existing terrain. The principal institutional

lenders have been commercial banks, the Farm Credit System, the Farmers

Home Administration, and life insurance companies; the relative

importance of each is documented In Table 7. We review the current

status and special attribute of the first three below.34



Commercial Banks



     Commercial agricultural banks —— those with greater than the

national average of 16 percent of their loan portfolio in agriculture ——

suffer    as agricultural borrowers find it increasingly difficult to meet

their obligations.35 Furthermore, recent trends, along with the high

leverage and low cash flow of many agricultural borrowers indicate that

private bank failures and concomitant agricultural bank credit scarcity

are unlikely to abate over the next few years.36

     The concentration of bank vulnerability is important because

banking in farm states is restricted by prohibitions on Interstate entry

and, typically, by unit—banking laws. Branch—banking restrictions

operate to increase banks' vulnerability to failure —— by restricting

bank size and the ability to diversify loan risks —— and to accentuate
                                   — 27 —



the   consequences of bank failures by limiting the entry of alternative

intermediaries. The scope for improvement through branching and

diversification i.s demonstrated by the robust performance of California

banks. California leads the country in total agricultural production

and has had a higher than average percentage of troubled agricultural

loans. The percentage of agricultural loans with non—accrual status in

1984 was 8.4 for California and 4.7 for the rest of the country. The

agricultural loan delinquency rate for 1984 was 13.1 percent in

California, compared to the national average of 8.9 percent. Net

chargeoffs as a percentage of agricultural loans was 6.1 percent in

California and 1.8 percent in other states.37 At the same time,

California accounted for only one of the 68 agricultural bank failures

in 1985. This is because large banks, which account for most of

agricultural lending in California, held only 3 percent of their
                                              38
portfolio in agricultural production loans.

      Further evidence for the scope for improvement through branch

banking comes from the distribution of troubled banks. In 1985, 36.4

percent of U.S. agricultural banks had a proportion of non—performing

loans of less than 2 percent, while the national average was 4.5 percent

and only 30.5 percent of agricultural banks had ratios in excess of 5

percent. Similarly, 39 percent of agricultural banks show a rate of

return to equity of less than 5 percent, while 50 percent show a greater

than 10 percent rate of return.39 Presumably, branch banking would lead

to a more even distribution of losses on agricultural loans among banks,

and prevent as many banks from crossing the failure threshold. In

addition, it would allow banks with a lower proportion of loan losses to

enter markets occupied by troubled banks.
                                 — 28 —



The Farm Credit System



     The Cooperative Farm Credit System (FCS) is a nationwide network of

financial institutions owned by borrower stockholders. It is divided

into twelve districts and is comprised of twelve Federal Land Banks,

twelve Federal Intermediate Credit Associations, and thirteen Banks for

Cooperatives (including a central Bank for Cooperatives). The Federal

Land Banks finance mortgages through more than 400 Federal Land Bank

Associations; the Federal Intermediate Credit Associations finance

production loans through nearly as many Production Credit Associations.

     Until recently the FCS has functioned as a loose confederation of

decentralized organizations with most discretionary authority in the

hands of district—level management, though funds have been raised by the

national—level Farm Credit Funding Corporation. One of the main results

of the current financial stress has been a change toward greater

centralization in lending policy. To this end, national organizations

have been created or redesigned under the Farm Credit Amendments Act of

1985. The Farm Credit Administration (FCA) regulates the districts more

closely and from a separate arm's—length position; the new Farm Credit

Capital Corporation has authority to allocate funds among districts in

order to shore up the relatively weak units with the surplus of the

relatively strong units; the new Farm Credit Corporation of America

(FCCA) acts as a research and advisory arm of the FCS.40

     The troubled condition of the FCS largely parallels that of

commercial banks; commercial banks have roughly the same proportion of

debtors in each cash—flow/debt—equity class.4' Like commercial banks,

FCS intermediaries have experienced a growing rate of loan delinquency
                                   — 29 —



and threats of default. Portfolio quality varies greatly among FCS

districts.42 Though districts varied up through June 1983 with respect

to the ratio of "untroubled" to total loan items at Federal Land Banks,

all districts reported in excess of 92 percent. By December 1985, six

districts had fallen below 85 percent. Much of this variation in Land

Bank performance reflects relative degrees of diversification in

regional economics.43

     For our purposes, it is important to consider the ability of the

FCS to function as an effective localized provider of agricultural

credit, particularly when local banks may be vulnerable to fluctuations

in farm income because of institutional restrictions on their ability to

diversify risks. The FCS enjoys advantages over commercial banks both

through an implicit government commitment to its debtholders and through

a cooperative national network for spreading risk and merging

troubled associations. At the same time, three specific features of FCS

organization and rules ——   the method of arriving at interest rates on

loans, cooperative stock ownership by borrowers, and the potential

incompatibility of local and national goals ——   create   problems of

coordination and portfolio management.

     Loan interest rate policy and cooperative ownership together have

encouraged relatively good borrowers to leave the FCS recently.

Interest rates are set on an average—cost rather than a marginal—cost

basis. Loan interest rates reflect the average interest cost on

outstanding FCS bonds, operating expenses and past loan losses. When

bond interest rates fall and losses from the past rise —— as they did in

the last two years —— average cost exceeds marginal cost. By pricing at

average cost, therefore, the FCS encourages borrowers who can retire
                                      — 30 —



debt or refinance it at competing institutions to do so, while at the
same time it places unwarranted stress on borrowers who remain in the

system.44

     The cooperative nature of the FCS creates a further incentive for

borrowers who can withdraw to choose to do so. Upon taking out an FCS

loan, borrowers must purchase between 5 and 10 percent of the funds

borrowed in FCS stock. When the loan is repaid, these funds ——       or   a

lesser amount if loan losses have reduced shareholders' equity to below

par value —— are reimbursed to borrowers; it is not possible to enjoy a

capital gain on FCS stock. The threat of future equity losses leads

borrowers in vulnerable districts to repay their loans prematurely in

order to withdraw capital before expected portfolio losses are realized;

it also encourages borrowers in relatively financially healthy districts

to repay their loans before the impending consolidation of FCS stock

eliminates the distinctions among districts' equity positions. The

combined effect of high interest rates and expected capital losses ——

due to average cost pricing and cooperative ownership —— on early "pay—

downs" has been large.45 Presumably, the borrowers leaving the FCS are

among those of the highest quality. Thus average—cost pricing and

cooperative ownership act to weaken further the FCS portfolio during the

current crisis.

     Finally, the potential incompatibility between national — and

district—level objectives has created problems of coordination both in

the past and during the current period of transition toward

centralization. Policies which are advantageous from a national

perspective ——    loan   interest rate differentials across borrowers of

different riskiness, for example —— may he resisted In troubled
                                   — 31 —



districts   which see a benefit to keeping rates their borrowers pay lower

than true marginal cost, and which do not have as strong an incentive to

protect the system's capital since they will be net recipients of a

capital transfer in any case. At the same time, districts with

relatively healthy balance sheets may be encouraged to lend more freely

today, before the new Capital Corporation has a chance to implement its

program of inter—district capital transfers.



Farmers Home Administration



     The Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) Is the "lender of last

resort" for farmers. The FmHA provides direct loans of various types——

including Farm Ownership Loans (FO), Farm Operating Loans (OL), Economic

Emergency Loans (EE), and Economic Disaster Loans (ED)——as well as loan

guarantees on loans made by other lending institutions. Applicants for

credit must own or operate a "family—sized" farm, not so big that it

requires a large proportion of hired labor, nor so small as to be

considered a "rural residence." Further requirements are that the

applicant (f) has been refused credit from another lending institution;

(ii) has sufficient experience as a farmer; (lii) be "creditworthy"

(recent bankruptcy, delinquency, or a history of slow payments would be

evidence of a lack thereof); and (iv) demonstrate a need to rely on farm

income 46

     Credit supply restrictions to troubled borrowers in local loan

markets need not be binding if government credit sources are

sufficiently generous. Funding limits for the various FmHA programs are

set by Congress, though these limits have only recently acted as binding
                                  — 32 —



constraints   on FmHA lending. Typically, in the past, when funding

limits for qualified borrowers were reached in a particular program,

Congress increased funding or the Secretary of Agriculture transferred

funds from one program to another. Since some loan programs had

unlimited "entitlement" status (e.g., the Emergency Disaster Program,

ED) the power to transfer funds from one to another effectively gave the

Secretary of Agriculture an unlimited amount of lending authority. For

example, in fiscal year 1985, the Secretary transferred $1.7 billion

from the ED program to the direct OL program and $460 million from the

ED program to the guaranteed OL program.

     Two recent developments have made current congressional lending

limits a binding constraint on FmHA activity. First, the volume of FrnBA

loan requests has risen markedly since 1984, as borrowers who previously

depended on the FCS and commercial banks find themselves unable to

secure credit without FmHA assistance——either in the form of a direct

loan or a loan guarantee; total loans increased nearly 10 percent during

fiscal 1985 to a level of over $29 billion. Second, the entitlement—

loan—program loophole has been eliminated by the Food Security Act of

1985, which placed a ceiling of $1.3 billion on the ED program.

     The portfolio of the FmHA has suffered in recent years more than

any other lending institution. By June 30, 1985, roughly 50 percent of

FmFTA loan principal was in delinquent loans, of which a majority have

been delinquent for more than three years. As of December 1984, 40

percent of the FmHA borrowers had debt—equity ratios of greater than 70

percent and negative cash flow——twice the figure for commercial banks

and the FCS.47 Presumably, this reflects the poorer initial quality of

FmHA borrowers. An additional explanation for so high a proportion of
                                   — 33 —



loan delinquencies is the court—enforced moratorium on many FmHA
foreclosures from 1983 through 1985. The FmHA was forced to adopt

uniform, detailed standards for Informing borrowers of their rights and

options, which include applying for rescheduling, or a five—year payment

deferral.

     Loan standards are tightening at the FmHA. The FmHA will only

allow rescheduling or deferral in cases where the farmer can demonstrate

long—run viability. By the end of fiscal 1985, the FmHA had received

108,710 applications for assistance by borrowers; 29,196 of these were

granted a rescheduling, 15,794   were granted a debt set—aside, and 21,539
were rejected for reasons of inadequate cash flow.48 Jerry Hansen of the

Center for Rural Affairs estimates that of the more than half of the

65,000 adverse action notices sent out by the FmHA so far this year will

end in foreclosure.

     Several factors point to a growing tightening of FIUHA credit

availability in the future as well. As discussed above, congressional

limits will become a binding constraint on total lending for the first

time. Moreover, in November 1985, the FmHA adopted tighter eligibility

requirements for operating loans: Previously less attention was placed

on the applicant's ability to service other loans; after November 1985,

a farmer who cannot pay off other debts in addition to the operating

loan were not to be granted credit. This change, combined with the

simultaneous increase in foreclosures will force many farmers who

previously had qualified for FmHA forebearance to leave farming.
                                 — 34   —




Conclusions



     The findings presented here suggest two Implications concerning

agricultural policy. First, as international trade In farm products has

expanded, so has the sensitivity of farm incomes to fluctuations in

domestic and world economic conditions. Thus, while the price

stabilization, acreage reduction, and related policies in place since

the 1930s were relatively successful in stabilizing farm income during

the 1950s and 1960s, these programs will most likely be less effective

in achieving this goal In the future.

     Second, our analysis of the state panel data indicates that

disruptions in agricultural credit markets can have real effects on farm

output. This finding is consistent with the conventional wisdom that,

unlike credit markets for large firms or for firms for which monitoring

is less costly, agricultural financial markets require close customer

arrangements. Local financial institutions, for which such

relationships are best developed, are often unable (for institutional

reasons) to diversify their loan risks (within agriculture and across

other geographically separated activities). The deviations from perfect

markets indicate an economic rationale ——   in   addition to the usual

political, social, and national defense rationales ——     for   government

intervention in agricultural markets. Our empirical evidence supports

the view that customer relationships in localized credit markets are

important In agriculture. Because of its ability to pool agricultural

loan risks nationally and its access to national capital markets, the

Farm Credit System will continue to be an important lender in

agricultural credit markets.
                                  — 35   —




Notes

1.   These summary statistics are drawn from papers by Emanuel Melichar
     and George Irwin, Dallas Batten and Michael Belongia, and Emanuel
     Melichar. Emanuel Melichar and George D. Irwin, "Conditions of
     Rural Financial Intermediaries" (Invited paper, American
     Agricultural Economics Association Meetings, Ames, Iowa, August 6,
     1985). Dallas S. Batten and Michael Belongia, "Monetary Policy,
     Real Exchange Rates, and U.S. Agricultural Exports" (Mimeograph,
     1985); Emanual Melichar, "Agricultural Banks under Stress," Federal
     Reserve Bulletin (July 1986).

2. This view of supply—side failures in credit markets as being an
    important determinant of economic activity has received increasing
    attention (see for example Ben Bernanke, Alan Blinder, and Benjamin
    Friedman). However, empirical attempts to ascertain the role of
    credit constraints in determining economic activity have been
    confined to historical data pertaining to the National Banking Era
    (in Charles Calomiris and Glenn Hubbard) or to the Great Depression
    (in Ben Bernanke). While these historical analyses are suggestive,
    more relevant to the issues raised in current deregulatory and farm
    policy debates would be an investigation of the quantitative
    importance of credit—supply effects on output that might have arisen
    over the past several years in the farm sector. Ben S. Bernanke,
    "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of
    the Great Depression," American Economic Review, vol. 73 (June
    1983), pp. 259—76. Alan S. Blinder, "Credit Rationing and Effective
    Supply Failures," Working Paper 1619 (National Bureau of Economic
    Research, May 1985). Benjamin M. Friedman, "The Relative Stability
    of Money and Credit 'Velocities' in the United States: Evidence and
    Some Speculations," Working Paper No. 645 (National Bureau of
    Economic Research, November 1981). Charles W. Calomiris and R.
    Glenn Hubbard, "Price Flexibility, Credit Rationing, and Economic
    Fluctuations: Evidence from the U.S., 1879—1914," Working Paper 1767
    (National Bureau of Economic Research, December 1985).

3. See D. Harrington and A. Manchester, "Profile of the U.S. Farm
    Sector," Agricultural—Fund Policy Review. (U.S.D.A. AER 530, 1985).

4. Internal Memorandum, Farm Credit Corporation of America, July 11, 1986.

5. For reviews of problems of financial distress in U.S. agriculture
    during the interwar period, see Lee Aiston and Albert Hart. Aiston
    in particular notes a pattern similar to that experienced in recent
    years. An agricultural boom in cash crops occurred after World War
    I, accompanied by a large increase in mortgage debt to finance
    expansion. Land values fell subsequently in the mid—1920s and 1930s
    as expectations changed. The combination of high levels of debt
    service and restrictions of credit to agricultural borrowers led to
    the highest levels of foreclosure rates ever experienced in U.S.
    agriculture. Indeed, James Stock argues that high leveraging, heavy
    debt—service burdens, and the associated risk of foreclosure were
    central to the agrarian unrest movements before World War I. Lee J.
    Alston, "Farm Foreclosures in the United States During the Interwar
                                 — 36



   Period," Journal of Economic History, vol. 43 (December 1983), pp.
   885-903. Albert C. Hart, Debts and Recovery, 1929—1937 (New York,
   Twentieth Century Fund, 1938). James H. Stock, "Real Estate
   Mortgages, Foreclosures, and Midwestern Agrarian Unrest, 1865—1920,"
   Journal of Economic History, vol. 43 (March 1983), Pp. 89—105.

6. "Farm Real Estate Market Developments: Outlook and Situation
     Report" (Economic Research Service, U.S.D.A., August 1984).

7. In addition to reflecting the decline in the relative price of
    agricultural commodities, the decline in farm land values in the
    1980s may well have been exacerbated by the general reduction in
    inflation. For example, Martin Feldstein has shown that the
    relative price of land (and of other nondepreciating real stores of
    value) will increase with inflation in the presence of unindexed
    taxes on capital income. Martin Feldstein, "Inflation, Tax Rules,
    and the Prices of Land and Gold," Journal of Public Economics, vol.
    14 (December 1980), pp. 309—18.

8. The analysis follows the general discussion of the allocation of
    risk, by William Brainard and F. T. Dolbear. We emphasize that
    farmers rely heavily on localized loan markets, often with limited
    potential for diversification (e.g., because of branching
    restrictions on commercial banks). William C. Brainard and F. T.
    Dolbear, "The Allocation of Social Risk," American Economic Review,
    vol. 61 (May 1971), pp. 360—70.

9. For a recent review of U.S. agricultural policies, see Elmer W.
    Learn, Philip L. Martin, and Alex F. McCalla, "American Farm
    Subsidies: A Bumper Crop," The Public Interest, no. 84 (Summer
    1986), pp. 66—78.

10. We implicitly assume that all investment is financed by debt. Later
    we discuss potential agency problems with equity finance; see also
    the reviews in Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler and in Bruce Greenwald
    and Joseph Stiglitz. Ben S. Bernanke and Mark Gertler, "Financial
    Efficiency, Collateral, and Business Fluctuations" (Mimeograph,
    Princeton University, 1986). Bruce C. Greenwald and Joseph
    Stiglitz, "Information, Finance Constraints, and Business
    Fluctuations" (Mimeograph, Princeton University, 1986).

11. These credit—market imperfections are likely to apply to many types
    of small businesses. There are reasons, however, to believe that
    they may be relatively more severe for farmers. First, farmers are
    subject to much greater income volatility than the typical
    proprietor. Second, the production process in agriculture is very
    capital (land)—intenslve, and a large minimum investment is required
    —— much larger than for a typical small business with similar
    sales. Third, the nature of the production process works against
    farmers with respect to cash flow: (1) there is a long period
    between the purchase of inputs and the sale of output; and
    (ii) short—run variable costs are a small portion of total costs.
                                 — 37 —



12. This argument relates well to discussions of "debt—deflation"
    episodes, in which wealth is redistributed from entrepreneurs to
    savers, with associated declines in the ability to obtain loans to
    finance productive investments. See the initial propostion In
    Irving Fisher; examples of subsequent empirical analysis include
    Bernanke and Calomiris and Hubbard. Irving Fisher, "The Debt—
    Deflation Theory of Great Depressions," Econometrica, vol. 1
    (October 1933), pp. 337—57. Bernanke, "Nonmonetary Effects."
    Calomiris and Hubbard, "Price Flexibility."

13. Personal communication, James M. Schurr, Senior Vice President,
    Credit Standards, Farm Credit Corporation of America.

14. Given asymmetries of information, contractual arrangements between
    borrowers and lenders cannot produce the same level of mutual
    benefit as would have been possible with costless information or
    costless aligning of the incentives of the parties to perform.
    See the general discussion of agency considerations in Michael
    Jensen and William Meckling and in Kenneth Arrow. Michael Jensen
    and William Meckling, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
    Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure," Journal of Financial
    Economics, vol. 3 (October 1976), pp. 305—60. Michael Jensen and
    William Meckling, "Rights and Production Function: An Application to
    Labor—Managed Firms and Codetermination," Journal of Business, vol.
    52 (October 1979), pp. 464—506. Kenneth J. Arrow, "The Economics of
    Agency," En John W. Pratt and Richard J. Zeckhauser (ed.),
    Principals and Agents: The Structure of Business (Boston, Harvard
    Business School Piess, 1985).

15. A general discussion of constraints on equity financing is given by
    Bruce Greenwald, Joseph E. StIglitz, and Andrew Weiss and by
    Nicholas Majiuf and Stewart Myers. Tenure arrangements separating
    land ownership from farm operations can also discourage soil
    conservation (reducing future output) through short—term leases or
    inequitable sharing of the costs and benefits of conservation
    investments. See the discussion in S.V. Ciriacy—Wantrup and In
    Linda Lee and William Stewart. Bruce C. Greenwald, Joseph E.
    Stiglitz, and Andrew Weiss, "Informational Imperfections in the
    Capital Market and Macro—Economic Fluctuations," American Economic
    Review, vol. 74 (May 1984), pp. 194—200. Nicholas S. Majluf and
    Stewart C. Myers, "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When
    Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not Have," Journal of
    Financial Economics, vol. 13 (June 1984), pp. 187—221. S.V.
    Ciriacy—Wantrup, Resource Conservation (Berkeley, University of
    California Press, 1963). Linda K. Lee and William H. Stewart,
    "Landownership and the Adoption of Minimum Tillage," American
    Journal of Agricultural Economics, vol. 65 (May 1983), pp. 256—63.

16. See for example Dwight Jaffee and Thomas Russell, "Imperfect
    Information and Credit Rationing," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    vol. 90 (November 1976), pp. 651—66; Joesph E. Stiglitz and Andrew
    Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,"
    American Economic Review, vol. 71 (June 1981), pp. 393—410;
    Bernanke, "Nonmonetary Effects;" N. Gregory Mankiw, "Credit
                                 — 38



    Allocation and Financial Collapse," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    vol. 101 (August 1986), Pp. 455—70. Charles W. Caloiniris and R.
    Glenn Hubbard, "Imperfect Information, Multiple Loan Markets, and
    'Credit Rationing'" (Mimeograph, Northwestern University, 1986).


17. An Important contribution of Stlglitz and Weiss Is that imperfect
    information can limit the number of loans a "bank" will make; that
    Is, "credit rationing" occurs In the sense that, within a class of
    observatlonally equivalent borrowers, not all receive loans.
    Stiglitz and Weiss, "Credit Rationing."

18. Gregory Gajewski, "Rural Bank Failures: Not a Problem——So Far"
    (Mimeograph, Economic Research Service, U.S.D.A., 1986).

19. Gajewski, "Rural Bank Failures." See also "Agricultural Conditions
    and the Prospects for Farm Banks," F.D.I.C. Banking and Economic
    Review (March 1986), pp. 3—9.

20. There is evidence In the literature for credit effects on such long—
    term investments as soil conservation. We discuss this point later.

21. The ability of fluctuations in credit availability to affect
    producers' incomes depends, of course, on the sensitivity of total
    demand (including net foreign demand) to changes in price.
    Appreciation of the dollar and expansion of agricultural capacity
    abroad have made the total demand for U.S. farm goods substantially
    price—elastic. Reductions In farm output because of credit
    restrictions are thus likely to result in lower farm incomes.

22. The data used are not available prior to 1977. Our sample includes
    all states that were either among the top 20 states in total farm
    cash receipts in 1982, or among the top 10 states in wheat cash
    receipts in 1982, or both, with the exception of Florida, whose crop
    share changed sufficiently over the sample period to make the
    assumption of our fixed effects model questionable. To this group
    we added South Dakota, leaving the following 24 states in our
    sample: Arkansas, California, Colorado, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois,
    Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi,
    Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio,
    Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. Because
    data on loan chargeoffs were not available for North Carolina and
    Washington, the regressions involving this variable used only 22
    states.

23. We use an annual average of a quarterly time series of survey
    responses of agricultural bankers to indicate whether their
    expectations were for increased or decreased loan demand In the next
    quarter. The expectations data were taken from the Agricultural
    Credit Conditions Survey of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

24. The correction entailed estimating the mean temporal error
    covariance matrix for each state, and then using this estimate to
    compute the adjusted coefficient covariance matrix.
                                 — 39   —




25. Our results with respect to credit variables are robust to using
    constant—dollar cash receipts as the dependent variable and to
    including the (state—specific) relative prices of farm products as
    an additional regressor, although this price variable formally
    should not enter the reduced—form specification.

26. This long—run perspective must be qualified, of course, to the
    extent that liquidity constraints raise the discount rate for
    calculating the present value of land.

27. These data are summarized in Emanual Melichar, Agricultural Finance
    Databook (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July
    1985).

28. Distributions for aggregate U.S. farm sales and Income were
    constructed from data on the number of farms with sales or income in
    various nominal ranges, which were deflated by the farm price index
    and then used to estimate lognormal distributions. Sales and income
    data are from Economic Indicators of the Farm Sector, National
    Financial Summary (U.S.D.A., 1984), Tables 27 and 30. The farm
    price index is from the Economic Report of the President (Council
    of Economic Advisers, 1986).

29. Bruce F. Hall and B. Phillip Le Veeen. "Farm Size and Economic
    Efficiency: The Case of California," American Journal of Agricultural
    Economics, vol. 65 (May 1983), pp. 256—63. See also the earlier
    discussion in Kenneth R. Krause and Leonard R. Kyle, "Economic
    Factors Underlying the Incidence of Large Farming Units: The Current
    Situation and Probable Trends," American Journal of Agricultural
    Economics, vol. 52 (December 1970), pp. 748—63.

30. Philip Garcia, Steven T. Sonka, and Man Sik Yoo, "Farm Size, Tenure,
    and Economic Efficiency in a Sample of Illinois Grain Farms," American
    Journal of Agricultural Economics, vol. 64 (February 1982), pp. 119—23.

31. See, for example, the essays in Wes Jackson, Wendell Berry, and
    Bruce Coleman (eds.), Meeting the Expectations of the Land (San
    Francisco, North Point Press, 1984).

32. A good discussion of the costs of poor soil conservation practices
    can be found in David Pimentel, et al. "Land Degradation: Effects
    on Food and Energy Resources," Science, vol. 194 (October 8, 1976),
    pp. 149—55. In the 1930s, poor soil conservation practices were
    thought by life insurance company lending agents to accompany credit
    constraints for farmers; see the discussion in Archibald H.
    Woodruff, Jr., Farm Mortgage Loans of Life Insurance Companies (New
    Haven, Yale University Press, 1937).

33. Linda K. Lee, "The Impact of Landownership Factors on Soil Conserva—
    tion," American Journal of Agricultural Economics, vol. 62
    (December 1980), pp. 1070—76.

34. Participation by life insurance companies in agricultural credit
    markets (primarily in real estate mortgages) has declined both
                                 — 40



    absolutely and relatively since the mid—1960s, in part because of
    the increased involvement of the Farm Credit System in farm
    lending. This decline has intensified in recent years, as might be
    expected from an analysis of lenders' relative efficiency in
    monitoring information—intensive loans in bad times. Life insurance
    companies also sharply curtailed their lending in the 1930s in
    response to both the deflation in farm prices and the centralization
    of loan administration; see the discussion in Woodruff. Woodruff,
    Farm Mortgage Loans.

35. Sixty—eight agricultural banks failed in 1985, most of them small
    relative to surviving agricultural banks and non—agricultural
    banks. Failed agricultural banks had average total assets of $21
    million, which is two—thirds the average for agricultural bank
    assets and one—eighth the average size for all commercial banks.
    Vulnerable agricultural banks —— those with past—due and non—
    performing loans greater than total capital —— rose from 240 at the
    end of 1984 to 332 at the end of 1985. Net chargeoffs as a
    percentage of total loans at agricultural banks increased from an
    average of 0.21 in the 1970s to 0.32 in 1980, 0.69 in 1982, 1.22 in
    1984, and 2.12 in 1985. The rate of return on equity for
    agricultural banks as a group declined from an average of 14 percent
    in the 1970s to 11 percent in 1983, 9 percent in 1984, and 6 percent
    in 1985. See Emanuel Melichar, "Agricultural Banking Experience,
    1985" (Mimeograph, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
    March 8, 1986).

36. See Melichar, "Agricultural Banks," pp. 437—8. Melichar estimates
    that two—fifths of farms' bank debt Is in danger of default.

37. Melichar, "Agricultural Banking Experience, 1984" (Mimeograph,
    Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 20, 1985),
    pp. 27, 40.

38. Melichar, "Agricultural Banks," p. 440.

39. Melichar, "Agricultural Banks," p. 447.

40. The movement toward centralization corresponds to a commitment from
    Congress to allow the use of public funds to support the FCS, under
    a complex formula involving the participation of the FCA, the
    Secretary of the Treasury, and Congress. Thus at the same time
    Congress has acted to reassure FCS bondholders (and perhaps
    stockholders) of a government commitment to back FCS bonds, it has
    created legislation to coordinate internal self—help and to
    centralize decisiorimaking in a way which makes the system more
    accountable to Congress. The effect of congressional action on
    bondholder confidence is illustrated by the changes in the yield
    spread between six—month Treasury and FCS securities. The spread
    rises from roughly zero from January through June of 1985 to around
    twenty basis points In July and August, then rises to a peak of
    around eighty basis points for September through November, and falls
    sharply in December, with the passage of the Farm Credit Amendments
    Act of 1985. Since then the spread has fallen and maintained itself
    at a level of approximately twenty basis points (through July 1986).
                                 — 41



41. See Agricultural and Credit Outlook, 1986 (Farm Credit
    Administration, 1986).

42. For example, the Springfield, Baltimore, and Texas districts show
    very low percentages of non—accrual loans (under 2 percent), while
    the Louisville, St. Louis, St. Paul, Omaha, Wichita, and Spokane
    districts all have non—accrual loans in excess of 10 percent. Non—
    accrual loans either: (1) are over 90 days contractuallly past due
    and inadequately secured, or (ii) have been classified as a "loss"
    or uncollectible with respect to all principal and interest due.
    The districts show greater similarity with respect to the percentage
   -of their overall portfolios deemed of "acceptable" quality——that Is,
    loans not classified as "loss," "problem," or "vulnerable." Because
    the percentage of loans not deemed acceptable is a reasonable
    predictor of future non—accrual loans, one would expect the
    currently most troubled districts to continue to experience high
    relative stress, with the addition of the Sacramento district to the
    list of relatively high future losses.

43. The Springfield and Baltimore districts enjoy a relatively diverse
    economic base which better sustains farm land values and offers
    greater off—farm employment opportunities during bad times for
    agriculture. Still, it seems not all of the differences among
    districts' FLB portfolio quality in 1985 can be attributed to
    different incidence of shocks. In 1979, at the end of the boom
    period, the six districts with below—average ratios of performing
    unmatured principal—to—total loan items were: Louisville, St. Louis,
    Omaha, Wichita, Texas, Sacramento, and Spokane. With the exception
    of Texas and Sacramento, these districts also show below—average
    portfolio quality in 1985. Though such comparisons are not
    conclusive, they suggest that relatively liberal loan qualification
    standards may have played a part In the adverse recent experiences
    of some Land Banks.

44. Average—cost pricing has created a widening interest rate
    differential between FCS intermediaries and their marginal—cost—
    pricing competitors. For example, in June 1986, interest rates on
    flexible—rate Federal Land Bank mortgages ranged from 11.5 to 12.5
    percent, while insurance companies and commercial banks typically were
    charging rates on mortgages in the range of 10 to 10.5 percent——
    adjusting for mortgage fee differentials (see the Crittenden Ag
    Financing Newsletter, various issues, 1986).

45. Estimated pay—downs for the first five months of 1986 for all twelve
    districts totaled $1.6 billion——roughly 2.7 percent of total FCS
    loans. District surveys indicate that the primary reason given for
    these pay—downs was high interest rates; the majority of borrowers
    who withdrew from the FCS switched to competing institutions. Loan pay—down
    data were provided by Robert Jensen of the Farm Credit
    Corporation of America.

46. The farmer's credentials——including a "Farm and Home Plan"——are
    examined by local county supervisors whose decisions are approved on
    a pro—forma basis by county committees. The Farm and Home Plan
                                 — 42



   contains information on current debts and assets, as well as
   historical and projected cash flow. Loan qualification standards
   are the same for direct as for guaranteed loans.

47. Memorandum, Farm Credit Corporation of America, July 11, 1986.

48. Agriculture and Credit Outlook, 1986. p. 40.
     Table 1. Farm Income, Borrowing, and      Investmenta


               Gross       Total Return       Net        Interest     Capital Expenditure
Year          Incomeb     from AssetsbC    Borrowing'O   on Debth   Buildingsb Machineryb
1950           123.7           46.7           5.3            2.2       3.4        12.2
1951           134.5           42.5           6.0            2.4      3.4         12.1
1952           129.0          —10.8           2.7            2.6      3.4         10.5
1953           115.0          —14.6          —1.3            2.5      3.2         11.2
1954           113.2           14.1           2.8            2.6      3.0          9.5
1955           109.4           13.7           4.7            2.7      2.9          9.4
1956           109.1           25.5           2.6            2.9      2.9          8.1
1957           108.1           19.2           4.3            3.0      2.8          8.2
1958           119.0           49.0           5.8            3.2      2.7         10.0
1959           112.8            5.5           7.1            3.6      3.5         10.7
1960           113.6            6.7           3.4            3.9      3.7          8.6
1961           117.3           28.5           5.1            4.1      3.5          8.7
1962           120.7           20.4           7.6            4.4      3.8          9.5
1963           121.7           22.9           8.4            4.9      3.9         10.4
1964           116.5           24.1           7.8            5.2      3.9         11.0
1965           126.5           38.8          10.5            5.7      4.0         11.9
1966           133.6           28.6           9.3            6.1      4.1         12.8
1967           130.0           17.8           8.0            6.7      4.6         13.9
1968           128.3            10.2          4.3            6.9      4.2         11.9
1969           133.6             7.2          6.1            7.2      4.2         11.3
1970           133.0             8.2          5.6            7.6      4.5         11.7
1971           134.6            36.3         10.1            7.7      4.4         11.1
1972           149.3            83.3         11.9         8.1         3.9         12.6
1973           198.3           146.9         18.7         9.2         5.3         16.0
1974           177.3            35.9         15.7        10.3         6.2         15.5
1975           167.9            94.5         16.2        10.7         6.6         15.2
1976           162.3          109.7          18.5        11.7         6.6         16.7
1977           160.9            57.6         22.9        12.9         7.0         16.8
1978           176.5          120.6          23.4        14.5         7.7         18.8
1979           191.6            87.9         32.4        17.0         7.6         19.4
1980           171.4            10.6         18.8        19.3         6.4         15.7
1981           176.4          —61.4          17.7        21.7         5.3         13.8
1982           159.4          —59.9           7.8        22.8         4.0         10.5
1983           143.5          —23.2           3.4        21.0         3.4         10.1
1984           161.7          —96.3          —1.4        21.5         3.0          9.5




a The information in the table was obtained from Tables 112 and 122 in Emanual
Melichar, Agricultural Finance Databook (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, July 1985).

b All amounts are in billions of 1984 dollars.

C
    The   return   on assets includes capital gains (or losses) on assets.
Table 2. Synopsis of Farm Balance Sheet and   Rates   of   Return8


         —   — — Farm Balance Sheetb —
                                            Total Rate of            Total Rate of
Year      Assets        Debt     Equity   Return to AssetsC          Return to Equity
1950      445.5         44.3     401.1           10.5%                    11.7%
1951      473.1         45.1     428.0            9.0                      9.8
1952      482.5        49.0      433.5           —2.2                     —2.9
1953      463.5         51.9    411.6            —3.2                     —4.0
1954      460.3        54.1      406.3             3.1                     2.9
1955      467.3        56.3     410.9              2.9                     2.9
1956      478.0        57.8     420.2              5.3                      5.8
1957      489.0        58.3     430.7              3.9                      4.2
1958      517.2        63.6     453.5              9.5                     10.3
1959      535.9        68.7     467.2              1.0                     0.7
1960      533.2        70.9     462.3              1.3                     0.9
1961      543.1        75.5     467.6              5.2                     5.3
1962      558.8        81.7     477.1              3.7                     3.6
1963      573.4        88.5     484.9              4.0                     4.0
1964      587.4        94.5     492.8              4.1                     4.1
1965      611.3       101.3     510.1              6.3                     6.9
1966      634.4       107.7     526.7              4.5                     4.8
1967      652.4       113.6     538.8              2.7                     2.7
1968      660.8       117.3     543.5              1.5                     1.5
1969      663.3       119.0     544.3              1.1                     1.0
1970      658.9       118.5     540.4              1.2                     1.0
1971      668.8       120.9     548.0              5.4                     6.0
1972      714.0       127.4     586.7             11.7                    13.6
1973      798.8       133.9     664.9             18.4                    22.2
1974      822.1       136.5     685.9              4.4                     5.6
1975      844.2       141.8     702.4             11.2                    13.0
1976      927.4       152.6     774.9             11.8                    13.6
1977      993.0       167.7     825.3              5.8                     6.5
1978    1,071.8       182.5     889.3             11.3                    13.5
1979    1,159.9       194.8     965.2              7.6                     9.1
1980    1,185.6       200.5     985.1              0.9                     1.0
1981    1,140.6       203.7     937.0             —5.4                    —7.4
1982    1,065.0       210.0     854.9             —5.6                    —8.6
1983    1,002.1       109.6     792.5             —2.3                    —4.7
1984      911.9       200.7     711.2            —10.6                   —15.7



a The information in the table is taken from Table 101 in Emanuel Melichar,
Agricultural Finance Datahook (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, July 1985).
b All figures are in billions of 1984 dollars.

C The total rate of return is the sum of the income rate of return and real
capital gains.
Table 3. Volatility and Cyclical Sensitivity of Farm Income




                       ———Summary Statistics—--—                ———Regression Results———

                                                             Ltn Farm Income = a+h
                                                                            t          1
                                                                                           nX t +   b2 UnX
                                                                                                             t—1
                            1954—1972        197 3—1984              1954—1972               1973—1984
                     Growth Standard      Growth Standard
Series               Rate     Deviation   Rate     Deviation       b1+b2 R2                 b1+b2 R2
Gross Farm Income    1.38%      4.53%     0.67%      12.10%

National Income      3.31       2.79      2.65        3.76        0.27          0.03        3.03      0.55

Employee             3.69       2.40      3.24        2.58        0.05          0.01        3.63      0.46
 Compensation

Corporate Profits    1.90       11.40     0.39       16.62        0.04          0.07        0.55      0.34

Merchandise Exportsb 4.51       7.68      5.68       13.29       —0.06          0.21        0.23      0.55




aSource: Authors' calculations. The right—hand variables in each
          regression are the growth rate of X and its lag, where X
          refers to the series noted in the first column on the
          corresponding line. All series are in 1972 dollars.

bThe series excludes military aid shipments.
         Table 4.    Estimated Effects of Indicators of Credit Variables on Farm


                          =
Dependent variable            log(Q)
                                                                                   Regression StatisticsC
                                                                          —   —               —
                                                                                  F—tests —
                                                                          Exclude     All
       log
       (RE)b    Fails_1       (Chargeoffs)_1   b     DS*(D/E)b   DS*FSb   All       hut RE

Equation
1.     0.342   —0.011                      —1.27                          5.00       2.83    .15        —.18   12.27
      (3.40)   (—2.37)                     (—1.57)                        (.0026)    (.0626)                   (.078)

2.     0.333 —0.011                         —1.11     —0.27               3.80    2.33    .15           —.18   19.74
      (3.24) (—2.38)                       (—0.94)   (—0.59)              (.0060) (.0789)                      (.006)

3.     0.425   —0.011                      —3.46                  8.82    5.57       4.26    .10        —.19   10.74
      (4.20)   (—2.37)                     (—2.94)               (2.73)   (.0004)    (.0067)                   (.150)

4.     0.434   —0.010                      —2.99      —0.69      10.20    4.51       3.83    .09        —.18   10.21
      (4.06)   (—2.29)                     (—2.28)   (—1.48)     (3.03)   (.0001)    (.0057)                   (.176)

5.     0.30    —0.011           2.68x103   —1.44                          3.74    2.47    .14           —.18   12.10
      (2.66)   (—2.33)           (0.69)    (—1.45)                        (.0062) (.0640)                      (.097)

6.     0.30    —0.011           3.67x103   —1.16      —0.29               3.07       2.41         .14   —.18   11.94
     (20.61)   (—2.36)           (0.92)    (—0.89)    (0.57)              (.0113)    (.0517)                   (.103)

7.     0.39    —0.011           2.00x103   —3.61                  8.93    4.51       3.78    .10        —.19   9.837
      (3.52)   (—2.78)           (0.56)    (—2.78)               (2.64)   (.0001)    (.0058)                   (.198)

8.     0.40    —0.010           4.26x103   —3.05      —0.77      10.35    4.02       3.34    .08        —.19   8.978
      (3.54)   (—2.40)           (1.15)    (—2.21)   (—1.52)     (2.91)   (.0001)    (.0067)                   (.254)



a
     Fixed time and state effects are not reported. Equations were estimated by two—
     stage least squares. t—statistfcs corresponding to corrected standard errors are
     in parentheses.
b    Variables taken as endogenous in 2SLS estimation.
C
     r1 and r2 respectively refer to the first and second autocorrelations of the
     residuals. p—values for the tests appear in parentheses.
 Table 4 (continued)

 Variable definitions:

 Q   = Cash receipts from farm marketings/P

DS = INT/INC

DIE    = Debt/Equity
where:

Cash receipts from farm marketings: Economic Indicators of the Farm Sector:
     State Income and Balance Sheet Statistics, U.S.D.A., 1984, Table 4.

P =     a price index constructed by weighting an annual series of national commodity
       prices by the quantity of output produced in 1980 for the five agricultural
       products of each state with the greatest sales in 1980. The annual price data
       from 1977 to 1984 were obtained from various tables in U.S.D.A., Agricultural
       Statistics, 1985. The cash receipts for the top five products in each state in
       1980 was taken from Table 2 of Economic Indicators of the Farm Sector. The
       products used to construct this index were: cattle, dairy, soybeans, corn,
       wheat, hogs, broilers, cotton, eggs, tobacco, hay, rice, turkeys, grapes,
       Potatoes, oranges, sorghum, apples, forestry, tomatoes, green peas, sugar beets,
       barley, dry beans, and peanuts. "Nursery and greenhouse products" were excluded
       because of ambiguities associated with the price for these products.

RE = the average real value (deflated by- the GNP deflator) of farmland in the state,
    as of January 1, obtained from Farm Real Estate Market Developments, U.S.D.A.,
       1984.

F = the number of F.D.I.C. board actions (liquidations and forced acquisitions and
    mergers) pertaining to commercial banks in each state in each year, collected
    from Annual Reports of the FDIC, 1977—1984.

Loan Chargeoffs = net loan chargeoffs as a percentage of total loans at agricultural
    banks in each state in each year, taken from Emanuel Melichar, "Agricultural
    Banking Experience, 1985" (Mimeograph, Preliminary Data Appendix, Tabulated
    March 8, 1986), Table E.7.

INT = total interest payments on debt, collected from Economic Indicators of
    the Farm Sector: State Income and Balance Sheet Statistics (U.S.D.A.,
    1980, Tables 11—12; and 1984, Tables 25—30).

INC = gross income of the state farm sector, taken from Economic Indicators of
    the Farm Sector: State Income and Balance Sheet Statistics, (U.S.D.A.,
    1980, Table 4; and 1984, Table 5).

FS =   the fraction of total sales in 1982, by state, generated by farms with sales
      per farm falling between $40,000 and 99,000 (1982 dollars), collected from the
      1982 Census of Agriculture, Table 3.
Debt = the estimated market value of total farm debt as of January 1 from Economic
    Indicators of the Farm Sector: State Income and Balance Sheet Statistics
    (U.S.D.A., 1984, Tables T43—T44).

Equity = the estimated market value of total farm equity as of January 1 from
    Economic Indicators of the Farm Sector: State Income and Balance Sheet
    Statistics (U.S.D.A., 1984, Table B2).
Table 5.         Debt—Asset Ratios by Value of Sales Class




Value of Sales Class
(Current Year Dollars)           1975        1976        1977    1978

        >$100,000                27.6%       25.3%       25.2%   22.7%
    40,000—99,999                 18.5       17.6        18.1    19.8
    20,000—39,999                 14.6       15.0        14.0    15.8

    10,000—19,999                 9.6        11.9        12.2    14.8
     5,000— 9,999                 6.6         7.3         7.4     9.1
     2,500— 4,999                 7.6         5.5         5.6     9.0
        <2,499                    3.3         4.7         4.2     6.3

           All                    15.8       15.7        15.7    16.7




a Data are taken from Economic Indicators of the Farm Sector:
   National Financial Summary, (U.S.D.A., 1980).
  Table 6. Trends In Real Sales Per Farma



              Distribution of                                 Fraction of Income
              Sales Per Farm           Number of Farms         from Farms with
            (Thousands 1984 $'s)         (Thousands)                Sales of
Year         Mean Median      90%   Total $50,000—150,000       $50,000—150,000

1960          22.7    7.8    51.5        3963     322                 29.2%
1961          24.4    8.1    55.9        3825     334                 29.3
1962          25.8    8.2    60.1        3692     339                 29.4
1963          28.0    8.6   66.2         3572     351                 29.7
1964          29.2    8.9   69.2         3457     351                 29.8

1965          30.4   8.8    71.3         3356     344                 29.3
1966          32.2   8.7    73.8         3257     337                 28.9
1967          34.6    9.4   79.9         3162     347                 28.7
1968          35.9    9.4   81.9         3071     340                 28.7
1969          37.7    7.7   81.6         3000     304                 25.2

1970          39.5    7.8    84.8        2949     304                 24.7
1971          41.2    7.9    89.5        2902     304                 24.3
1972          43.7    7.9    93.2        2860     303                 23.8
1973          44.7    7.7   101.9        2823     300                 24.4
1974         45.0     7.8   104.9        2795     301.                24.6

1975         48.3     9.2   109.6        2521     293                 24.8
1976          51.1    9.6   115.2        2497     298                 24.2
1977          52.1    9.8   117.8        2456     296                 24.1
1978          55.8   10.3   124.7        2436     302                 23.6
1979          57.4    9.6   120.7        2432     291                 23.7

1980         59.2     9.8   127.7        2433     296                 23.5
1981         58.8    10.2   136.8        2434     302                 23.5
1982         63.6    11.4   156.5        2401     314                 22.5
1983         60.3    11.5   159.2        2370     311                 22.7
1984         61.0    11.6   159.5        2328     308                 22.9



  a Source: authors' calculations. The mean is total real farm marketings
  divided by the number of farms. The median and ninetieth percentile point of
  distribution of farm sales (in 1984 dollars), the number of farms with sales
  between $50,000 and $150,000, and the fraction of gross income generated by
  farms with sales between S50,000 and $150,000 (in 1984 dollars) were estimated
  assuming that sales per farm is lognormally distributed. All deflation was
  done using the farm price index from the Economic Report of the President
  (Council of Economic Advisors, 1986).
Table 7. Total Outstanding Farm Debt by Lendera



                                                   % Held
            Total                    % Held         by Farm
        (Billions of   % Held        by Life        Credit    % Held by Farmers
                     b
Year   1984 dollars) by Banks     Insurance Cos.    System    Home Administration
1950         22.7       50.2            18.2        22.8              8.8
1951         24.7       51.9            18.5       21.5               8.2
1952         27.9       53.5            18.4       20.9               7.2
1953         29.2       52.0            19.3       21.0               7.6
1954         28.1       48.0            21.9       21.6               8.5
1955         29.1       47.5            22.2       21.5               8.7
1956         31.5       47.7            22.1       22.0               8.1
1957         32.2       45.1            22.9       23.7               8.3
1958         34.4       44.6            21.9       25.1               8.4
1959         37.2       45.6            20.5       26.0               7.8
1960         41.2       46.2            20.2       27.0               7.4
1961         43.2       45.4            19.4       27.8               7.5
1962         46.0       44.1            19.0       28.2               8.7
1963         50.2       44.9            18.4       27.9               8.8
1964         55.1       45.2            18.5       28.2               8.6
1965         58.8       44.0            19.2       28.1               8.6
1966         63.6       43.1            19.3       28.8               8.9
1967         69.1       42.5            18.8       30.0               8.6
1968         72.6       42.1            18.1       31.2               8.6
1969         73.5       41.7            17.7       31.8               8.8
1970         74.6       41.1            16.7       33.5               8.7
1971         75.6       41.2            15.3       34.9               8.6
1972         79.2       42.2            13.8       35.7               8.2
1973         82.7       43.4            12.6       36.1               7.9
1974         88.4       44.1            11.5       37.1               7.3
1975         90.8       41.9            10.8       40.3               7.1
1976         96.2       40.6            10.2       41.6               7.6
1977        102.4       40.8             9.9       42.1               7.2
1978        109.5       39.6            10.3       41.7               8.1
1979        115.2       38.0            10.7       41.5               9.8
1980        126.2       34.3            10.4       42.0              13.3
1981        127.9       31.5            10.0       44.0              14.4
1982        133.3       29.2             9.1       46.2              15.5
1983        134.5       30.1             8.5       46.1              15.2
1984        132.4       31.8             8.3       44.9              15.0
1985        129.6       32.5             8.0       43.7              15.8


a All figures are taken from Emanuel Melichar, Agricultural Finance Databook,
(Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 1985).
b
    Debt figures exclude loans made by "individuals and others.t'
                   APPJNDIX


ANCINC ONDIT IONS IN U.S •   AGRICULTURAL MARXTS


           (SELECTED SUMMARY TABLES)
Table. Al.         U.S. Share   of     World   AgrIcultural Production

Out    of   World Trade, U.S. Share of:

                                _Wheata_             __Soybeansa__         Oatsa                 __Tomatoesa__            _.01,a__     rIilg..   ——Sd Cut tu'——
Year          Exportsb      Acres        Output      Acres   Output      Acres   Output      Acres                  Acres     Output    Output    Acres Output
1970          $   7,980         8.4%      11.6%       49.0%   66.4%      23.1%   24.0%           9.6%      17.47.   23.6%     40.47.     28.6%    33.87.    17.6%
                                —              —        —       —          —       -.             —          —        —         -                   —         —
1971              8,020
                                —              —        —       —          —       —               —                  -                    -        —         —
1972              9,400
1973                            —              —        —       —                  —
                  16,738
                                —              —        —       —          —       —               —
1974              19,030

1975              17,410     12.3         16.4        50.2    60.6       17.5    19.5            10.9     21.8      23.6      45.4       25.1     11.5     —12.9
                                —              —        —       —          —       —                         —        —         —          —        -         -
1976              17,379
1977              16,857     11.6         14.3       47.3     60.5       18.4    21.3            8.4       17.3     24.2      46.8       24.3     36.3      20.2
                                —              —        —       —          —       —               —         —        —         —          —
1978              19,600                                                                                                                            -
1979              21,234     11.0         13.5        56.2    69.3       15.1    17.5             7.4      15,2     23.2      48.2       23.6     16.1      20.0
                                 —             —        —       —          —       —               —         —        —         —          —        -
1980              23,092
1981              22,137     13.7          16.6       53.7    62.8       14.2    16.8             6.7      12.6     24.0      46.3       22.1     16.2      20.4
1982              17,649     13.2          15.5       53.8    64.6       16.0    19.1             6.9      14.3     23.4      46.7       17.1     11.1      15.6
1983              16,764     10.8         13.3        51.8    56.0       14.0    15.7             6.8      13.6     17.6      30.5       19.4      9.3)     10.2
1984              17,000     11.7          13.5       51.4    56.3       12.9    15.8             6.7      13.9     22.4      43.3       35.3     33.8      14.5

dFigures      are taken from various issues of the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization Production Yearbook.

btxport figures are nominal exports deflated by the GNP deflator,                       1972 —    1.00.   Data are from the Economic Report
 of the President,         1986.

CAcreage data were not available for oranges.
Table A2. Indicators of Financial Stress in Agriculturea (percent)



                   1979    1980     1981     1982     1983     1984    1985

Loan Volume
 Delinquency        2.9%    NA       NA       3.9%     3.7%    4.5%     5.3%


Bank Finance
 Discontinued      3.8      4.5      2.9      3.3      2.9     3.4      4.5


Loaned up to
 Practical Limit   29       27       NA       32       28     32.8     36.7


Farmers Who Went
 out of Business   NA       2.1      NA       2.2      2.3     3.6      4.8


Farmers Who
 Went Through
 Bankruptcy        NA       NA       NA       0.8      1.1     2.6      3.8



aSource: American Bankers Association Midyear Farm Credit Surveys, Agricultural
          Banker, various issues.
Table A). Six—Month Yields on FCS and Treasury Securities (Percent)a



    Year       Month         FCS          T—Bills         Spread
                                                      (Basis Points)

    1985      January        8.60%         8.60%             0
              February       9.04          9.02              2
              March          9.05          9.00              5
              April          8.31          8.31              0
              May            7.67          7.59              8
             June            7.58          7.57              1

             July            7.28          7.10             18
             August          7.75          7.52             23
             September       8.16          7.39             77
             October         8.42          7.64             78
             November        8.39          7.61             78
             December        7.63          7.45             18

    1986     January         7.65          7.44             21
             February        7.57          7.34             23
             March           6.83          6.59             24
             April           6.64          6.48             16
             May             6.81          6.64             17
             June            6.43          6.28             15
             July            6.31          6.05             26




aSource: Wall Street Journal, various issues.
Table A4. Farm Credit System Portfolio Quality3




                Percentage Non—Accrual       Percentage of Portfolio Deemed of
  FCS             Loans (Amount)                   "Acceptable" Quality
District      May 1986 May 1985 Dec. 1984                 May 31, 1986
                                             FLB        PCA        BC     FCS

Combined       10.18      3.46      2.20    81.6       67.5       84.0   79.1

Central Bank   0.39       0.00      0.00      —          —        90.3   90.3
 for Cooperatives

Springfield     1.46      0.43      1.04    87.6       83.7       98.0   87.0

Baltimore       1.45      1.18      0.90    91.3       80.4       80.0   88.3

Columbia       7.53       1.81      1.68    85.3       77.5       91.7   84.1

Louisville     13.68      3.59      3.03    81.4       78.2       70.5   79.5

Jackson        7.66       2.95      2.97    84.2       75.1       89.1   83.0

St. Louis     10.47       2.81      2.41    87.5       57.1       82.3   82.5

St. Paul      10.72       3.72      2.44    74.3       66.6       74.3   72.4

Omaha         18.71       3.68      2.48    75.0       46.0      68.6    70.7

Wichita       13.46       4.75      3.12    79.8       56.2      62.6    75.3

Texas          1.98      0.40       0.43    93.5       78.6      87.9    89.4

Sacramento     6.42       3.18      2.07    76.4       56.2      94.3    71.0

Spokane       14.39      3.69       3.18    83.1      67.1       73.9    79.8




aConstructed from Annual Report of the Cooperative Farm Credit System, various
years, and various internal memoranda of the Farm Credit Administration.
Table A5. Federal Land Bank Portfolio Qualitya (Percentage of _Cood_b loans)


  Year       1977c   1978c   1979c   1980c   1981c   1982c   1983c   1984d   1985d

District

Combined     96.5%   96.6%   95.8%   95.3%   94.8%   93.7%   93.4%   92.0%   85.9%

Springfield 96.3     96.7    97.4    97.8    97.1    96.8    97.3    96.4    97.2

Baltimore    97.3    97.5    97.7    97.5    97.4    97.0    97.2    96.7    96.2

Columbia     95.8    96.2    96.6    96.2    95.8    94.9    94.3    94.2    91.3

Louisville   96.4    96.5    95.1    94.5    93.8    92.5    92.4    91.6    82.7

New Orleans/
 Jackson     96.6    96.8    95.9    94.4    95.1    94.0    93.0    91.0    88.4

St. Louis    97.0    97.0    95.6    95.2    94.5    93.4    93.1    91.4    84.7

St. Paul     97.8    97.8    97.4    96.9    96.2    95.0    94.8    92.7    83.6

Omaha        97.0    96.8    94.8    94.3    93.7    92.2    92.0    90.0    78.2

Wichita      96.0    95.9    95.7    95.0    94.2    92.8    92.0    89.9    82.0

Texas        95.8    95.9    94.8    94.5    94.3    94.1    94.5    94.2    94.2

Sacramento   96.3    95.6    94.6    94.6    94.2    92.8    92.7    91.4    88.2

Spokane      96.3    96.2    95.4    94.8    94.4    93.5    92.4    91.5    84.5



aSource: Constructed from Annual Reports of the Cooperative Farm Credit System,
         various years, and various internal memoranda of the Farm Credit
         administration.

bpercentage of loan items which do not represent unmatured extensions,
 delinquent principal, loans in process of foreclosure or closing, or
 accrued interest receivable.

cMeasured June 30 of year.

dMeasured December 31 of year.
Table A6. Commercial—Sized Farm Operators Cross Classified by Debt—to—
          Debt—to—Asset Ratios and Return on Equity or Assets by Equity
          ieveisa,b,c




                                 Debt—to—Asset Ratios (%)      All   Debt/Asset
                                 >70      40 to 70      <40          Categories


Equity    J $50,000
Return on Equity
Under — 15%
Number                                 8       17        17               42
Debt                              4.7         5.6       1.7             12.0
Assets                            5.9        10.3       9.4             25.6
—15 to 5%
Number                                 4       33       163              200
Debt                              1.8        12.0      17.1             31.0
Assets                            2.4        23.1     148.1            173.5
Over 5%
Number                            10           60       245                315
Debt                              5.2        15.7      16.9             37.8
Assets                            6.7        30.0     120.4            157.1

Equity F $50,000
Return on Assets
Under 5%
Number                             18           3         2                 23
Debt                              7.3         0.1       0.0               7.4
Assets                            6.0        0.2        0.0               6.3
Over 5%
Number                             36           8        11                 55
Debt                             10.3        0.4        0.0             10.7
Assets                            8.1         0.7       0.0              9.2
Overall
Number                             76         121       437              634
Debt                             29.3        33.9      35.8             99.1
Assets                           29.0        64.4     278.2            371.7


aSource: Agricultural Credit Outlook, 1986 (Farm Credit Administration),
         Table 11.

bAll numbers are in thousands; all dollar amounts are in billions.

CCommercial_sized farms are defined as those with sales of $40,000 and over.
Table Al. USDA Survey Data on Farm Borrowersa



                                           Debt—to—Asset Ratios

                             >100%   70—100%       40—70%    <40%   All Debt—Asset
                                                                      Categories
Debt of All
 Operators ($     billion)     13     15             27      22           77



Debt of Operators
 Reporting Negative
 Cash Flow
  ($   billion)                16    19             40       46          120



aSource: Financial Characteristics of U.S. Farms (U.S.D.A., 1985).
Table AS. FniEA Loans and Guarantees — Authorized   and Made
           (Millions of Current Dollars)


                              FY 1982   FY 1983     FY1984     FY 1985

Direct Operating Loans
    Authorized                 $1325     $1460      $1810       $1920
    Made                        1204      1685       1960        3600

Operating Loan Guarantees
    Authorized                     50       50        100         650
    Made                           47       51        111        1107

Direct Farm Ownership Loans
    Authorized                    700      700        625         650
    Made                          658      730        659         652

Farm Ownership Loan Guarantees
    Authorized                    125       75         50          50
    Made                            4       20         42          67


Emergency Disaster Loans         2173      566       1052         490

Economic Emergency Loans                              309




asource: Personal communication wit.h Cala Fsasz, Farmers Home Administration.

bJheflever actual loans or guarantees exceed authorized amounts, the balance
 was transferred from the Emergency Disaster Fund.
