                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   PRICING IN THE MARKET FOR ANTICANCER DRUGS

                                          David H. Howard
                                            Peter B. Bach
                                           Ernst R. Berndt
                                           Rena M. Conti

                                        Working Paper 20867
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20867


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




David H. Howard has received grant funds from Pfizer, Inc. for a project unrelated to this study. Peter
B. Bach is a consultant to Foundation Medicine and has received speaking fees from Genentech, the
Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO), MPM Capital, Goldman Sachs, the Boston Consulting
Group and McKinsey & Company. Ernst R. Berndt serves as an unpaid member of the Academic
Advisory Panel to the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics. Rena M. Conti received funding from
a K07 CA138906 award from the National Cancer Institute to the University of Chicago. This article
is forthcoming in the Winter (February 2015) issue of the Journal of Economic Perspectives, used
with permission. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by David H. Howard, Peter B. Bach, Ernst R. Berndt, and Rena M. Conti. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Pricing in the Market for Anticancer Drugs
David H. Howard, Peter B. Bach, Ernst R. Berndt, and Rena M. Conti
NBER Working Paper No. 20867
January 2015
JEL No. I1

                                             ABSTRACT

Drugs like bevacizumab ($50,000 per treatment episode) and ipilimumab ($120,000 per episode) have
fueled the perception that the launch prices of anticancer drugs are increasing over time. Using an
original dataset of 58 anticancer drugs approved between 1995 and 2013, we find that launch prices,
adjusted for inflation and drugs’ survival benefits, increased by 10%, or about $8,500, per year. Although
physicians are not penalized for prescribing costly drugs, they may be reluctant to prescribe drugs
with prices that exceed subjective standards of fairness. Manufacturers may set higher launch prices
over time as standards evolve. Pricing trends may also reflect manufacturers’ response to expansions
in the 340B Drug Pricing Program, which requires manufacturers to provide steep discounts to eligible
providers.


David H. Howard                                            Ernst R. Berndt
Department of Health Policy and Management                 MIT Sloan School of Management
Emory University                                           100 Main Street, E62-518
1518 Clifton Road NE                                       Cambridge, MA 02142
Atlanta, GA 30322                                          and NBER
dhhowar@emory.edu                                          eberndt@mit.edu

Peter B. Bach                                              Rena M. Conti
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics               University of Chiccago
Department of Medicine                                     Department of Pediatrics
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center                     Section of Heamtology/Oncology
New York, NY 10065                                         5812 S. Ellis Street
bachp@mskcc.org                                            Chicago, IL 60637
                                                           rconti@uchicago.edu
Introduction


       In 2004, Genentech introduced the drug bevacizumab—brand name Avastin—for
patients with late stage colorectal cancer. The drug cost $50,000 per treatment episode and was
associated with an incremental increase in life expectancy of five months. Following
Genentech’s pricing announcement, newspapers ran stories with titles like “Cancer Weapons,
Out of Reach” in the Washington Post (Wittes 2004) and “Price of Cancer Drugs Called ‘Mind-
Boggling’” in USA Today (Szabo 2004). Some Wall Street analysts worried that bevacizumab’s
pricing would prompt Congress to regulate drug prices (Anand 2007). By 2011, the backlash
against bevacizumab was a distant memory. Bristol-Myers Squibb set the price of its newly-
approved melanoma drug ipilimumab—brand name Yervoy—at $120,000 for a course of
therapy. The drug was associated with an incremental increase in life expectancy of four months.
       Drugs like bevacizumab and ipilimumab have fueled the perception that the launch prices
of new anticancer drugs and other drugs in the so-called “specialty” pharmaceutical market have
been increasing over time and that increases are unrelated to the magnitude of the expected
benefits (Experts in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia 2013; Kantarjian et al. 2013; Schrag 2004; Hall
2013). A commentary in The Lancet, a leading British medical journal, summarized the
conventional wisdom: “[T]he cost of the new generation of drugs is getting out of all proportion
to the added benefit” (Cavalli 2013). The public debate has focused on a handful of high-profile
drugs like bevacizumab. It is unclear if these drugs are outliers or reflect broader trends in the
industry.
       In this paper we discuss the unique features of the market for anticancer drugs and assess
trends in the launch prices for 58 anticancer drugs approved between 1995 and 2013 in the US.
Drugs used to treat other conditions have also been closely scrutinized – most recently the
$84,000 hepatitis C treatment Sovaldi – but we restrict attention to anticancer drugs because the
use of survival time as a primary outcome measure provides a common, objective scale for
quantifying the incremental benefit of new products.
       The market for anticancer drugs is economically significant. Within the market for
pharmaceuticals, anticancer drugs rank first in terms of global spending by therapeutic class: $91
billion in 2013, up from $71 billion in 2008 (IMS 2014). The US market size was $37 billion in

                                                  3
2013, of which one-third was spent on 10 patent-protected cancer drugs alone (Conti et al. 2013).
The market is also politically salient. Anticancer drugs figure prominently in discussions over
health reform, alternately symbolizing wasteful spending and biomedical progress. benefits
       We find that anticancer drugs’ average benefit- and inflation-adjusted launch prices
increased by 10 percent annually, or an average of $8,500 per year, from 1995 to 2013. We
review the institutional features of the market for anticancer drugs, including generous third-
party coverage that insulates patients from drug prices, the presence of strong financial
incentives for physicians and hospitals to use novel products, and the lack of therapeutic
substitutes. We argue that under these conditions, manufacturers are able to set the prices of new
products at or slightly above the prices of existing therapies, giving rise to an upward trend in
launch prices. Government-mandated price discounts for certain classes of buyers may have also
contributed to launch price increases as firms sought to offset the growth in the discount segment
by setting higher prices for the remainder of the market.


Drug Pricing Strategies


       The process by which firms establish the “launch prices” of new, branded drugs – the
prices firms set immediately following US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval – is
opaque, and relatively little work has been done on the subject.1 At the time of FDA approval,
most drugs are on-patent, and so manufacturers are temporary monopolists. They have wide
leeway, though not unlimited power, to set prices.
       Reekie (1978) and Lu and Comanor (1998) studied the determinants of drugs’ launch
prices for drugs across multiple therapeutic categories. They found that prices are higher for
drugs that offer significant benefits compared to existing products. Hedonic pricing studies of
colorectal cancer (Lucarelli and Nicholson 2009) and anti-ulcer drugs (Suslow 1996; Berndt,
Bui, Reiley and Urban 1995) find that manufacturers set higher prices for higher quality drugs,
but studies of antidepressants (Chen and Rizzo 2012) and arthritis drugs (Cockburn and Anis
2001) actually find the opposite. In most therapeutic categories physicians and patients learn

1
 Prior work on pricing in the pharmaceutical industry has mostly focused on the effect of
generic competition on price levels (for example, Caves et al. 1991) and post-entry pricing
dynamics (Lu and Comanor 1998).
                                                 4
about drug quality partly through experience, and so manufacturers may find it advantageous to
introduce high-quality drugs at low prices so that the drugs will penetrate the market more
quickly (Chen and Rizzo 2012).


Anticancer Drugs


       Anticancer drugs are among the only life-prolonging treatments available for patients
with metastatic tumors, which means that the tumor has spread beyond its original site to a non-
adjacent location. The vast majority of patients with metastatic disease will die of cancer. It has
become increasingly common to administer anticancer drugs to patients with early stage disease
after they have undergone surgery or radiotherapy. Because most newly approved anticancer
drugs are approved on the basis of their effectiveness in patients with metastatic disease, our
analysis focuses on this group of patients.
       Rapid progress in the fields of tumor biology, genetics, and immunology has spurred the
development of a number of new anticancer drugs. Almost 1,000 anticancer drugs are currently
in various phases of pre-approval testing, more than the number for heart disease, stroke, and
mental illness combined (IMS 2014; PhRMA 2014). Many new drugs are approved for the
treatment of tumors with particular genetic markers. For example, the FDA approved
pertuzumab in 2012 for patients with metastatic breast cancer linked to a defective HER2 gene.
Targeted therapies are more likely to succeed in clinical trials and may face a less elastic demand
curve, facilitating premium pricing (Trusheim and Berndt 2012).
       The scientific knowledge embodied by new drugs is impressive, but progress in basic
science has not always been accompanied by proportionate improvements in patient outcomes.
Gains in survival time associated with recently approved anticancer drugs are typically measured
in months, not years.
       Most anticancer drugs are approved by the FDA on the basis of one or more randomized
controlled trials. Some trials have an “active control”; patients are randomized to receive the new
drug or an alternative therapy. When a drug is sufficiently novel that it has no close substitutes or
it will be used in combination with existing drugs, patients in the control arm may be randomized



                                                 5
to receive the new drug or a placebo. Trials of anticancer drugs usually measure patient
outcomes in terms of the difference in survival between the treatment and control arms.
       Some drugs are approved on the basis of single-arm trials. In single-arm trials, all patients
receive the new drug and there is no control group. Single-arm trials focus on short-term patient
safety rather than patient survival, and so they have a much shorter duration compared to
randomized control trials. The FDA grants approval for many leukemia and lymphoma drugs on
the basis of single-arm trials. Median survival among patients with these types of cancers is two
or more years. Requiring manufacturers of leukemia and lymphoma drugs to conduct
randomized trials to measure survival benefits could significantly delay the introduction of
potentially beneficial drugs. Single-arm trials can show that a drug is safe but cannot determine
whether the drug improves life expectancy. Physicians can observe survival in their own patient
populations, but it is probably difficult for individual physicians to draw sound inferences about
the quality of a new drug because their patient panels are not sufficiently large. Unlike single-
arm studies, randomized trials establish efficacy as common knowledge.
       Economists have measured the value of anticancer drugs by evaluating changes in life
expectancy and costs over time (Howard et al. 2010, Lichtenberg 2009a; 2009b, Sun et al. 2010;
Woodward et al. 2007) or measuring patients’ willingness-to-pay (Goldman et al. 2010;
Lakdawalla et al 2012; Romley et al. 2012; Seabury et al. 2012; Snider et al. 2012). A common
finding is that that the dollar-denominated benefits associated with anticancer drugs are equal to
or exceed the cost of an episode of treatment. However, willingness-to-pay estimates must be
interpreted cautiously in light of the fact that most patients mistakenly believe that anticancer
drugs cure cancer (Weeks et al. 2012). In addition, these past studies do not address trends in
launch prices. If new drugs have higher prices per unit of benefit, then we cannot assess the cost-
effectiveness of anticancer drugs as a class based on studies of older drugs.


Policies Governing Drug Coverage and Reimbursement


       Medicare is the most prominent US payer for anticancer drugs, followed by commercial
insurers, and then state Medicaid programs. Medicare pays for physician-administered
intravenous drugs through the medical “Part B” benefit. By law, Medicare does not directly

                                                  6
negotiate with drug manufacturers over prices for prescription drugs covered under the Part B
benefit or the oral anticancer drugs largely covered under Medicare’s pharmacy “Part D” benefit.
Section 1861 of the Social Security Act, which requires that the Medicare program cover
“reasonable and necessary” medical services, precludes consideration of cost or cost-
effectiveness in coverage decisions (Neumann 2005). Consequently, Medicare covers all newly
approved anticancer drugs for indications approved by the FDA.
       The private insurance plans that provide prescription drug coverage under Medicare “Part
D” are required to cover all drugs in six protected classes, one of which is anticancer drugs
(Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services 2014). Three quarters of the population reside in
states that require insurers to cover anticancer drugs for “off label,” non FDA-approved uses
(Bach 2009).
       Insurers in states without these requirements and large employers that self-insure have
more leeway to determine coverage policies, yet, in the rare instances where third-party payers
have tried to place meaningful restrictions on patients’ access to anticancer drugs, they have
relented under pressure from clinicians and patient advocacy groups. In the early 1990s, many
insurers refused to cover a breast cancer treatment consisting of higher than normal doses of
anticancer drugs followed by a bone marrow transplant. Breast cancer patient advocacy groups
waged a high-profile campaign to secure coverage, and most insurers started paying for the
treatment. Randomized trials later found that it did not prolong survival, and physicians and
patients abandoned the procedure (Howard et al. 2011).
       Oregon’s Medicaid program recently proposed to limit coverage of anticancer drugs on
the grounds that “in no instance can it be justified to spend $100,000 in public resources to
increase an individual’s expected survival by three months when hundreds of thousands of
Oregonians are without any form of health insurance” (as reported in Landsem 2013). The
proposal was withdrawn following a public backlash.
       The case of bevacizumab illustrates the laxity of payers’ coverage policies. The FDA
approved the drug for the treatment of colorectal cancer in 2004 and then for treatment of breast
cancer in 2008 based on the results of a randomized trial. Results from two additional
randomized trials were later released in 2009. The trials found that patients receiving
bevacizumab experienced a statistically significant gain in “progression-free survival,” which

                                                 7
measures the period of time where the cancer is under control, but differences in overall survival
were small and not statistically significant. Based on these findings, the FDA revoked coverage
for bevacizuab’s breast cancer indication in 2011. However, an expert panel convened by the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (2010), a consortium of major cancer centers, voted
against removing bevacizumab from its list of appropriate breast cancer drugs. Faced with these
conflicting decisions, Medicare and major multistate insurance plans announced they would
continue to cover bevacizumab for breast cancer patients.
         Some drug industry critics hold up the British National Health Service as a model for
restraining drug prices. Britain’s National Institute for Clinical Effectiveness evaluates the cost-
effectiveness of new drugs and has restricted National Health Service funding for cancer drugs
where the benefits are small in relation to costs. The British government uses the threat of non-
coverage to negotiate discounts with drug manufacturers. However, restrictions on patient access
are unpopular, and Prime Minister David Cameron created a 200 million pound Cancer Drugs
Fund in 2011 to pay for non-covered cancer drugs outside of normal funding channels (Fleck
2013).
         The oncologists who provide care to cancer patients face financial incentives to
administer intravenous anticancer drugs. In most industries, there is not much difference between
wholesale and retail prices, and so they send consistent signals. But wholesale and retail prices
for drugs can diverge systematically, providing incentives for dysfunctional behavior.
Oncologists and hospitals buy intravenous, physician-administered drugs from wholesalers and
bill insurers. They profit on the spread between the reimbursed price and the wholesale cost.
Medical oncology practices derive more than 50 percent of their revenues from drugs (Akscin et
al. 2007), and many oncologists report that they face financial incentives to administer anticancer
drugs (Malin et al. 2013). Oncologists’ drug choices are responsive to profit margins (Conti et al.
2012; Jacobson et al. 2006; 2010). The use of irinotecan—brand name Camptosar—decreased
following the expiration of its patent, even though the price dropped by more than 80 percent,
possibly reflecting declines in the spread between the reimbursement level and oncologists’
acquisition cost (Conti et al. 2012).
         Insurers use cost-sharing – i.e., copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles – to make
patient demand responsive to the cost of health care, but cost sharing is not always effective in

                                                  8
reducing patients’ demand for anticancer drugs. Most employer-based insurance policies have an
annual out-of-pocket maximum, beyond which the insurer assumes 100 percent of the cost of
care. Many patients with late stage cancer reach the maximum fairly quickly, in which case the
insurer bears the full cost of anticancer drugs for the remainder of the benefit year.2
Consequently, patients may be indifferent between a drug that costs $20,000 and one that costs
$100,000.
       An analysis of private insurance claims data from 1997 to 2005 found that the annual
median out-of-pocket cost for the intravenous drug rituximab was $431 per year (Goldman et al.
2010). Patients’ costs were less than 2 percent of total spending on rituximab. Patients’ out-of-
pocket costs for oral agents, which are covered under insurers’ pharmacy benefit, are higher.
Still, a separate analysis of claims found that cancer patients’ out-of-pocket costs were 5 percent
of total drug costs, and only 34 percent of patients faced per claim copayments in excess of $50
(Raborn et al. 2012).
       Even when patients face large out-of-pocket costs for anticancer drugs, they have several
options for reducing their liabilities. Patients with private insurance can apply for aid from drug
manufacturers’ co-pay assistance programs, which offset patients’ out of-pocket costs, typically
on generous terms. For example, Dendreon’s patient assistance program covers up to $6,000 of
patients’ copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles for its $93,000 prostate therapy sipuleucel-T,
boasting “75 percent of patients receiving Provenge [the trade name for sipuleucel-T] are
expected to have minimal to no out-of-pocket costs.” (Dendreon 2014). The program even
reimburses patients for the costs they incur during travel to oncology clinics. These funds flow
directly from pharmaceutical companies to patients and are not captured in insurers’ records.
Patient assistance programs lower the elasticity of patient demand, enabling manufacturers to set
higher prices (Howard 2014). The federal government does not allow assistance programs
affiliated with a pharmaceutical manufacturer to aid Medicare and Medicaid enrollees on the
grounds that these programs provide an illegal inducement for patients to receive care, but
manufacturers are allowed to donate funds and steer Medicare and Medicaid patients to
programs operated by independent foundations. Patients can also use death as a backstop against


2
 Some plans do not count spending on prescription drugs towards the out-of-pocket maximum, a
practice prohibited by the Affordable Care Act beginning in 2014.
                                                  9
medical debt. Most patients considering whether to use anticancer drugs have short life
expectancies. They may be willing to exhaust their assets to buy small gains in health. Health
care providers must write-off debt in excess of the decedent’s estate.
        Not surprisingly, the elasticity of demand with respect to patients’ out-of-pocket costs is
low. Goldman et al. (2006) estimate that spending on cancer drugs declines by 0.1 percent in
response to a 10 percent increase in patient coinsurance. For the sake of comparison, spending on
drugs used to treat arthritis declines by 2.1 percent and spending on drugs used to treat kidney
failure declines by 0.7 percent when patient coinsurance increases by 10 percent.


Trends in Launch Prices


        We evaluate pricing trends for 58 anticancer drugs approved in the US between 1995 and
2013 (CenterWatch 2014). We restrict attention to drugs administered with the primary intent of
extending survival time for cancer patients and drugs for which survival benefits have been
estimated in trials or modeling studies. We do not consider drugs administered to treat pain or
drugs that are administered to alleviate the side effects of cancer treatments. Details about the
selection of drugs, references for survival benefits, and other details about the data are provided
in an appendix, available upon request from the lead author.
        The FDA approves drugs for specific uses, or indications, which are described in each
drug’s “product label.” We focus on the benefits associated with each drug’s first FDA-approved
indication. Once a drug is FDA-approved, physicians are free to use the drug for any patient with
any condition, but manufacturers may not promote the drug for “off label” indications. We did
not consider the survival benefits associated with indications approved by the FDA after the
initial approval of the drug. In most cases, the benefits associated with these indications are
unknown to manufacturers at the time of launch and are thus difficult to incorporate into their
initial pricing decisions.
        Forty-one of the 58 drugs in our sample were approved on the basis of randomized
controlled trials. We obtained information on the incremental survival benefits of these drugs
from the results of these trials. Drugs are typically tested against the next best therapy available
at the time the trial was initiated. In some cases the next best therapy is “nothing”, and so

                                                 10
patients receive a placebo. We measured benefits by subtracting median overall survival in the
control arm from median overall survival in the treatment arm. We used progression-free
survival (the period of time the cancer is under control) when trials did not report overall
survival.3 Survival benefits equal the gain in median overall survival or, when trials did not
report overall survival or when overall survival was higher in the control arm, progression-free
survival (the period of time where the cancer is under control).4 Drug manufacturers may focus
on progression-free survival for practical reasons. Trials designed to detect differences in
progression-free survival are shorter (progression precedes death) and require a smaller sample
size because the variation in progression-free survival is typically lower than the variation in
overall survival. There is considerable debate in the oncology community about whether
progression-free survival is a good proxy for overall survival. Our view is that even if
progression-free survival benefits are only weakly correlated with overall survival benefits, data
on progression-free survival benefits provide a useful signal of product quality to a manufacturer
who must set a price for a new drug in the absence of information on overall survival benefits
and to practicing physicians who must decide whether to use it. In our data, we observe both
overall survival and progression-free survival for 20 drugs. The average absolute difference
between overall and progression-free survival is less than one month for five of these drugs and
less than two months for 13 of the drugs.
       For the 17 drugs that were approved on the basis of single-arm trials, we obtained
estimates of survival benefits from post-approval trials (N = 6) and cost-effectiveness studies that
use simulation models to project survival (N =11). Cost-effectiveness studies typically report
benefits in terms of mean life expectancy or mean quality-adjusted life years. We converted
these quantities to median survival gains assuming survival time is distributed exponentially. 5



3
  Trials report medians, because measurement of means is possible only after all patients in the
trial are dead. Some trials are not powered to detect changes in overall survival, but report it
anyway.
4
  Trials report medians, because measurement of means is possible only after all patients in the
trial are dead. Some trials are not powered to detect changes in overall survival, but report it
anyway.
5
  If we assume survival time is distributed exponentially, it is possible to convert means to
medians without estimating ancillary shape parameters. Median survival is equal to mean
survival multiplied by ln(2).
                                                 11
        We calculated the “episode treatment price” for each drug, which equals each drug’s
monthly cost to the Medicare program in 2013 dollars (see Bach 2009 for details) multiplied by
the typical duration of treatment in months. Medicare costs represent the actual dollar amounts
Medicare, the largest public insurance program, pays for drugs. In most cases Medicare
reimbursements will be greater than the prices hospitals, physicians and pharmacies pay to
wholesalers. We do not believe that rebates – refunds from manufacturers to hospitals,
physicians, pharmacies and third party insurers – are large in the market for new anticancer
drugs, but pricing is opaque and rebate arrangements are closely guarded. Medicare has adjusted
its payment formulae over time to better align reimbursement and wholesale prices. For this
reason, our price series may understate increases in providers’ acquisition prices. As we describe
below, drug acquisition costs vary between providers and pharmacies, and Medicare payment
rates do not account for differences in acquisition costs across various categories of buyers.
        Our approach accounts for differences in the duration of treatment across drugs and is
consistent with the notion of measuring the price of a treatment episode, as advocated by Berndt
et al. (2000) and Busch et al. (2001). However, a drug’s treatment episode price is not a
comprehensive measure of the impact of that drug on health care costs. The impact of a drug on
total costs depends on whether it is a substitute or complement to existing treatments and
whether it increases or decreases the incidence of side effects, some of which can be quite costly
to treat.


Prices vs. Survival Benefits Over Time


        Figure 1 plots treatment episode prices in 2013 dollars against incremental survival
benefits, both on the natural log scale. The average drug price is $65,900 (in 2013 dollars) and
the average survival benefit is 0.46 years. The markers identify drugs based on the source of
survival benefit data: overall survival from a randomized trial, progression-free survival from a
randomized trial, and overall survival from a modeling study. There is a positive correlation, 0.9,
between treatment episode prices and incremental survival benefits.
        A regression of the natural logarithm of prices on incremental life years gained indicates
that prices increase by 120 percent (with a 95 percent confidence interval ranging from 74 to 166

                                                12
percent) for each additional life year gained (or 14% per month gained). The effect in dollar
terms is $75,000 per year gained (with a 95 percent confidence interval from $12,000 to
$137,000).
       Newer drugs are not associated with greater survival benefits compared to older drugs. A
regression with life years gained as the dependent variable and year of approval as the
explanatory variable yields a small and insignificant coefficient (0.005 years of life gained, with
a 95 percent confidence interval from -0.024 to 0.034 years of life gained).
       Prices have increased over time. A regression of the natural logarithm of price on
approval year indicates that prices increased by 12 percent per year (with a 95 percent
confidence interval from 7 to 17 percent). The result is robust to the inclusion of a control for
survival benefits.
       For the remainder of the paper we focus on trends in the price per life year gained, which
equals the price per treatment episode (in 2013 dollars) divided by survival benefits. The price
per life year gained can be thought of as a “benefit-adjusted” price. The sample average is
$150,100 per year of life gained (with a standard deviation of $130,500). This value is in the
range of estimates of the willingness-to-pay for a quality-adjusted life year (Hirth et al. 2000).
Figure 2 plots drugs’ price per life year gained against drugs’ approval date. There is an upward
trend. A regression of the price per life year gained on approval year indicates that benefit- and
inflation-adjusted launch prices increased by $8,500 (with a 95 percent confidence interval from
$2,900 to $14,100) per year.6 The intercept (1995 is zero on the x-axis) is $54,100 (95 percent
confidence interval: -$16,700 to $124,900). Put another way, in 1995 patients and their insurers
paid $54,100 for a year of life. A decade later, 2005, they paid $139,100 for the same benefit. By
2013, they paid $207,000.
       Figure 3 shows trends in the price per life year classified by different types of anticancer
drugs. Upward trends are apparent for most disease types.




6
  The marginal effect from a generalized linear model with a log link and a gamma variance
function is $8,500 (95 percent confidence interval: $1,800 to $15,300). Details of this approach
are available in the appendix to be available with this paper at http://www.e-jep.org>.
                                                 13
Price Per Life-Year Gained and Drug Attributes


       We used least squares regression to determine if the relationship between the price per
life year gained (in 2013 dollars) and approval year is robust to the inclusion of controls for other
drug attributes. Table 1 presents regression estimates (sample means and other summary
statistics for the drug attributes are presented in the appendix, available upon request from the
lead author). We used the natural logarithm of the price per life year gained as the dependent
variable because the price per life year gained is skewed. Results are qualitatively similar if we
use untransformed prices as the dependent variable. Because of the modest sample size, we did
not attempt to control for all drug attributes simultaneously.
       The model in Column A, the baseline specification, indicates that benefit- and inflation-
adjusted launch prices increased 10 percent per year over the study period. The model in Column
B adds controls for the gastrointestinal complication and neutropenia rates. The gastrointestinal
complication rate is the average of the nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea rates experienced by
patients on the drug. The neutropenia rate is the proportion of patients who experience high-
grade neutropenia, a deficit of white blood cells which puts patients at risk of infection. We set
missing values to “0”. Data on the side effects experienced by patients in the control arms of
trials are inconsistently reported. We controlled for absolute rather than relative side effect rates,
which may be why the coefficient on the gastrointestinal complication rate is “wrong signed.” In
general, side effect rates are similar for newer and older drugs (Niraula et al. 2012).
        The model in Column C includes a control for administration route: intravenous versus
oral. Oral drugs are more convenient for patients than physician-administered intravenous drugs,
but patients’ out-of-pocket costs are typically higher for oral drugs. The positive coefficient on
the intravenous administration route is insignificant.
       The model in Column D explores the hypothesis that increases in prices reflect increased
production costs. We test this hypothesis indirectly by examining the link between several
proxies for production costs and prices. Biologic drugs are typically more expensive to develop
and produce than traditional anticancer drugs. Multiproduct firms – firms that sell two or more
anticancer drugs – are able to spread the fixed costs associated with marketing oncology drugs
across products and may have equipment that can be used to manufacture two or more products.

                                                  14
The coefficients on the cost-shifters are insignificant. These findings are consistent with the
observation that there is a large gap between the generic and brand launch prices of anticancer
drugs: for example, over 80 percent in the case of irinotecan (Conti et al 2012). The prices of on-
patent anticancer drugs do not appear to be closely related to marginal production costs.
       The model in Column E examines the relationship between the source of information
about survival benefits and prices. We would expect that physicians would be more willing to
prescribe drugs about which they have more information. This regression includes controls for
whether the drug was approved on the basis of a randomized trial and if survival benefits are
measured in terms of progression-free rather than overall survival. The coefficients are of the
expected sign but are not significant.
       The models in columns F-H consider whether drugs with few close substitutes command
higher prices. Characterizing the degree of competition between anticancer drugs is difficult.
Some compete, but most are used in a complementary manner, either in a co-administered
multidrug “cocktail” regimen or in a sequence of therapy lines (first-line therapy, second-line
therapy, etc.) Some drugs are approved to treat all patients diagnosed with late-stage cancer in a
specific body part, while other drugs have narrower indications. The model in Column F includes
a control for whether the drug was compared against a placebo (or “best supportive care”) or
against another drug. Drugs tested against placebos occupy unique niches in the product space
compared to drugs tested against “active” controls. Presumably the FDA and ethical review
boards would not allow a manufacturer to test an anticancer drug against a placebo unless the
drug had no direct substitutes. The coefficient is positive and significant at the 10 percent level.
The model in column G includes controls for whether the drug was granted priority review status
by the FDA. Priority review is granted to drugs that demonstrate “significant improvements in
the safety or effectiveness of the treatment, diagnosis, or prevention of serious conditions when
compared to standard applications.” The model indicates that drugs awarded priority review
status command significantly higher prices. The model in column H includes a variable equal to
the natural logarithm of the number of drugs previously approved for the tumor site (National
Cancer Institute 2014). The coefficient is negative and significant. It is unclear if this result can
be interpreted as a purely competitive effect because anticancer drugs are often used in a



                                                  15
complementary manner. The FDA grants orphan drug status to drugs used to treat rare
conditions. The coefficient on orphan drug status (Model G) is not significant.
        The model in column I includes controls for whether a drug was approved for use in
patients with specific genetic biomarkers (US Food and Drug Administration 2014) or as a
second-line drug, for use in patients whose disease has progressed after an initial course of
treatment. Demand may be less elastic, and prices higher, for drugs targeted at narrow patient
subgroups. The coefficient on the gene test variable is negative, contrary to our expectation.
The discussion up until this point has implicitly assumed that patients’ valuation of gains in life
expectancy from a new anticancer drug is independent of its clinical context. It does not depend
on the type of cancer or how long patients expect to live if they do not receive a new drug. This
approach treats anticancer drugs as bundles of comparable attributes. The model in column J
includes a control for baseline survival (i.e., survival in the control or comparator arm of the
study we used to assess survival benefits). Results indicate that the longer patients survive
without the drug, the lower the drug price. Patients’ and physicians’ willingness-to-pay may
depend on absolute survival as well as relative survival gains. They may place a higher value on
a drug that extends survival time by 6 months from a base of 8 months than one that extends
survival time by 6 months from a base of 12 months. The model in column K includes a control
for the tumor-specific mortality rate, which we calculated by dividing the number of deaths
attributed to the tumor by disease incidence. The coefficient on the mortality rate is positive but
is not significant.7
        The coefficient on approval year is economically and statistically significant in all 11
specifications in Table 1. Thus, our basic finding that benefit- and inflation-adjusted launch
prices increased by about 10 percent annually appears robust to the inclusion of controls for the
various drug attributes described above.




7
  Mortality rates are measured with substantial error. Ideally, we would like to measure mortality
among patients diagnosed with late-stage disease, but we do not have data on tumor incidence by
stage at diagnosis.
                                                 16
Sensitivity Checks


       We performed several sensitivity checks. We re-estimated the baseline model (Column
A) on the subsample of drugs approved on the basis of randomized trials and for which we had
trial-based estimates of overall survival. We also re-estimated the baseline model on the
subsample of drugs with prices below the 90th percentile ($94,000) to determine the sensitivity of
results to extreme values. In both cases the coefficients on approval date indicate that prices
increased by about 10 percent annually and were significant at the 1 percent level, consistent
with the results from the baseline model.


Explaining Pricing Trends


       Our empirical results suggest that the launch prices of anticancer drugs, even when
adjusted for inflation and survival benefits, have increased substantially over time. We offer two
explanations grounded in our observations of market behavior, economic theory, and current
regulatory policy.
       Our discussion focuses on branded drugs’ launch prices. If manufacturers make large
changes to drugs’ prices in the years following launch, our focus may be misplaced. We
analyzed the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ Average Sales Price files for a subset
of the drugs in our sample to determine if launch prices are a sufficient statistic for post-launch
prices. The files capture prices for the mostly intravenous drugs reimbursed under Medicare’s
Part B outpatient medical benefit. We excluded three drugs – gemcitabine, irinotecan, and
oxaliplatin – that experienced large declines in price following patent expiration and generic
entry. We calculated annualized growth rates in the remaining sample of 19 drugs. The average
annualized growth rate in real prices after launch was 1 percent. The 25th, 50th, and 75th
percentiles were -0.7 percent, 0.9 percent, and 4 percent. The results are consistent with Lu and
Comanor’s (1998) finding that the prices of innovative drugs do not change much after launch.
Launch prices are where the action is.




                                                 17
Reference pricing


       Writing to criticize the “astronomical” prices of new anticancer drugs, a group of
over 100 prominent oncologists (Experts in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia 2013) proposed
the following model of manufacturers’ price setting behavior: “How are the prices of
cancer drugs decided? Of the many complex factors involved, price often seems to follow
a simple formula: start with the price for the most recent similar drug on the market and
price the new one within 10-20 percent of that price (usually higher).” Industry insiders
echo this theory of price setting behavior. For example, from Hutchison (2010): “Gold
[CEO of Dendreon] says that the cost of Provenge was based on the `overall landscape’
of treatment prices for cancer.” From Marcus (2004): “A spokeswoman for AstraZeneca
justified the price of Iressa as ʽin line with other cancer treatments.’” From Silber (2005):
“The retail price of the drug will be $5,416 per month, an amount that Onyx said is in the
range of similarly specialized cancer drugs.”
       The theory that manufacturers set the prices of new drugs based on the prices of existing
therapies (not necessarily competitors), rather than some intrinsic standard of product value, is
consistent with reference price models of demand. Reference pricing models depart from the
standard economic model of consumer behavior by allowing consumers’ purchase decisions to
depend on a pricing anchor, or reference price, rather than on an internal comparison of price and
willingness-to-pay (Thaler 1985). Consumers may determine reference prices based on observed
past prices or the prices of similar, but not necessarily substitute, goods.
       Oncologists are in a strong position to influence the market share of anticancer drugs.
Although oncologists do not face direct incentives to avoid costly drugs, they may balk at
prescribing drugs with prices they perceive as exploitative — in the language of theory, drugs
with prices above the reference price level. An extensive literature in economics and marketing
describes how perceptions of fairness influence consumers’ attitudes towards prices and market
behavior (for example, Frey and Pommerehne 1993; Mas 2006; Maxwell 2002; Kahneman et al.
1986; Piron and Fernandez 1995).
       There is a “zone of indifference” around a reference price such that consumers ignore
small deviations from the reference price (Kalyanaram and Little 1994). The zone of indifference

                                                  18
gives manufacturers the ability to set the prices of new drugs slightly above the prices of existing
drugs without reducing quantity demanded. As costlier drugs come to market, oncologists
become habituated to higher prices, giving manufacturers leeway to set even higher prices in the
future. The characteristics of the market for anticancer drugs, including patent protection that
protects producers from direct competition and generous third party payment, allow this dynamic
to persist. These characteristics are present in other medical product markets, but not to the same
degree as in the anticancer drug market.
       Over time, the use of reference prices leads to forward-looking price complementarities
between manufacturers. When a new drug enters with a price in excess of the reference price, it
re-establishes price levels, freeing up the next entrant to set its price even higher. Kahneman et
al. (1986) write, “[P]rice increases that are not justified by increasing costs are judged less
objectionable when competitors have led the way.” Shortly after the FDA approved bevazicimab
and erlotinib, one Wall St. analyst noted: “Companies will be looking at these products to help
them determine the pricing of their own drugs…Tarceva and other drugs will likely take their
cue from Erbitux and Avastin” (Griffith 2004). According to textbook monopoly pricing theory,
the price of Erbitux (generic name cetuximab) should have had no direct bearing on the price of
Tarceva (generic name erlotinib), a lung and pancreatic cancer drug, because cetuximab was not
a competitor at the time.
       If a manufacturer sets a price that is perceived as exploitative, in the sense that the price
exceeds the reference price to a large degree, it risks provoking a backlash. One example of
where this happened involved a second-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer, ziv-
aflibercept (brand name Zaltrap). When approved by the FDA in 2012, its price was double that
of bevacizumab, its closest competitor, at bevacizumab’s common dosing level. Oncologists did
not view ziv-aflibercept as particularly innovative, and three prominent physicians at the
Memorial Sloan Kettering cancer center wrote an opinion piece in the New York Times (Bach et
al. 2012) stating that they would refrain from using ziv-aflibercept at their center because of its
price. One month later the manufacturer, Sanofi, announced that it would provide purchasers
with a 50 percent discount off the list price.
       According to one Wall Street analyst, “market structure effectively provides no
mechanism for price control in oncology other than companies’ goodwill and tolerance for

                                                  19
adverse publicity” (Anand 2007). The observation begs the question: What is to stop a
manufacturer from setting the price of a drug at $1,000,000 or more? Drug manufacturers’ are
able to set higher prices for new drugs, but they must be mindful of physicians’ ability to exact
retribution when manufacturers’ violate physicians’ norms of fairness in pricing.


Pricing Discounts


       Recent increases in the launch prices of anticancer drugs may be an unintended
consequence of policies to expand access to price discounts. The so-called 340B drug pricing
program, authorized by Congress in 1992, requires drug manufacturers to provide deep discounts
to 340B-qualified buyers. At the program’s inception, only federally qualified health centers,
specialized public health clinics, and disproportionate share hospitals (hospitals whose patient
population includes a high proportion of low-income patients) qualified for 340B discounts.
Discounts are set relative to the average price wholesalers, retail pharmacies, and providers pay
manufacturers to purchase drugs, called the “Average Manufacturer Price”. The 340B price
discount for branded drugs must be at least 23.1 percent of the Average Manufacturer Price.
Providers that purchase drugs through a government-designated distributor may receive
additional discounts, though these are relatively small, totaling $67 million in 2013 (Drug
Discount Monitor 2014). Participation in the 340B program is attractive for health care providers
because they do not have to pass the discount on to insurers. They profit on the spread between
third party payers’ drug reimbursement rates and the 340B discounted price.8
       Since 1992, Congress and federal regulators have broadened eligibility to include critical
access hospitals, free-standing cancer hospitals, some community hospitals, and outpatient
clinics affiliated with disproportionate share hospitals. Mergers between 340B providers and
non-340B providers, a predictable effect of the incentives inherent in the program, have also
expanded the program’s reach. Due to changes in eligibility rules and mergers, the number of
providers in the 340B program increased from 8,605 in 2001 to 16,572 in 2011 (US General

8
  When calculating average sales prices for purposes of Medicare reimbursement, regulations
instruct manufacturers to exclude sales to 340B providers. Hence Medicare reimbursement rates
are not affected by growth in the 340B discount program, though providers’ acquisition costs are
reduced.
                                                20
Accounting Office 2011). Industry sources predict that the volume of drug sales under the 340B
program will increase from $6 billion in 2010 to $12 billion in 2016 (Biotechnology Industry
Organization 2013).9
       Because the 340B discount is based on a drug’s average price, the program presents
manufacturers with an incentive to set higher launch prices to offset discounts. Increases in the
number of 340B-eliglble providers have magnified the incentive, possibly leading to upward
pressure in the prices paid by non-eligible providers (Conti and Bach 2013). The 340B program
also splits the market into price-elastic and price-inelastic segments. Just as branded drug
manufacturers increase prices following generic entry to capture revenues from brand-loyal
customers (Frank and Salkever 1997), manufacturers of recently launched drugs may cede large
discounts to their price-sensitive segment but increase prices to non-340B providers.
       The federal Medicaid program has its own set of drug pricing rules. In exchange for
formulary coverage by state Medicaid programs, branded manufacturers give rebates to the
federal government on sales to Medicaid patients. Similar to the 340B program, the rebate is
based on the Average Manufacturer Price. If a manufacturer increases the price of a drug over
and above the rate of inflation, it must pay a larger rebate. This aspect of the program provides
incentives for firms to set higher prices initially, rather than increasing prices after launch.
Although Medicaid accounts for less than 10 percent of spending on cancer treatment (Howard et
al. 2004), enrollment in the program is growing, presenting manufacturers with additional
incentives to increase prices to non-Medicaid patients.
       The United Kingdom and other European countries negotiate drug prices with
manufacturers. Although negotiated discounts are not legislatively linked to the US price, the US
price may serve as an opening bid in negotiations, and discounts are often expressed as a percent
of the US list price in contracts. As pressure has mounted on governments to reign in health
spending, European health systems have adopted a more aggressive bargaining stance, backed by




9
  This figure includes anticancer and non-cancer drugs. Industry sources indicate that the two
therapeutic classes having the largest 340B sales are anticancer drugs and anti-infectives.
                                                  21
a credible threat of non-coverage, potentially leading manufacturers to set higher US prices.10
The United Kingdom and many other countries do not divulge negotiated drug prices, and so we
are unable to determine whether launch prices have increased outside the US. There is anecdotal
evidence that they have. For example, a number of signatories to a statement calling attention to
the “unsustainable” prices of new anticancer drugs were European physicians (Experts in
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia 2013).


Other potential causes of price increases


       What about “obvious” explanations for pricing trends, such as shifts in patient or
physician demand? Changes on the demand side of the market seem inconsistent with observed
pricing trends. The income elasticity of the demand for health care is not large enough to account
for changes in prices or health care spending generally (Newhouse 1992). Moreover, patient
cost-sharing is higher now than it was in 1995 as consumers have shifted to high-deductible
plans (Berndt and Newhouse 2012; Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research &
Educational Trust 2013). The structure of insurers’ payments to physicians has remained largely
unchanged, but payment levels for physician-administered anticancer drugs have declined
following passage of the Medicare Modernization Act (Jacobson et al. 2006; 2010).
       On the supply side, it is unlikely that changes in development and production costs alone
can explain launch pricing trends. The FDA has reduced barriers to approval, and advances in
genetics have facilitated drug discovery. The generic versions of anticancer drugs cost much less
than the branded versions, suggesting that production costs are low relative to pre-patent
expiration price levels. Pharmaceutical manufactures often claim that they set drug prices to
recoup research and development costs. Manufacturers’ research and development costs may
have increased over time. As more drugs come to market, the number of unexploited targets for
anticancer therapy shrinks, requiring firms to invest more to develop new drugs. Lacking
measures of research and development costs, we are unable to evaluate the claim empirically.

10
   The British National Health Service and other national health systems do not disclose
negotiated prices, and so we cannot determine whether the spread between domestic and
international drug prices has increased.


                                                22
However, research and development costs are sunk at the time of product launch, and so they
ought not to factor into the pricing decisions of a profit-maximizing firm once the product has
been developed. We believe the direction of causation runs from prices to research and
development costs – as prices increases, manufacturers are willing to spend more to discover
new drugs – rather than the other way around.


Discussion


       We find that, controlling for inflation and survival benefits, the launch prices of new
anticancer drugs have increased over time. We do not anticipate that US payers and providers
will change their policies in a way that will fundamentally change pricing dynamics, at least in
the near term. The American Society of Clinical Oncology, the main professional group for
physicians who treat cancer patients, is encouraging its members to consider costs when they
choose drugs, but these efforts are mostly focused on costs to patients rather than system-wide
costs. Efforts to increase the sensitivity of physician demand to drug prices still rely on
physicians’ sense of fairness rather than their pocketbooks. A Congressional advisory board, the
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, recently held a hearing on reforming reimbursement
for physician-administered drugs. Many committee members voiced support for proposals that
would reduce Medicare reimbursement for drugs if there are less costly alternatives that have a
“similar health effect” (InsideHealthPolicy 2014). However, newly-approved anticancer drugs
are, by definition, unique, and will probably be unaffected if Medicare implements the policy.
       To supporters of the US health care system, new anticancer drugs are a potent symbol of
progress and represent the type of innovation that would be squelched if Medicare and other US
insurers denied coverage to costly treatments (for example, Gingrich 2009). To critics, the
pricing of new anticancer drugs represents the worst excesses of a system that provides few
checks on drug companies’ pricing power and prioritizes gains in health, however small, over
cost control. Policymakers are quick to agree that the health system should discourage use of
ineffective treatments, but it is unclear how regulators, insurers, and physicians should approach
treatments that are more costly but also offer small incremental benefits.



                                                 23
       The optimistic view of recent trends in cancer drug development is that although
individual drugs many not be associated with large gains in survival, the work that goes into
developing a new drug contributes to the stock of knowledge about cancer biology. Eventually,
scientists will use the information gleaned from the development of existing drugs to develop
new drugs with much greater benefits. The pessimistic view is that current coverage,
reimbursement, and patent policies (Budish, Roin and Williams 2013) divert drug
manufacturers’ attention away from developing drugs that yield truly meaningful survival
benefits. If insurers restricted coverage to drugs that improved survival time by an economically
significant amount, perhaps there would be more of them.

References

Akscin, John, Thomas R. Barr, and Elaine L. Towle. 2007. “Key Practice Indicators in Office-
Based Oncology Practices: 2007 Report on 2006 Data.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 3(4): 200-
3.

Anand, Geeta. 2007. “Prescribing Caution: From Wall Street, a Warning About Cancer-Drug
Prices; Morgan Stanley Analyst Creates Stir in Industry As He Sees a Backlash.” Wall Street
Journal, March 15. http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB117391934158537592

Bach, Peter B. 2009. “Limits on Medicare's Ability to Control Rising Spending on Cancer
Drugs.” New England Journal of Medicine 360(6): 626-33.

Bach, Peter B., Leonard B. Saltz, and Robert E. Wittes. 2012. “In Cancer Care, Cost Matters.”
The New York Times, October 14. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/15/

Conti, Rena M., Peter B. Bach. 2013. “Cost Consequences of the 340B Drug Discount Program.”
Journal of the American Medical Association 309(19): 1995-6.

Berndt, Ernst R., David Cutler, Richard G. Frank, Zvi Griliches, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Jack
E. Triplett, 2000. “Medical Care Prices and Output,” Chap. 3, In Handbook of Health
Economics, Vol. 1A. edited by J.P. Newhouse and A.C. Culyer. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
B.V.

Berndt, Ernst R., and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2012. “Pricing and Reimbursement in US
Pharmaceutical Markets.” Chap. 8 in The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of the
Biopharmaceutical Industry, edited by P.M. Danzon and S.N. Nicholson. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.




                                                24
Berndt, Ernst R., Linda T. Bui, David R. Reiley, and Glen L. Urban. 1995. “Information,
Marketing and Pricing in the US Anti-Ulcer Drug Market.” American Economic Review 85(2):
100-5.

Biotechnology Industry Organization. 2013. The 340B Drug Discount Program.
http://www.bio.org/sites/default/files/340B percent20White percent20Paper
percent20FINAL.pdf

Budish, Eric, Benjamin N. Roin, Heidi Williams. 2013. “Do Fixed Patent Terms Distort
Innovation? Evidence from Cancer Clinical Trials.” National Bureau of Economic Research
working paper 19430.

Busch, Susan H., Ernst R. Berndt, and Richard G. Frank. 2001. “Creating Price Indexes for
Measuring Productivity in Mental Health Care.” Chap. 5 in Frontiers in Health Policy Research,
Vol. 4, edited by A.M. Garber. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press for the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Cavalli, Franco. 2013. “An Appeal to World Leaders: Stop Cancer Now.” The Lancet
381(9865): 425-6.

Caves, Richard E., Michael D. Whinston, and Mark A. Hurwitz. 1991. “Patent Expiration, Entry
and Competition in the US Pharmaceutical Industry: An Exploratory Analysis.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics 1-48.

Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 2014. CMS proposes program changes for Medicare
Advantage and Prescription Drug Benefit Programs for Contract Year 2015 (CMS-4159-P).
January 6. http://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Fact-Sheets/2014-Fact-
sheets-items/2014-01-06.html

CenterWatch. 2014. FDA Approved Drugs for Oncology. http://www.centerwatch.com/drug-
information/fda-approved-drugs/therapeutic-area/12/

Chen, Jie, and John A. Rizzo. 2012. “Pricing Dynamics and Product Quality: The Case of
Antidepressant Drugs.” Empirical Economics 42(1): 279-300.

Conti, Rena M., Arielle C. Bernstein, Victoria M. Villaflor, Richard L. Schilsky, Meredith B.
Rosenthal, and Peter B. Bach. 2013. “Prevalence of Off-Label Use and Spending in 2010
Among Patent-Protected Chemotherapies in a Population-Based Cohort of Medical
Oncologists.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 31(9): 1134-9.

Conti, Rena M., and Peter B. Bach. 2013. “Cost Consequences of the 340B Drug Discount
Program.” Journal of the American Medical Association 309(19): 1995-6.




                                               25
Conti, Rena M, Meredith B. Rosenthal, Blase N. Polite, Peter B. Bach, and Ya-Chen Tina Shih.
2012. “Infused Chemotherapy Use in the Elderly After Patent Expiration.” American Journal of
Managed Care 18(5): e173-8.

Cockburn, Iain M., and Aslam H. Anis. 2001. “Hedonic Analysis of Arthritis Drugs.” Chap. 11
in Medical Care Output and Productivity, edited by E. Berndt and D. Cutler. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.

Dendreon. 2014. Patient Access. http://www.dendreon.com/patient_resources/patient_access/

Drug Discount Monitor. 2014. 340B Sales Totaled $7.5 Billion in 2013, Apexus Says. February
14. http://drugdiscountmonitor.com/2014/02/340b-sales-totaled-7-5-billion-in-2013-apexus-says/

Experts in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia. 2013. “The Price of Drugs for Chronic Myeloid
Leukemia (CML) is a Reflection of the Unsustainable Prices of Cancer Drugs: From the
Perspective of a Large Group of CML Experts.” Blood 121(22): 4439-42.

Fleck, Leonard. 2013. "Just Caring: Can We Afford the Ethical and Economic Costs of
Circumventing Cancer Drug Resistance?” Journal of Personalized Medicine 3(3): 124-43.

Frank, Richard G., and David S. Salkever. 1997. “Generic Entry and the Pricing of
Pharmaceuticals.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 6(1): 75-90.

Frey, Bruno S., and Werner W. Pommerehne. 1993. “On the Fairness of Pricing--An Empirical
Survey among the General Population.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 20(3):
295-307.

Gingrich, Newt. 2009. “Trust the Government.” Human Events. August 12.
http://humanevents.com/2009/08/12/trust-the-government/

Goldman, Dana P., Anupam B. Jena, Darius N. Lakdawalla, Jennifer L. Malin, Jesse D. Malkin,
and Eric Sun. 2010. “The Value of Specialty Oncology Drugs.” Health Service Research 45(1):
115-32.

Goldman, Dana P., Geoffrey F. Joyce, Grant Lawless, William H. Crown, and Vincent Willey.
2006 “Benefit Design and Specialty Drug Use.” Health Affairs 25(5): 1319-31.

Griffith, Victoria. 2004. “Pricing Weighs on Cancer Treatments.” Financial Times, June 03.
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/8a7697f6-b4fa-11d8-81c6-000e2511c801.html#axzz38sOrHssv

Hall, Stephen S. 2013. “The Cost of Living.” New York Magazine. October 20.
http://nymag.com/news/features/cancer-drugs-2013-10/




                                              26
Hirth, Richard A, Michael E. Chernew, Edward Miller, A. Mark Fendrick and William G.
Weissert. 2000. “Willingness to Pay for a Quality-Adjusted Life Year: In Search of a Standard.”
Medical Decision Making 20(3): 332-42.

Howard, David H. 2014. “Drug Companies’ Patient-Assistance Programs – Helping Patients or
Profits?” New England Journal of Medicine. 371(2): 97-9.

Howard, David H, John Kauh, and Joseph Lipscomb. 2010. “The Value of New
Chemotherapeutic Agents for Metastatic Colorectal Cancer.” Archives of Internal Medicine
170(6): 537-42.

Howard, David H., Carolyn Kenline, Hillard M. Lazarus, Charles F. LeMaistre, Richard T.
Maziarz, Philip L. McCarthy Jr., Susan K. Parsons, David Szwajcer, James Douglas Rizzo and
Navneet S. Majhail. 2011. “Abandonment of High Dose Chemotherapy/Hematopoietic Cell
Transplants for Breast Cancer.” Health Services Research 46(6): 1762-77.

Howard, David H., Nicole A. Molinari, and Kenneth E. Thorpe. 2004. National Estimates of
Medical Costs Incurred by Non-Elderly Cancer Patients. Cancer 100(5): 883–891.

Hutchison, Courtney. 2010. “Provenge Cancer Vaccine: Can You Put a Price on Delaying
Death?” ABC News. July 29. http://abcnews.go.com/Health/ProstateCancerNews/provenge-
cancer-vaccine-months-life-worth-100k/story?id=11269159

IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics. 2014. “Innovation in Cancer Care and Implications for
Health Systems: Global Oncology Trend Report” Available at:
http://www.imshealth.com/portal/site/imshealth/menuitem.762a961826aad98f53c753c71ad8c22
a/?vgnextoid=f8d4df7a5e8b5410VgnVCM10000076192ca2RCRD.

InsideHealthPolicy. 2014. MedPAC Explores Fixes To Part B Drug Payment Policy, Calls
Current System ‘Perverse Incentive’. http://www.pipcpatients.org/pipc-
admin/pdf/cde114_MedPAC%20Explores%20Fixes%20To%20Part%20B%20Drug%20Paymen
t%20Policy.pdf

Jacobson, Mireille, A. James O’Malley, Craig C. Earle, Juliana Pakes, Peter Gaccione, and
Joseph P.Newhouse. 2006. “Does Reimbursement Influence Chemotherapy Treatment for
Cancer Patients?” Health Affairs 25(2): 437-43.

Jacobson, Mireille, Craig C. Earle, Mary Price, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2010. “How
Medicare's payment cuts for cancer chemotherapy drugs changed patterns of treatment.” Health
Affairs 29(7): 1391-9.

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, 1986. “Fairness as a Constraint on
Profit Seeking: Entitlements in the Market.” American Economic Review 76(4): 728-41.



                                              27
Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust. 2013. Employer Health
Benefits. 2013 Annual Survey. Washington, D.C.: Kaiser Family Foundation and Health
Research & Educational Trust.

Kalyanaram, Gurumurthy, and John D.C. Little. 1994. “An Empirical Analysis of Latitude of
Price Acceptance in Consumer Package Goods.” Journal of Consumer Research 21(3): 408-18.

Lakdawalla, Darius N, John A. Romley, Yuri Sanchez, J. Ross Maclean, John R. Penrod, and
Tomas Philipson. 2012. “How Cancer Patients Value Hope and the Implications for Cost-
Effectiveness Assessments of High-Cost Cancer Therapies.” Health Affairs 31(4): 676-82.

Landsem, Hope. 2013. “Rationing Health Care in Oregon.” Wall Street Journal, August 8.
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324522504579000560184822956

Kantarjian, Hagop M, Tito Fojo, Michael Mathisen, and Leonard A. Zwelling. 2013. “Cancer
Drugs in the United States: Justum Pretium--The Just Price.” Journal of Clinical Oncology
31(28): 3600-4.

Lichtenberg, Frank. 2009. “The Effect of New Cancer Drug Approvals on the Life Expectancy
of American Cancer Patients, 1978-2004.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 18(5):
407-28.

Lichtenberg, Frank R. 2009. “International Differences in Cancer Survival Rates: The Role of
New Drug Launches.” International Journal of Healthcare Technology and Management 10(3):
138-55.

Lu, Z. John and William S. Comanor. 1998. “Strategic Pricing of New Pharmaceuticals. Review
of Economics and Statistics 80(1): 108-18.

Lucarelli, Claudio, and Sean Nicholson, 2009, “A Quality-Adjusted Price Index for Colorectal
Cancer Drugs.” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 15174.

Malin, Jennifer L, Jane C. Weeks, Arnold L Potosky, Mark C. Hornbrook, and Nancy L Keating.
2013. “Medical Oncologists’ Perceptions of Financial Incentives in Cancer Care.” Journal of
Clinical Oncology 31(5): 530-5.

Marcus, Amy D. 2004. “Price Becomes Factor in Cancer Treatment.” Wall Street Journal
September 7. http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB109450779986210547

Mas, Alexandre. 2006. “Pay, Reference Points, and Police Performance.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 121(3): 783-821.

Maxwell, Sarah. 2002. “Rule-Based Price Fairness and Its Effect on Willingness to Purchase.”
Journal of Economic Psychology 23(2): 191-212.


                                              28
National Comprehensive Cancer Network. 2010. Guidelines for Breast Cancer Updated;
Bevacizumab Recommendation Affirmed.
http://www.nccn.org/about/news/newsinfo.asp?NewsID = 259.

National Cancer Institute. 2014. Cancer Drug Information.
http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/druginfo/alphalist

Neumann, Peter J. 2005. Using Cost-Effectiveness Analysis to Improve Health Care. Oxford,
United Kingdom; Oxford University Press.

Newhouse, Joseph P. 1992. Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss? Journal of Economic
Perspectives 6(3): 3-21.

Niraula, Saroj, Bostjan Seruga, Alberto Ocana, Tiffany Shao Robyn Goldstein, Ian F. Tannock,
and Eitan Amir. 2012. “The Price We Pay for Progress: A Meta-Analysis of Harms of Newly
Approved Anticancer Drugs.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 30(24): 3012-9.

PhRMA (Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America). 2014. Medicines in
Development. 2014. http://www.phrma.org/innovation/meds-in-development

Piron, Robert, and Luis Fernandez. 1995. “Are Fairness Constraints on Profit-Seeking
Important?” Journal of Economic Psychology 16(1): 73-96.

Raborn Martin L., Elise M. Pelletier, Daniel B. Smith, and Carolina M. Reyes. 2012. “Patient
Out-of-Pocket Payments for Oral Oncolytics: Results from a 2009 US Claims Data Analysis.”
American Journal of Managed Care 18(5 No. 2): SP57-64.

Reekie, W. Duncan. 1978. “Price and Quality Competition in the United States Drug Industry.”
The Journal of Industrial Economics 26(3): 223-37.

Romley, John A, Yuri Sanchez, John R. Penrod, and Dana P. Goldman. 2012. “Survey Results
Show That Adults are Willing to Pay Higher Insurance Premiums for Generous Coverage of
Specialty Drugs.” Health Affairs 31(4): 683-90.

Schrag, Deborah. 2004. “The Price Tag on Progress--Chemotherapy for Colorectal Cancer.” New
England Journal of Medicine 351(4): 317-9.

Seabury, Seth A., Dana P. Goldman, J. Ross Maclean, John R. Penrod, and Darius N.
Lakdawalla. 2012. “Patients Value Metastatic Cancer Therapy More Highly Than is Typically
Shown Through Traditional Estimates.” Health Affairs 31(4): 691-9.

Silber, Judy. 2005. Onyx Gets OK for Kidney Cancer Drug. Contra Costa Times December 21.

Snider, Julia Thornton, John A. Romley, John, William B. Vogt, and Tomas J. Philipson. 2012.
“The Option Value of Innovation.” Forum for Health Economics & Policy 15(2): 1558-9544.

                                              29
Sun, Eric, Anupam B. Jena, Darius Lakdawalla, Carolina Reyes, Tomas J. Philipson, and Dana
Goldman. 2010. “The Contributions of Improved Therapy and Early Detection to Cancer
Survival Gains, 1988-2000.” Forum for Health Economics & Policy 13(2): 1-20.

Suslow, Valerie Y. 1996. “Measuring Quality Change in Pharmaceutical Markets: Hedonic
Price Indexes for Anti-Ulcer Drugs.” Chap. 4 in Competitive Strategies in the Pharmaceutical
Industry, edited by R. Helms. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute.

Szabo, Liz. 2004 “Price of Cancer Drugs Called ‘Mind-Boggling’” USA Today. July 21.
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/health/2004-07-21-cancer-usat_x.htm

Thaler Richard. 1985, “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice,” Marketing Science 4(3):
199-214.

Trusheim, Mark R., and Ernst R. Berndt. 2012. “The Segmentation of Therapeutic Populations in
Oncology.” Health Management, Policy and Innovation 1(1): 19-34.

US Food and Drug Administration. 2014a. Table of Pharmacogenomic Biomarkers in Drug
Labeling. August 18.
http://www.fda.gov/drugs/scienceresearch/researchareas/pharmacogenetics/ucm083378.htm

US Food and Drug Administration. 2014. Fast Track, Breakthrough Therapy, Accelerated
Approval and Priority Review. September 18, 2014.
http://www.fda.gov/ForPatients/Approvals/Fast/default.htm

US General Accounting Office. 2011. Manufacturer Discounts in the 340B Program Offer
Benefits, but Federal Oversight Needs Improvement. Washington, D.C.

Weeks, Jane C, Paul J. Catalano, Angel Cronin, Matthew D. Finkelman, Jennifer W. Mack,
Nancy L. Keating, and Deborah Schrag. 2012 “Patients’ Expectations About Effects of
Chemotherapy for advanced Cancer.” New England Journal of Medicine 367(17): 1616-25.

Wittes, Robert E. 2004. “Cancer Weapons, Out of Reach.” Washington Post June 15.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A42035-2004Jun14.html

Woodward, Rebecca M, Martin L. Brown, Susan T. Stewart, Kathleen A. Cronin, and David M.
Cutler. 2007. “The Value of Medical Interventions for Lung Cancer in the Elderly: Results from
SEER-CMHSF.” Cancer 110(11): 2511-8.




                                              30
                                                                         Figure 1: Price versus life years gained

                                             500
Price on log scale ($1,000s of 2013 USD)




                                           300
                                             200

                                           100

                                                 50




                                            10


                                                  4                                                          Source of survival benefit:
                                                                                                             Trial, overall survival
                                                                                                             Trial, progression-free survival
                                                                                                             Modelling study

                                                           0.1          0.2                 0.5         1.0          2.0        3.0         5.0
                                                                              Life years gained on log scale (years)
                                                      Source: Authors




                                                                                           31
                                                                      Figure 2: Price per life year gained versus approval date
Price per life year gained ($1,000s of 2013 USD)




                                                   400        Source of survival benefit:                                                              802
                                                              Trial, overall survival
                                                   350        Trial, progression-free survival
                                                              Modelling study
                                                   300

                                                   250

                                                   200

                                                   150

                                                   100

                                                    50

                                                     0

                                                         1996      1998       2000        2002      2004       2006       2008       2010        2012         2014
                                                                                                   Approval date
                                                         The best fit line is: Price per life year gained = $54,100 + $8,500 x Approval year.
                                                         Approval Year = 0 for 1995, 1 for 1996, etc. For purposes of display, we re-coded one value
                                                         from $802,000 to $400,000.
                                                         Source: Authors




                                                                                                       32
                                                            Figure 3: Price per life year gained versus approval date by indication
                                                                     Breast                        Colorectal                             Kidney
Price per life year gained ($1,000s of 2013 USD)




                                                    200                              400                              400

                                                    150
                                                                                     300                              300
                                                    100
                                                                                     200                              200
                                                     50
                                                                                     100                              100
                                                      0

                                                          1996 2000 2004 2008 2012         1996 2000 2004 2008 2012         1996 2000 2004 2008 2012

                                                                     Blood                           Other
                                                    200                              400

                                                    150                              300

                                                    100                              200

                                                     50                              100
                                                                                                                             Source of survival benefit:
                                                      0                                0                                     Trial, overall survival
                                                                                                                             Trial, progression-free survival
                                                          1996 2000 2004 2008 2012         1996 2000 2004 2008 2012          Modelling study


                                                                                              Approval date
                                                   Source: Authors




                                                                                                    33
Table 1: Impact of approval year and other variables on the natural logrithm of the price per life year gained in $1,000s of 2013 USD for 58 cancer drugs approved between 1995
and 2013

                                      A                      B                       C                      D                        E                     F

Approval year                 0.10 [0.06, 0.14]*     0.10 [0.06, 0.14]*     0.10 [0.06, 0.14]*      0.10 [0.06, 0.15]*      0.10 [0.06, 0.15]*     0.09 [0.05, 0.13]*
GI complication rate                                 1.70 [0.47, 2.94]*
Neutropenia rate                                     0.26 [-0.76, 1.28]
IV drug                                                                     0.26 [-0.22, 0.74]
Biologic                                                                                            -0.15 [-0.67, 0.36]
Multiproduct firm                                                                                    0.38 [-0.14, 0.90]
Randomized controlled trial                                                                                                  0.12 [-0.45, 0.69]
Progression free survival                                                                                                   -0.36 [-0.91, 0.20]
Placebo comparator                                                                                                                                 0.46 [-0.02, 0.94]+
Constant                      3.51 [2.99, 4.03]*     2.95 [2.31, 3.59]*     3.34 [2.73, 3.95]*      3.24 [2.58, 3.89]*      3.48 [2.89, 4.06]*     3.39 [2.87, 3.92]*
R-squared                           0.28                  0.37                    0.29                    0.31                    0.30                  0.32

                                      G                      H                       I                       J                      K

Approval year                  0.10 [0.07, 0.14]*    0.10 [0.06, 0.14]*     0.09 [0.05, 0.14]*      0.09 [0.05, 0.13]*      0.11 [0.06, 0.15]*
Priority drug                  0.93 [0.46, 1.40]*
Orphan drug                   -0.17 [-0.67, 0.33]
Ln competitors                                      -0.64 [-0.99, -0.29]*
Gene test                                                                   -0.59 [-1.05, -0.14]*
Second line therapy                                                          0.15 [-0.33, 0.62]
Baseline survival                                                                                   -0.29 [-0.53, -0.05]*
Mortality rate                                                                                                              0.77 [-0.38, 1.92]
Constant                      2.83 [2.23, 3.44]*     4.92 [4.01, 5.83]*     3.75 [3.09, 4.42]*      3.89 [3.30, 4.48]*      3.20 [2.50, 3.90]*

R-squared                           0.44                  0.41                    0.36                    0.35                    0.30


*P < 0.05, +P < 0.10
95% Confidence intervals are in brackets.
GI: gastrointestinal , IV: intravenous.




                                                                                         34
