                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT HIGH-ACHIEVING LOW-INCOME STUDENTS KNOW ABOUT COLLEGE

                                           Caroline Hoxby
                                            Sarah Turner

                                        Working Paper 20861
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20861


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015


We gratefully acknowledge supporters of the Expanding College Opportunities project including Stanford
University, Princeton University, Syracuse University, The University of Michigan, University of
Virginia, Duke University, Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Northwestern
University, Smith College, The University of California, Vassar College, participants in the Windsor
Group meetings of higher education leaders, John Hennessy, Roberta Katz, John Casteen III, William
Fitzsimmons, Rick Shaw, Ted Spencer, Janet Rapelye, Greg Roberts, The College Board, ACT, Herb
Elish, Connie Betterton, Anne Sturvenant, Ryan Williams, Michael Matthews, Sharon Lavelle, Bettina
Donohoe, David Coleman, Robert Ziomek, Ranjit Sidhu, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Spencer
Foundation for Research Related to Education, the Smith Richardson Foundation, the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation, Harriet Zuckerman, Michael McPherson, Mark Steinmeyer, Karen Douglas, Hiromi
Ono, Greg Ratliff, William Bowen, Catherine Hill, Henry Bienen, Joshua Leake-Campbell, Stephanie
Adams, Christina Harvey, Alexandra Cowell, Jacqueline Basu, and Casey Cox. The interventions,
survey, and evaluation were supported by grant R305A100120 from the U.S. Department of Education's
Institute for Education Sciences (IES) and by a generous grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Caroline Hoxby and Sarah Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
What High-Achieving Low-Income Students Know About College
Caroline Hoxby and Sarah Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 20861
January 2015
JEL No. I2,I21,I22,I23,I24,I26

                                               ABSTRACT

Previous work (Hoxby and Avery 2014) shows that low-income higher achievers tend not to apply
to selective colleges despite being extremely likely to be admitted with financial aid so generous that
they would pay less than they do to attend the non-selective schools they usually attend. The Expanding
College Opportunities project is a randomized controlled trial that provides such students with individualized
information about the college application process and colleges' net prices. In other work (Hoxby and
Turner 2013), we show that the informational intervention substantially raises students' probability
of applying to, being admitted at, enrolling at, and progressing at selective colleges. In this study, we
show that the intervention actually changes students' informedness on key topics such as the cost of
college, the availability of the curricula and peers they seek, and the different types of colleges available
to them. We highlight topics on which the control students, who experienced no intervention, are seriously
misinformed.


Caroline Hoxby
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Building, 579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
choxby@stanford.edu

Sarah Turner
University of Virginia
Department of Economics
Monroe Hall, Room 237
248 McCormick Rd
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
sturner@virginia.edu
1. Introduction
The decisions that young people make about college – where to apply, where
to attend, how to pay, and what course of study to pursue – can greatly affect
whether they achieve their earnings, career, and other life goals. Even among
those with strong academic preparation, low-income students have poorer
college outcomes than their more affluent peers. It is at the application stage
– not admissions or matriculation -- where low-income high achievers diverge
from their higher-income counterparts (Hoxby and Avery, 2013).
     The Expanding College Opportunities (ECO) project is an intervention
designed and implemented by the authors to test the hypothesis that low-
income, high achievers find it hard to digest the mountain of complex
information on colleges’ net prices, attributes, and application processes and
apply it to their individual circumstances. In a large randomized controlled
trial, the comprehensive ECO intervention (hereafter, ECO-C) caused students
to apply to, be admitted to, and matriculate at schools with richer instructional
resources, higher graduation rates, and better prepared peers (Hoxby and
Turner, 2013). This paper uses ECO’s rich survey data to get “inside the black
box” and evaluate how ECO-C affects students’ knowledge and decision-
making.

2. Design, Implementation & Evaluation
ECO-C gave low-income high achievers information on applying to colleges,
what they would actually pay at various colleges, colleges’ graduation rates and
instructional resources, and no-paperwork fee waivers. Materials were
customized to provide information specific to each student’s family
circumstances and location. ECO-C did not recommend colleges but, rather,
provided information that was relevant and in context.
    The target students (i) scored in the top decile of SAT I or ACT takers; (ii)
had estimated family income in the bottom third of the income distribution for
families with a twelfth grader; (iii) did not attend a "feeder" high school.1
Our findings on enrollment and degree attainment can be based on
administrative data from the National Student Clearinghouse, but we obtained
rich survey data to evaluate students’ knowledge and decision-making. 66.9
percent of students answered the survey, and there is no differential response
between the treatment and control groups.2




1
  We also tested the intervention on some non-target students. Hoxby and Turner
(2013) describes the interventions, survey and results in detail.
2
   We test for differential response using both pre-experiment background
characteristics and National Student Clearinghouse data.

                                       2
3. Effects of Expanding College Opportunities on College
Choices
ECO-C’s treatment-on-the-treated effects were substantial.3 Relative to the
controls, treated students submitted 48 percent more applications and were 56
percent more likely to apply to a peer college (or better). They applied to
colleges with 17 percent higher graduation rates and 55 percent higher
instructional spending.4 Treated students were admitted to 31 percent more
colleges and were 78 percent more likely to be admitted by a peer college. They
were admitted at colleges with 24 percent higher graduation rates and 34
percent higher instructional spending. Treated students enrolled in colleges
that were 46 percent more likely to be peer institutions, whose graduation
rates were 15 percent higher, and whose instructional spending was 22 percent
higher.

4. Understanding Why the Expanding College Opportunities
Interventions Worked
Revealed preference—students making different choices when
treated—suggests that the intervention made them better off. ECO’s rich
survey data help us understand why.

4.1 Information on Net Price
Price is perhaps the most salient dimension of any large investment like a car,
home or college education, yet low-income high achievers may have a
particularly difficult time learning it. The most selective and resource-rich
colleges have high “sticker” prices but these are irrelevant. Owing to generous
financial aid, low-income students typically pay less to attend such schools
than they would pay to attend non-selective schools that have far fewer
instructional resources. However, net prices are not obvious because a student
only receives a financial aid offer after she applies and is admitted. ECO-C
helps students form accurate expectations by giving them examples of net
prices for students with similar family income at schools known to be salient
in their area, other in-state schools, and a random sample of peer institutions
outside their state. The intervention also explains the value of different forms
of aid and the aid application process.
    In one set of questions, the survey asked students what factors made them


3
  Because the materials were distributed by an unknown organization and many
families therefore discarded them, the treatment-on-the-treated estimates are what are
relevant for future policies (which are being conducted by highly reputed college
organizations). We count a student as being treated if he or she could simply recall
receiving (not necessarily reading) the materials. See Hoxby and Turner (2013) for a
detailed discussion.
4
  A “peer college” is one in which the median student’s college assessment score is
within 5 percentiles of the student’s own.

                                          3
more likely to apply to a college. The choices were “No difference”, “Somewhat
more likely to apply,” “Much more likely to apply”. Table 1 shows treatment-
on-the-treated effects on some relevant responses.5 Treated students increased
the weight they placed on financial aid when making decisions. Relative to the
control group, they said 39 percent more often that they were “much more
likely to apply” if “I could tell from the college's materials that I would get
enough financial aid to attend.” They said 42 percent more often that they were
“much more likely to apply” if “The college advertised that it admits students
without regard to financial need.”

                                   Table 1
             Determinants of Students’ College Application Decisions

                                                Control                      Treatment
                                                mean of                        effect as
    How important were each of the          “Much more           ECO-C       percentage
    following factors in your decision         likely to     treatment        of control
    about where to apply?                    apply if…”:          effect          mean
    I could tell from the college's               0.402        0.156***           38.8%
    materials that I would get
    enough financial aid to attend.
    The college advertised that it                  0.225         0.096*           42.7%
    admits students without regard
    to financial need.
    The college's average student                   0.320       0.133**            41.6%
    has test scores and a GPA like
    mine.
    The college has a high                          0.258       0.104**            40.3%
    graduation rate.
    The college's academic programs                 0.785          0.068            8.7%
    have a very good reputation.
    Students with an income                         0.046         -0.016          -34.8%
    background similar to mine are
    well-represented at the college.

Notes: The comprehensive ECO treatment-on-the-treated effect is from a regression of
the "Much more likely to apply" indicator on treatment status, scaled by the probability
of being treated (see text).
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2011-12 ECO cohort. See Hoxby and Turner
(2013) for additional details.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant
at the 10 percent level.



5
 We show treatment-on-the-treated effects to be consistent with the results mentioned
above. To obtain intention-to-treat effects, multiply by 0.4.

                                             4
4.2 Information on Typical Outcomes
Low-income students may lack information on the differences among colleges
in students’ outcomes. Students and their families may believe that “college
is college.” Yet, graduation rates and other outcomes vary dramatically. Some
four-year colleges have on-time graduation rates well below 10 percent while
resource-rich schools often have rates above 85 percent.
     ECO-C prominently displays typical outcomes for schools known to be
salient in a student’s area, other in-state schools, and a random sample of peer
institutions outside the state. ECO-C also explains, in simple terms, how
graduating on time affects a person’s lifetime return on the college investment.
This information apparently has an effect. Table 1 reveals that treated
students say 40 percent more often that they were “much more likely to apply”
if “The college has a high graduation rate.”

4.3 Information on a College Fitting their Desires
Low-income high achievers are well aware that their achievement is unusual
for students of their background. They know they have learned much more
than many of their classmates. They report being eager to enroll where their
preparation for college will pay off. They say they want to attend schools that
have resources to instruct them intensively and curricula for students with
their preparation. Yet, they do not necessary know which schools these are.
ECO-C informs students about schools’ instructional resources and student
bodies. It also tells them how to use reliable sources, like the U.S. Department
of Education’s College Navigator, to find schools that fit their desires.
It appears that this makes a difference. Treated students are 43 percent more
likely to say that they are “much more likely to apply” when “The college's
average student has test scores and a GPA like mine.” We do not find
statistically significant evidence that treated students are more likely to say
that they “are much more likely to apply” if a “college's academic programs
have a very good reputation.” However, the control group is very (78 percent)
likely to say this even though they routinely apply to schools with weak
academics.6 Thus, we believe this (non) result arises because ECO-C causes
students to find schools that really are academically strong but also causes
them to learn that schools that they believed to be strong are actually weak.

5. Clearing Up Misimpressions
Do low-income high achievers suffer from misimpressions about colleges more
generally and does the intervention rectify them? One survey item asked
students why they chose not to attend specific types of colleges. They were
offered several answers, none of which, naturally, contained a falsehood.
Students often picked the “other” category and provided a very revealing open-
ended response.


6
    See Hoxby and Avery (2013), Hoxby and Turner (2013).

                                         5
     “Other” was picked by 36 percent of students who did not apply to a liberal
arts college, 15 percent who did not apply to a most selective private university,
and 24 percent who did not apply to a flagship public university. Notably,
treated students were less likely to choose “other” than control students.

5.1 Liberal Arts Colleges
Low-income, high achievers seriously misunderstand liberal arts colleges.
Numerous students express a lack of familiarity with the basic model:
         “What is a private liberal arts college?”
         “I don't know what this is.”
         “I am not liberal.”
    Moreover, an overwhelming number do not understand that the liberal arts
include mathematics and science. Indeed, engineering majors are often offered
by the liberal arts colleges that are peer schools for high achievers. Students
often believe that “liberal arts” means “humanities” or even just “art”:
         “I don’t like art/art related subjects.”
         “I'm a math/science guy. I'm not very good at liberal arts.”
         “Liberal arts is for people who aren't good at math.”
         “Liberal arts colleges typically do not have mathematics majors.”
    In several hundred cases, a student who replied that she did not apply to
a liberal arts college because it “does not offer my major” had an intended
major that is always offered: politics, biology, mathematics, economics, physics,
psychology, and even English.
    Further, students often believe that attending a liberal arts college will
prevent them from attending graduate school later:
         “I plan on attending medical school.”
         “I plan on grad school later.”

5.2 Flagship Public Universities
One might suppose that the selective school most salient to low-income high
achievers would be their state’s public flagship university. Such schools not
only offer a wealth of academic opportunities, they often have merit
scholarships and honors programs for high achievers. Yet, many low-income
high achievers fail to apply to their flagship.
    This is not because, as is sometimes supposed, the students prefer to stay
close to home. This answer is rarely picked. Instead, their responses suggest
that it is the academic riches of the flagships that are salient but non-academic
characteristics that are off-putting to low-income high achievers:
          “My flagship school is too focused on sports and partying, and too big.”
          “Students too focused on the party scene (I don't mind parties)”
          “Too much party and not enough academics.”
          “I was not interested in attending an institution with such a sports-
          centered atmosphere”
The flagship’s excess size, sports, and parties were consistent themes.
Students who made such comments often did not apply to academically

                                        6
rigorous colleges but, instead, to ones much less selective than the flagship.

6. Conclusion
The ECO survey allows us to get “inside the black box” of low-income high
achievers decision-making. Students in the control group lack information
about net prices, instructional resources and rigor, student bodies, and
curricula. The comprehensive ECO intervention improves their knowledge.
This may explain why treated students made difference application and
matriculation choices than control students.

7. References
Hoxby, Caroline and Christopher Avery. 2013 “The Missing “One-Offs”: The
Hidden Supply of High-Achieving, Low-income Students,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 1-61.

Hoxby, Caroline and Sarah Turner. 2013. “Expanding College Opportunities
for. High- Achieving, Low Income Students.” SIEPR Discussion Paper No. 12-
014.




                                      7
