NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS EVERYTHING NEUTRAL?

B. Douglas Bernheim

Kyle Bagwell

Working Paper No. 2086

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Canibridge, MA 02138
December 1986

We are indebted to Lawrence Sumers for helpful discussions, as
well as to participants at the various seminar presentations of
this paper. This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation, through Grant No. SES-8404164. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2086
December 1986

Is Everything Neutral?

ABSTRACT

In his well—known analysis of the national debt, Robert Barro
introduced the notion of a "dynastic family." This notion has since
become a standard research tool, particularly in the areas of public
finance and macroeconomics. In this paper, we critique the assumptions
upon

which the dynastic model is predicated, and argue that this

framework is not a suitable abstraction In contexts where the objective

is to analyze the effects of public policies. We reach this conclusion
by formally considering a world in which each generation consists of a

number of distinct individuals, as opposed to one representative
individual. We point out that family linkages form complex networks, in
which each individual may belong to many dynastic groupings. The
resulting proliferation of linkages between families gives rise to a
large

host of neutrality results, including the irrelevance of all public
redistributions, distortionary taxes, and prices. Since these results
are not at all descriptive of the real world, we conclude that, in some
fundamental sense,

the

world

is not even approximately dynastic. These

observations call into question all policy related results based on the
dynastic

framework, including the Ricardian equivalence hypothesis.

B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics

Kyle Bagwell

404 Enema Hall

Evanston, Illinois 60201

Stanford University
Stanford,

CA 94305

(415) 723—9678

Department of Economics

Northwestern University

1.

Introduction

Over the last decade, there has been a growing awareness that many
important public policy issues turn critically upon the assumed nature

of economic relationships within the family. This awareness is largely
attributable to seminal papers by Robert Barro [1974] and Gary Becker

[1974]. Barro's paper ostensibly concerns the national debt, but its
implications are much more far-reaching. Specifically, Barro
supplemented the traditional overlapping generations model with
intergenerational altriusm, and argued, in essence, that voluntary
transfers between parents and children cause the representative
"dynastic" family to behave as though it is a single, infinite—lived

individual. Policies which fail to affect the family's real
opportunities are neutralized through private actions; thus, Ricardian
equivalence and related propositions (concerning the irrelevance of

government debt and Social Security) follow directly. The dynastic
family model has since become a standard research tool, particularly in
the areas of public finance and macroeconomics (see, for example, Abel

[1984], Chamley [1981], and Judd [1965]). No doubt, its popularity in
part reflects considerations of analytic convenience.!7
In this paper, we critique the dynastic family as a modelling
tool, and argue that it is not a suitable abstraction in contexts where

the objective is to analyze the effects of various public policies. Our
criticism differs fundamentally from those offered by previous
commentators (see e.g., Feldstein [1976], Buchanan [1976], and Tobin and
Buiter [1980]), in that we assail neither the logic, nor the assumptions

—2—

employed by studies which invoke the dynastic framework. Rather, we

take these at face value, and show that the lead to untenable
conclusions.

We reach these conclusions by formally considering a world in
which each generation consists of a large number of distinct

individuals, as opposed to one representative individual. While the
notion of a representative consumer is always somewhat objectionable,
here it is especially pernicious, in that it obscures considerations

arising from the biological structure of families. For the human
species, propogation requires the participation of two traditionally

unrelated individuals. Thus, family linkages form complex networks, in
which each individual may belong to many dynastic groupings. In this
paper, we argue that the resulting proliferation of linkages between
families gives rise to incomparably stronger neutrality properties under

weaker conditions than those imposed by Barro. In particular, no
government transfer (including those between unrelated members of the
same generation) has any real effect, and all tax instruments (including

so—called "distortionary" taxes) are equivalent to lump—sum taxes. In
essense, the government can effect the allocation of real resources only

by altering real expenditures. The efficiency role of government is
thus severely limited, and the distributional role is entirely

eliminated. More generally, we argue that if all linkages between
parents and children are truly operative, then market prices play no
role in the resource allocation process--the distribution of all goods
is determined by the nature of intergenerational altruism.

—3—

If taken literally, these results would have profound implications

for the study of economics. We hardly intend to suggest that such
extreme conclusions are warranted. Rather, when results stretch the
bounds of credibility past the breaking point, it is natural to question

the validity of underlying assumptions. We must therefore emphasize
that we have obtained these results under relatively weak conditions,
and that these same conditions are the fundamental building blocks of

the dynastic model. Thus, refusal to accept the practical implications
of our results is tantamount to a rejection of the dynastic framework,
and calls into serious question the results (such as Ricardian
equivalence) which follow from it.

In particular, we assume: (1) parents are operatively linked
through transfers (gifts and bequests) with their children (although we
do not specify the direction of these transfers), and (2) levels of

gifts and bequests do not matter pse (consumers care only about the
consequences of giving, and not the act of giving). If we are unwilling
to accept the extreme implications described above, we must abandon one

of these assumptions. Further analyses of economic policies, such as
the effects of government debt, require us to specify quite explicitly
which of these assumptions fails, and how it fails.

The paper is organized as follows. Initially, we assume the

existence of pervasive linkages, and analyze their effects. In
Section 2, we consider some simple examples which illustrate the

principles driving our neutrality theorems. Analysis of our general

model appears in Section 3. In Section 4, we argue that operative

-4—

transfers between parents and their children are alone sufficient to

establish pervasive linkages throughout the population. In Section 5,
we clarify the nature of our results, reexamine the central assumptions,
and consider various interpretations.

2.

Examples
The linear structure of "dynastic" families in Barro [1974] allows

him to model a family as, essentially, a single, infinite—lived consumer

with dynamically consistent preferences. In particular, he specifies

the well—being of generation t as a function of t's own consumption,
and the utility of t's immediate successor:

ut(ct,ut+i)

Popular intuitive explanations of Ricardian equivalence are closely tied

to this formulation: since the dynastic family chooses an optimal
program, it will simply offset any exogenous, intertemporal redistribu—

tions of resources which might displace it from the optimum.V
Once one recognizes the complex biological structure of families,
this linearity disappears (for example, unrelated individuals share

common descendents). Due to the existence of linkages between families,
it is, in general, impossible to represent any particular family (or set
of families) as a single, utility—maximizing agent, even when the wellbeing of each individual is assumed to depend only on his own
consumption and the well—being of his children, as above.-"

—5—

This observation raises an important question: does Barro's
version of Ricardian equivalence depend upon the assumption that we can
represent each family as a single infinite-lived consumer, or upon the
more basic assumption that family members are linked through operative

transfers? Our analysis demonstrates that the first of these
assumptions is, in fact, unnecessary; however, this observation leads us
to conclude that voluntary transfers through operative linkages are,
under very weak assumptions, capable of neutralizing the effects of all
tax and transfer policies (including so—called "distortionary" policies

which are conditioned on behavior). Given the proliferation of linkages
between families, the implications of these observations are profound.
We defer our analysis of interfamily linkages to Section 4, and
our discussion of larger implications to Section 5.

In

this and the

following section, we simply assume that a number of individuals are
linked through operative transfers., and explore the role of transfers in

offsetting government policies. We begin with two simple examples.

Example 1: Suppose there are three individuals, 1, 2, and 3.

Individuals

1

and 2 have quasiconcave preferences of the form

u.(c.,c3)

,

I

=

1, 2

while 3's preferences are simply u3(c3). We may think of 3
common descendent of

1

1

and 2 divide this wealth between own

consumption c.,, and a non—negative transfer to 3,

w +

+
b1

b2.

a

and 2, who are unrelated. Each consumer i

is endowed with wealth w. 1

consumes

as

b.,

i =

1, 2. 3

—6—

There are, of course, a variety of ways in which

1

and 2 might

determine the magnitude of their transfers to 3. For the purpose of
this illustration, we will assume that the exogenous environment is such
that

and 2 must make simultaneous, non—cooperative choices.

1

Accordingly, it is perhaps most natural to consider Nash equilibria in

transfers to 3. Suppose that there exists a Nash equilibrium in which 1

and 2 both make positive transfers. The reader may easily verify
through a direct argument that private transfers will then neutralize
the effects of all sufficiently small lump sum redistributional

poiicies4/ despite the fact that this extended family does not act as a
single, utility maximizing individual.-' Throughout this paper, we use a
more powerful but less direct line of argument, which works as follows.
We have described an environment in which two agents, 1 and 2,

play a simple game. Each agent chooses an action (transfer) b.
subject to the constraint b. > 0, and receives a payoff of

u.(w. -

1 1

By transferring z from

1

w +
b.,
1
3

b. +
1

b.)
as

to 2, the government alters this game

follows. Each agent still chooses an action b subject to the
constraint b. > 0, but receives different payoffs:
+
u1(w1 - z - b1, w3

+ z -

b2, w3

+
b1

+

+
b1

b2)

b2)

Now we introduce the following change of variables:

=

+

b1

-7-

and 2 =

b2

—

z.

That is, we think of agent 1 (2) as choosing

> z 2 > z), and receiving

subject to the constraint
payoffs

u.(w. —

., w3

+

+

Note that this differs from the original game in only two respects.
First, the same abstract action has a different practical interpretation

in each case. For example, we associate the choice "b1 = 5"
interpretive label "1
=

5"

with the

transfers $5 to 3," while we associate

with the label "1

transfers $5 — z

to 3." Since all

standard solution concepts have the property that strategically

equiva1ent/ games give rise to equivalent sets of equilibria, changing
the interpretations of abstract actions is inconseq.uentiaiJi Second,

agents' opportunity sets differ between the two games. Since this
difference is potentially substantive, we conclude that private actions
neutralize the effects of.governxuent transfer policies as long as the

original equilibrium is insensitive to perturbations in the agents'
constraints.

This simple condition is, in principle, easily verifiable.
Suppose, for example, that we have an initial Nash equilibrium with
b. > 0 ,

i

=

1,2.

Under the assumption that utility is q.uasiconcave,

equilibrium behavior is insensitive to small perturbations of the

constraints, so neutrality follows as an immediate corollary. However,
it should now also be clear that quasiconcavity does not play a

significant role in establishing this result. As long as u1 is

-8-

continuous and i strictly prefers b.

to 0, the basic robustness

condition is satisfied. Since indifference between b. and 0 is an
1

extremely unlikely outcome (formally, one can show that it is a measure
zero event in the space of potential preferences), the existence of an
equilibrium with positive transfers is generally sufficient to guarantee
that private actions will neutralize sufficiently small government
transfer policies.

This alternative line of reasoning also allows us to conclude that

neutrality will hold for a wide range of solution concepts. When an
environment gives rise to a multiplicity of Nash equilibria, one often
hopes to identify a unique outcome, or at least narrow down the set of

possible outcomes, by employing some refinement of the Nash concept. As
long as an interior Nash equilibrium strictly satisfies (violates)
certain refined criteria, small perturbations of the corner constraints
will not generally cause it to violate (satisfy) these criteria../
More generally, it is natural to expect that interior equilibria
will typically satisfy the basic condition unless the corner constraints

play a special role in defining the relevant solution concept. Suppose

for example that x and y can form binding contracts, so that
transfers are determined through bargaining. If the relevant threat

point is b1 = b2 = 0, then the Nash bargaining solution will not give
rise to neutralizing behavior. However, if a breakdown in negotiations
is followed by non—cooperative behavior (so that a non-cooperative Nash
equilibrium prevails), and if this threat point entails positive
transfers, then the basic condition will generally hold, and private

—9-

actions

will neutralize small transfer policies.

While it would be interesting to identify more primitive exogenous
conditions under which transfers are positive and equilibria are robust
with respect to perturbations of corner constraints, this is not our

current objective. As we argue in the next section, the most important
aspects of dynastic behavior arise only when these hypotheses are

satisfied. Since our objective is to critique the dynastic model by
taking its central premises (which concern the endogenous properties of
equilibria) at face value, it is appropriate to restrict our attention
accordingly.

Example 2: Suppose everything is as in example 1, except that
individual

chooses labor supply ()

1

consumption and

transfers.

prior

to the choices of

Further assume that his utility is given by

u1(c1,c3,1)

,

and that his wealth is

w1=w+w1—z(Z1)
where w is non—labor income, w is the wage rate, and z is a tax
schedule, used for redistributing wealth from
wealth is

w2 =w+z(1)

1

to 2. Thus, 2's

-10-

The extensive form of this game is represented schematically in

Figure 1(a). First, 1

and 2 play

chooses his labor supply; then, 1

a simultaneous move "transfer game," as in example 1. Thus, if 1
chooses labor supply

endowments are w +

,

1

and 2 play a transfer game in which their

— z(2.), and w +

game is denote "G1"). Similarly, if 1
1

z(9),

respectively (this

chooses labor supply

and 2 play the corresponding transfer game, G2.
Suppose that the government contemplates an arbitrary change in

the tax-transfer schedule from z to z'. At first, this may appear to
alter the game in a fundamental way. For instance, when

this induces a simultaneous move transfer game between

where endowments are now w +

respectively

wi

—

z'(), and

(this game is denoted

resources of 1

and 2 are identical in

chooses

1

1

and 2,

w +

in Figure 1(b)). Yet the total

and G. Thus, by the

argument given in example 1, if we appropriately perturb the corner

constraints in G1, we obtain a game that is strategically equivalent to
•

Clearly, this same reasoning applies regardless of

1 's labor

supply decision (for instance, an appropriate perturbation in the corner

constraints of G2 yields a game that is strategically equivalent to
G). Consequently, the only substantive difference between these two
environments consists of perturbations in corner constraints. If the
original equilibria (or set of equilibria) is robust with respect to
such perturbations, then private actions will offset sufficiently small
policy changes.

—11 —

'4

Again, we would like to identify circumstances under which this
robustness condition is likely- to hold. For purposes of illustration,
we consider subgame perfect Nash equilibria (see Selten [1965, 1975]).
This solution concept demands that agents act in their own best
interests at all times, and serves to rule out threats which are not
credible, in the sense that agents would not be willing to carry them

out. Formally, a Nash equilibrium is subgame perfect if strategies form
Nash equilibria in every proper subgaine. In the current context, this

implies that every choice of Li must be followed by Nash behavior in
the ensuing simultaneous more transfer game. Our discussion in
example 1 establishes that, as long as the initial equilibrium entails
positive transfers in some particular subgame, perturbations of the
corner constraints will not generally alter behavior in that subgame.
If this condition holds for every subgame, then the original set of
perfect equilibria will indeed be robust with respect to arbitrary
perturbations of the corner constraints.
The assumption that transfers are positive for every choice of

is, of course, quite strong. However, the basic result typically
holds as long as transfers are positive following any choice in some

neighborhood of the original equilibrium selection, Li. By the
preceding argument, policy changes will not alter the consequences of
1 'a choices in this neighborhood——hence,

Furthermore, if

1

remains a local optimum.

strictly prefers L. to alternatives outside of

this neighborhood, and if equilibrium outcomes following such
alternatives vary continuously with the values of corner constraints,

—12—

then Li remains a global optimum

for

sufficiently small

perturbations. This last condition (continuity) is relatively weak,

and, for example, follows from quasiconcavity of u1.
It is interesting to contrast these results with those that follow

from use of the unrefined Nash concept. There is typically a continuum
of Nash equilibria for the game described here, which we construct as

follows. If

1

selects some L, 1

and 2 play Nash choices in the

ensuing subganie. For any other choice of Li, 2 subsequently plays
=

0

(l's choices in these subgames are irrelevant). Effectively,

2 induces 1

to choose L by threatening to hurt 3 unless

complies.V Clearly, 2's ability to punish 1

1

though 3 determines the

set of labor supply choices which are sustainable in some equilibrium.

Any transfer from 1

to 2 strengthens this ability, and therefore

expands the range of potential outcomes. There is then no guarantee
that private actions neutralize redistributional policies; indeed, if

2 can select a threat, redistributions ordinarily have real effects.
It is, however, important to reiterate that in such circumstances, the
central properties of dynastic behavior are also lost (see Section 3B).
The irrelevance of an apparently distortionary tax may, at first,
seem counterintuitive——indeed, readers who are unfamiliar with abstract
game theoretic arguments may wish to verify this result directly through

standard comparative statics.!2! The imposition of a tax schedule
certainly appears to change the relative price of 1 's leisure; should

this not effect his decision? The fundamental insight here is that the
price of l's leisure is not simply w, since he must also consider the

—13—

effect of his labor—leisure choice on 2's transfer to 3. Thus, he
faces some "shadow" wage, and it is this shadow wage which is invariant
with respect to tax policy.

This invariance is easiest to understand in a single consumer

world. As long as the government must balance its budget, no tax can
distort behavior, since the individual knows that all revenues must be

returned to him at some point. By way of contrast, in a representative
consumer world each consumer is thought of as small relative to the
economy, so that the fraction of marginal revenues distributed to any
one consumer is negligible, and (in the absence of altruistic linkages)

can be ignored. The point of our analysis is that, as long as consumers
are linked through operative transfers, all marginal revenues associated
with the taxation of a particular individual are, regardless of
population size, eventually returned to that same individual, just as in
a single consumer world.

Once we have established that private actions offset the effects
of apparently distortionary taxes, it appears to follow immediately that
prices must be locally indeterminant, and that sufficiently small
changes in prices will have no effect on the allocation of real

resources. For suppose that

1

and 2 are engaged in a market

transaction; one might, for example, generalize our simple model by

specifying that 2 is
2 buys labor from 1

1 's employer. Decreasing the price at which
seems analytically equivalent to imposing a

linear tax on l's earnings, and distributing the proceeds to 2.
While this intuition is essentially correct, its formalization raises

—14—

some subtle issues which we address in Section 3D.

3.

General

Analysis

In the current section, we extend the analysis of Section 2 to

more general contexts. Part A exhibits an overlapping generations model
with intergenerational altruism. Part B concerns the technical definition of operative links. We present the generalized neutrality results
in part C, and discuss extensions in part D.

A. The Model
We consider a discrete time, (t =

1,2,...)

infinite horizon

overlapping generations model. For simplicity, we assume that there is

one composite good, which can either be consumed or invested. Current
output is determined through a constant returns-to—scale production
technology, as a function of current labor inputs and investment from

the previous period. Markets are perfectly competitive; firms earn zero
profits, and pay factor inputs their marginal products. Labor and
capital are each hoinogenous, so that in period t all labor receives a

wage rate of w, and capital yields a gross return of a , paid in
period t+1 (the interest rate is equal to a — 1)

at =

.

We

define

t—1
TI
•r= 1

Let I be the set of individuals born in period t. We suppose
that every individual lives for M+1 periods. Thus, I, the set of
individuals living at time t, is given by

—1 5—

M

I =u I
k=O

We will use Nt and Nt to denote the number of individuals in

and 1, respectively.
At time t, each individual i c

labor supply (a),

transfers

I

t

t

chooses consumption (c.),

to other living individuals

(b., j c i_{i}),-iJ_1 purchases of physical capital (s), and purchases of

short term (single period) bonds (d.). Since our model abstracts from
uncertainty, we will assume that bonds pay the competitive rate of

return, a.
Throughout our analysis, we employ the following notation. Let
t

b. denote the vector of 1., S

transfers

in period t:

(by.).

ij jI—{i}

i

We will use Bt to indicate the sequence of all transfer choices up to

period t—1:

ft1\j•

Dt =
—
id

1,...,L?.

id

t—i

(similarly for C, Lt, S, and Dt). We define a t—history of the
economy as a complete record of all choices made through the end of

period t—1

Ht =

The government
of

real expenditures

(Ct,

Lt,

Bt, S, Dt)

participates in this economy by financing a stream
through tax levies

and bond sales. Throughout, we

—16—

,t

assume that the stream of real expenditues

> 1) is fixed, and

focus on the effects of alternative financial policies. We allow the
government to specify period t taxes on individual i as an arbitrary

function, z(Ht), of the observed t_history.-i./ Note that this very
general specification subsumes taxes on labor income, capital income,

and transfers. It also allows for idiosyncratic provisions, such as
income averaging. The government may also condition one individual's

taxes on another's actions. In 8hort, virtually any action may be
taxed, and the corresponding rate schedule may be chosen without
restriction.

Given a tax policy and real expenditure stream, the government

balances its budget by issuing debt. Specifically, the supply of
government bonds evolves as follows:

•

dt(Ht) +

z(H)

=

id
For

atldt(Htl)

+

arbitrary taxes and expenditures, the implied deficit profile may,

of course, be infeasible (i.e., debt might eventually exceed economic

resources). We implicitly exclude such policies from consideration.
Prevailing prices and government financial policy determine the

opportunity constraint of each consumer. Specifically, for each
i

ci,
t

t
t
t
c.+s.+d.+
1
1
1

jcI
= w

t
£.
ti

+

at—i

It—i
ts.

1

t
b..

r
L

+

—{i}

d.t1\
1
)

r

+

2.

jcl

—U)

t

b..

.11

—17—

In addition, i confronts a number of feasibility constraints:

o

o

b.(Ht)
=<bt
—13
13
Two comments are in order. First, we do not impose any

constraints on i's purchases of bonds. In particular, it is possible

to have d < 0, which signifies that i borrows at the competiive
rate, a. Thus, we have implicitly assumed that capital markets are
perfect. It is straightforward to relax this assumption by artificially
limiting borrowing; as long as liquidity constraints are generally non-

binding, our central results continue to hold. Since the absence of
binding liquidity constraints is fundamental to the dynastic
formulation, it is appropriate for us to focus our attention on this
case.

Second, we allow the lower bounds on i's period t
t
t
transfers, b..(H ),

to

depend upon the evolution of prior decisions,

Ht. Ordinarily, we would expect these lower bounds to be invariant with

respect to Ht (generally, they equal zero). The more general
formulation adopted here allows us to contemplate a wider class of
perturbations to the corner constraints, and, correspondingly, a wider
class of alternative financial policies.
We complete the model by assuming that it is possible to represent

the preferences of each consumer i by a utility function defined over

-18-

choices of consumption and labor:

u.(C,L)
Since we allow for dependence on the entire history of choices, this

specification is extremely general. By imposing additional
restrictions, one can obtain various formulations employed by other

authors, such as Barro's [1974] dynastic specification. Note also that
we do not require the utility of each individual to vary with the

choices of all other individuals; indeed, u would ordinarily be
insensitive to changes in most of its potential arguments. We do,
however, explicitly rule out direct dependence of preferences on the

levels of transfers. This restriction is, of course, essential.
As in the preceding section, our central result will depend upon a
hypothesis about the sensitivity of equilibria to perturbations in the

corner constraint. Since we generally expect interior equilibria to
satisfy this hypothesis under a wide range of solution concepts, and
since the hypothesis is in principle verifiable in any particular
context, we wish to avoid tying our analysis directly to a particular

notion of equilibrium. Thus, we will describe behavior within this
economy in as general terms as possible. We assume that consumers take
the wage rates and interest rates as fixed. A given profile of factor
prices induces a game, where in each period t, consumers choose
consumptions, labor supplies, transfers, purchases of capital, and

purchases of bonds. Each distinct t—history

Rt identifies a distinct

subgame originating in period t. Players may condition their period

—19—

t

choices upon the actual t-history which has resulted from previous

play. Thus, strategies consist of functions mapping t—histories to
current choices.

Individuals are, of course, constrained to select strategies which
satisfy their opportunity constraints in each period t for all feasible

t—histories and concurrent choices made by their contemporaries. This
requirement is more demanding than it might at first appear. In

particular, individual i cannot simply specify

, a.1

13

and

d. as functions of H

subject to budget
1
—(i}
since concurrent deviations by contemporaries (e.g., a change

(b. .)

jc]

balance,

,

of b. for some j) mightrender these choices infeasible. Rather, he
must allow one of these variables to be determined as a residual. As
long as we confine our attention to pure strategy equilibria, i has no
basis for preferring one residual variable to another (he always assumes

that other players will select their equilbrium choices). For the
purposes of our analysis, it is convenient to assume that consumption is

always the residual variable. While selecting some other variable might
well alter the specific set of equilibrium outcomes (since this changes
the consequences of deviating from equilibrium actions for the deviating
player), it would not affect our central arguments.
For any particular solution concept, there is a (potentially
empty)

set of

equilibria among consumers for the game induced by each

profile

of

profile

is a full equilibrium if

consumers

possible factor prices. We will say that a particular price
there exists an equilibrium among

relative to these prices such that along the equilibrium path,

-20-

(i) consumers demand in aggregate the amount of bonds supplied by the
government, and (ii) the aggregte demand for capital (labor) equals the

aggregate supply of capital (labor). Condition (ii) holds as long as
full employment of factor supplies generates marginal products equal to
the assumed factors prices.

B. Operative Linkages
Barro's [1974] formulation of the dynastic family employs both a
restrictive specification of preferences and a restrictive notion of

equilibrium (see footnote 1). In addition, he assumes that successive
generations are operatively linked, in the sense that parents make

positive, discretionary transfers to their children. Within his
framework, this condition is sufficient to guarantee that equilibrium
behavior is insensitive to perturbations in the lower bounds which

constrain specific transfer decisions. We have already remarked that
this implication does not necessarily hold in other more general

contexts. Indeed, for all but the simplest models (such as our
examples), it is extremely difficult to derive exogenous conditions
which guarantee the irrelevance of perturbing apparently non-binding
transfer constraints.
One might initially suspect that, as in Section 2, the desired
implication would follow directly from appropriate convexity

conditions. Unfortunately, when the preferences of successive
generations conflict, convexity of an individual's decision problem
depends not only upon the characteristics of utility functions and
budget constraints, but also upon the properties of equilibrium

—21 —

strategies.

In general, it is extremely difficult to guarantee that

these strategies are well-behaved.ii Furthermore, in various kinds of
non—cooperative equilibria, one individual may condition his transfer

upon another's behavior in order to exert influence. If the first
individual can credibly threaten to sever financial ties, then the
location of his corner constraint will affect behavior even if one
observes positive discretionary transfers in equilibrium (Bernheim,
Shleifer, and Summers [1985] develop this line of argument in greater

detail). Once again, it is very difficult to rule out this possibility
by imposing restrictions either on the exogenous environment or on the
notion of equilibrium.
Rather than search for a set of exogenous conditions which would
guarantee the irrelevance of apparently non—binding corner constraints,
our strategy is to assume directly that perturbations of certain

constraints have no effect on equilibrium behavior. Formally, we
proceed as follows. A potential link is a triplet, (i,j,t) , such that
1

j,

and i,

j c I

(since i and j

are

both alive in period t,

it is conceivable that i could transfer resources to j at that

time). Let A be the set of all potential links. Consider some X C A,
and choose some vector of real numbers £ =

(e.

.)

ij (i,j,t)cX

.

The vector

is an c—perturbation of the original
—i (i,j,t)cX
constraints (jj(i,j,t)cX if for all (i,j,t) e X and Ht,
of functions (.)

I.(Ht)I <e.
i,J
—i3

Subsequent

to some perturbation, the constraints become

—22—

b. >= —13
b.(Ht) +
13

for

all

Fit

and

(i,j,t) c X .

We

t(Ht)

—13

will say that XC A is a set of

jointly operative links if there exists some c > 0

— (1,3,t)EX

E—perturbation of (b.)

such

that no

alters the set of equilibria in the

game induced by the prevailing profile of factor prices.
In the following section, we assume

that

particular links are

jointly operative. Unfortunately, this assumption concerns the
endogenous properties of equilbrium; its validity is therefore highly
dependent both upon the environment considered, and upon the notion of

equilbrium employed. Certainly, assumptions of this kind are less
satisfactory from a theoretical point of view than those that concern

exogenous characteristics of the model. However, the reader should
recall that, in formulating the dynastic model, Barro [1974] assumes
that transfers are positive; this too concerns a property of

equilibrium. Since our objective is to critique the dynastic family as
an analytic tool by taking its basic premises at face value, the only
relevant question is whether we have assumed more than Barro.
We have already remarked that Barro's assumption is equivalent to

ours within the context of his model. More generally, the important
features of dynastic behavior do not necessarily follow from the
assumption that transfers are positive, unless our stronger assumption
(the irrelevance of perturbing corner constraints) is also satisfied.
One must therefore invoke this assumption (or more primitive conditions

—23—

which guarantee it) when generalizing the dynastic model to more complex
environments.

We demonstrate this principle in a model which is only slightly

more general than Barro's. Assume that Nt =

= 1,

individuals desire

consumption only in the second period of life, labor supply is fixed,

= 0.

and

This is essentially Barro's model, except that we

allow for arbitrary forms of altruism. Our strategy is to impose

dynasticism by assuming that X

{(t,t+i ,t)It > 1 1

is

a set of

jointly operative links, rather than by employing the weaker assumption

that bt+i > 0 for all t. As we now show, failure of our assumption
implies that one can always devise an arbitrarily small deficit policy
that has real effects, even if transfers are positive in every period.
Thus, one cannot establish Ricardian equivalence without employing our
formulation of the operative transfer condition.
Assume- that initially the government neither levies taxes nor

issues debt. A particular profile of factor prices induces a game in
t

subject

which each successive generation chooses bt

to the

constraint bt+i > 0. Consumption evolves according to the equation
t

c =

w

+

.t—1

—
t

t

btt÷i

Suppose that the operative transfer condition is not satisfied.
Then for any

=

(c1,c2,...)

> 0 there exists an s—perturbation,

of the transfer constraints such that this perturbation

alters equilibrium behavior. For expositional simplicity, suppose that

one can always find such a perturbation where each .,t+1 is invariant

-24—

with respect to Ht. Subsequent to this perturbation, a particular
profile of factor prices induces a game in which each successive

generation chooses bt÷i subject to the constraint bt+i
and where consumption evolves as before. By assumption, this game gives
rise to different behavior than does our original game.

Now we consider the following fiscal policy. The government
levies taxes as follows:

1_ t

zi —

t,t+i

t_— t

In

t—1
—

addition, it balances its budget constraint year by year through

issuing debt:

d

t_ t

Suppose that this policy is neutral, i.e., that its implementation

does not alter capital accumulation or associated factor prices. The
original factor prices induce a game in which each successive generation

chooses bt+i subject to the original non—negativity constraint, and
in which consumption evolves as follows:
t—1
-bt
ct =wtt —ztt +at—1bt—1
,t
t,t+1

Now we perform the following change of variables. For each t, let
t

=t
btt+i
-

+

t

t,t+i

—25—

Subsequent to implementation of the policy, we may think of consumers as
subject to the constraint that

choosing

Consumption evolves as follows:

c

t

t

w

=

—z

t

t

w

t
t

+at—1 (

+

t—1

,

t—1 ,t

-

— )—(p — )
t—1

t—1

—t—1 ,t

t

t,t+1

t

—t,t+1

t

Thus, the same numerical choices are feasible, and lead to the same
consumption streams in the games induced by perturbing either the corner

constraints or the policy. Since these two games are strategically
equivalent, their equilibria must be identical. But then by hypothesis
the policy perturbation must have a real effect on consumption. Since
this alters aggregate capital accumulation and associated factor prices,
we have a contradiction.
Of course, failure of the operative transfer condition does not
guarantee that we can find an arbitrarily small perturbation of the
corner constraints,
and has the property that each

, that

both alters equilibrium behavior
is invariant with respect to

Ht, as assumed above. However, this assumption seems relatively mild.

Recall that each distinct t—history Ht determines a different
subgame. Ordinarily, perturbations fail to affect behavior because they
do not change the outcome in any relevant subgame. Since each subgame
has an independent existence, one should then be able to perturb the
constraints differntly in different subgames, without effect (the reader

may wish to refer back to example 2 for an illustration). Thus, when

—26—

all sufficiently small perturbances satisfying the invariance condition
fail to affect behavior, it is natural to expect that the operative

transfer condition will generally hold. Even when this reasoning is
invalid, one can show through a modification of our previous argument
that failure of the operative transfer condition implies the existence
of some arbitrarily small, non—neutral deficit policy in which the
government adjusts its bond sales in response to choices of deceased
generations.

We close our discussion of operative transfers with one final

remark. While the issues raised in this section may appear purely
technical, they raise an important empirical issue. Specifically, once
one steps out of Barro's simple framework, it becomes difficult to
determine whether or not any given consumer is up against a binding

constraint, appropriately defined. Certainly, the observation of
positive, discretionary transfers does not constitute sufficient

evidence to establish that two individuals are operatively linked. This
issue must be resolved through more subtle means (see, for example, the
empirical analysis in Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers [1985]).

C. Results
We begin our analysis of government fiscal policy by restricting
attention to equilibria which satisfy a certain strong condition, which

we designate the linkage hypothesis. Formally,

Linkage hypothesis: There exists a set of jointly operative

links X and an integer T such that for each t > 1

the following

—27—

property holds. For all i,j e

there exists a finite integer p

with

and sequences (i1,... i) and (v1 ,...
j =

i

such that for k =
c X

k' 'k+l

Loosely,

1

k+1

,

'

... ,p—i

t

,

<

i =

1

< t+T, and either

£ X

1k'

this hypothesis implies that in each period t, one can find a

chain of operative linkages connecting any two living individuals, where
each link consists of a transfer made sometime between periods t and

t+T.

At first, this requirement might appear extremely demanding:

indeed, Barro's dynastic model is based on the seemingly less
restrictive assumption that parents are operatively linked to their

children. However, as we show in Section 4, Barro's assumption
virtually guarantees that the linkage hypothesis will be satisfied. By
invoking this hypothesis, we therefore do nothing more than take the
premises of the dynastic model at face value.

We now demonstrate that, when the linkage hypothesis is satisfied,
sufficiently small but otherwise arbitrary perturbations of government

fiscal poiicy are irrelevant. We define a policy perturbation as

follows. Consider some vector of real numbers 1
<,5t

id
t

>= is

= (r

i 2 2)

an 1)—perturbation of some initial policy

t

(z.)
>=i if
1

id

<

I(Ht)I <

t

-28-

and
ot(Ht) +
3-

for all t, i c

I

= a

ti

ti
-

(Ht_i)

and t—histories Ht. Subsequent to the

perturbation, the government's deficit and tax policies are given by

dt(Ht) +

ot(Ht)

and

tt

t t

+ 1(H

z(H )

)

respectively.
Proposition: Suppose that some full equilibrium satisfies the

linkage hypothesis. For some

11

>

0 and every r-perturbation of the

government's fiscal policy, there exists a full equilibrium in which
factor prices, labor supplies, consumption decisions, and purchases of

physical capital are all unaffected. In such an equilibrium, the policy
perturbation simply induces offsetting private transfers and bond
purchases.

We establish this proposition by showing that, subsequent to the
policy perturbation, there must exist an equilibrium for the game
induced by the original profile of factor prices in which consumers
select the same levels of consumption and factor supplies as in the
original full equilibrium, and in which the aggregate demand for

—29—

government bonds changes to match supply in every period. The desired
conclusion follows immediately.

We proceed by first considering three simple classes of policy

perturbations, labelled A, B, and C. These provide the building
blocks for analyzing more complex fiscal policies.

Class A: This class of perturbations consists of transfers

between pairs of individuals who are directly linked. That is, we
t

choose some (i,j,t) c L, select .

(Ht) =
3

for

arbitrarily,

and set

_(Ht)
1

all Ht. All other aspects of fiscal policy remain unchanged.
To demonstrate the irrelevance of this policy, we consider the

following change of variables for i's transfer choice. For each

history Ht, let

.(Ht) =
13

b.13 + (Ht)
1

(that is, we adopt a different change of variables in each subgaine).

Clearly, the same numerical choices yield the same payoffs prior to the
perturbation, and in the transformed game after the perturbation.
However, subsequent to the perturbation, the transfer constraint becomes

(Ht) > b(Ht) +

(Ht)

This game is therefore strategically equivalent to one in which the
perturbation

-30-

p.(Ht)

1

—13

t
is applied to b... Since i and j are operatively linked, this

perturbation of the corner constraint will not affect behavior as long
as

is

sufficiently small. But then the policy perturbation is also

irrelevant, in the sense that it only alters i's transfer to j.

Class B: In this class of policy perturbations, the government
issues debt, distributes the proceeds to some individual i, and retires
the debt in the subsequent period by taxing the same individual. That

is, we choose i c

I t flI t+1 select .t arbitrarily,
,

st(Ht) =

and set

_(Ht)

and

t+l(t+l) =

_at(Ht)

for all Ht. All other aspects of fiscal policy remain unchanged.
To demonstrate the irrelevance of this policy, we consider the

following change of variables for i's bond purchases. For each

history Ht, let

i(Ht) =

t

—

6t(Ht)

Clearly, the same numerical choices yield the same payoffs prior to the
perturbation, and in the transformed game after the perturbation.
Indeed, these two games are strategically equivalent, since there are no

constraints on borrowing or lending. Equilibrium therefore entails the

—31—

same numerical choices. This implies that i simply increases his bond
purchases by 6 (H ).

Class

In this class of perturbations, we consider transfers

C:

between pairs of individuals who are alive at the same point in time.
t

That is, we choose 1,3 C I ,

select

(Ht) =

.t arbitrarily,

and set

._4(Ht)

for all Ht. All other aspects of fiscal policy remain unchanged.
Let i1 ,•.•,i

be the sequence of individuals described in the

linkage hypothesis. For each k =

1 ,

. . . 'p—i

,

define

the following

policy perturbations:

=

(1)

k

(Hk) =

1k+ 1

For k =

O,...,p,

=

1k+1

k+1 (H 1C4' )
1k+1

ôk(H

)

_(Ht)a k/at

let

k (HiC)

(2)

(Ht)a k1t

k1t
(Ht)a
1

= t1 (11t )a1 /a

= sgnk
for

—

tt tt

k÷1 )1(H )a /a

linkk, •tkl )

< inax(,

)

-32—

where

t
o

ET

p4-1

First,

Et.

we note that the cumulative effect of all these component

policies is equivalent to the effect of the original policy. In
is

particular, the effect on ik in period 'tkl

(H1)

Similarly,

0

k=2 ,

(Ht)

k=1

...,p

+ :1 (H) =
in

the effect on

period Tk is

0
=

+

_(Ht)
Finally,

the change in period

k=p

'r bond issues is

= (Ht)aT/at
k=0

k s.t.
r

sgn( -

<r<rk

k+1 =

=0

since T
=tp4-i
0
Now note that for each k, (1) is a Class A policy, arid (2) is a

Class B policy. We know that Class B policies are always irrelevant.

We can therefore focus on the Class A policies. Reasoning as before, we
see that adoption of all the Class A policies described in (1) yields a
game that is equivalent to one which is induced by perturbing the

—33-

original transfer constraints as follows: if k' 'k+l
t

H k_= 1tit)a

k

,'

1k'1k+1

k

c L,

t
/cx

otherwise,

'tk

1k+1,1k

t
tlt\
H k\_
=—.H
1 )a /a

Since no link need appear twice in this chain, we can obviously make the
composite perturbation to transfer constraints arbitrarily small by

small. Since a small perturbation of transfer constraints

taking

has no effect on behavior, the corresponding policy perturbation mu.st be
irrelevant.

Having analyzed Cases A, B, and C, we are now prepared to consider
t

t

an arbitrary policy perturbation, <6 ,(.)
i ci

?=r

We

begin by

decomposing this into component parts. For each t, we define

Nt —

Nt_N_i

policy perturbations as follows. For all i

i

t

let

4(Ht)

()

=

ot(Ht)/(Nt

+i (1t )
o(Ht) =

=

—

Nt_N)

atót(Ht)/(Nt

ot(Ht)/(Nt

—

NtM)

Nt_N)

Next, define Nt

1 policy perturbations as follows. Choose some

i c I, and for

all i c 1t_{j*}, let

—34-

(i) t (ii) —
(4)

E,t

(Ht )

-

(H)

(Ht) (Ht) (Ht) — (Ht)
=

+

We now establish that the cumulative effect of these component

policies is equivalent to the effect of the original policy. The effect

is

on debt at time t

(Nt

The effect on 1

clearly

- NtM)ot(Ht)/(Nt -

Nt)

=

ot(Ht)

6 It _{i*) is
(Ht) +

(Ht) + ,(Ht) = (Ht)

Finally, the effect on i is

(ii) =

{(ii)
icIt_U*}

=

ot(Ht)

+

(ii)

—

atlôt_l (Ht -

.(Ht)]

)

ielt_{i*}

= *(Ht)
where the last equality follows from the government's budget constraint.

Note that for each i 6

I

—

't—M'

(3) is a Class B policy.

Recall once again that Class B policies are completely irrelevant. We
can

(4).

therefore

confine attention to the Class C policies described in

We know that each Class C policy induces a game which, after a

—35—

change of variables, is equivalent to one in which we have perturbed

corner constraints. Similarly, the entire policy induces a game which,
after making all component changes in variables, is equivalent to one in
which we have made all component perturbations in the appropriate corner

constraints. We need only verify that the transformed game (i.e., the
one in which variables have been changed) is well-defined, and that the
corresponding aggregate perturbation to corner contraints can be made
arbitrarily small by taking the policy to be small.

Fix some period t, and consider a link, (i,j,t) c L. This link
might appear in any chain connecting any two individuals living in

periods t—T through t. However, it does not appear in any other
chain. The total number of potential appearances is therefore finite
t

(i —

(specifically, it is bounded by

1

)).

Consequently, the

'r=t—T

composite change of variables is well—defined. The corresponding total
perturbation- to the link (i,j,t) is just equal to the sum of the
component perturbations. We can clearly make this sum arbitrarily small
t—T

by taking (

'

t—T

,..., iit

t

%) sufficiently

small. Now choose c

such that no c—perturbation to the corner constraints affects
equilibrium behavior. Since there are a finite number of individuals

living in period t, we can find some (t_T,

>

such that for 11 satisfying

(t_T, tT•••1t1.t) < (]tTTt...
the aggregate perturbation to each b, , implied
1)—perturbation of fiscal policy satisfies

by any

0

—36-

<

.(Htfl
13

13

for all Ht aid i,j with (i,j,t) c L. Thus, by choosing r such
that

t t
(11

t
(m1ntT,...t1t},In1n{iiT,...,11})
'•'t

't

.

>0
for all t, we guarantee that the aggregate perturbation to each

b., f3, implied

by any 11—perturbation of fiscal policy satisfies

<

13

13

for all Ht and (i,j,t) c L. The proposition is therefore
established.

One aspect of our proof deserves comment. Note that the number of
potential perturbations to any particular link (which corresponds to the
number of potential appearances of that link in chains connecting pairs
of individuals) rises proportionately with the size of the population.
To keep the potential composite perturbation small, it appears that we
must therefore take each component perturbation smaller and smaller as

the population grows. This observation suggests that, in large
economies, only very tiny

policy

perturbations are irrelevant. We

believe, however, that this conclusion is unwarranted. In the proof, we
have fixed the population size, and calculated bounds conservatively by
assuming that every potential appearance of a given link is an actual

appearance. We could obtain tighter bounds by using only actual

—37—

appearances, by choosing chains to avoid repeated appearances of any
particular link, and by noting that many perturbations may be partly

offsetting. Indeed, it is conceivable that the number of actual
perturbations of any particular link may not rise with the population
size (see Section 4).

This observation also raises a methodological issue. One can
interpret our result as establishing that fiscal policies have real
effects only when they cause non-negativity constraints to become

relevant (ordinarily, by driving some individual to a corner). Whenever
the dynastic model is employed, one assumes that the validity of the
model's basic premises (including the assumption that particular links
are operative) is robust with respect to an interesting range of
environments (otherwise, the model may become inapplicable if the

environment changes slightly). Government fiscal policy is certainly an
aspect of the environment; indeed, the dynastic model is often used to

compare the effects of alternative policies. If we take the premises of
this framework at face value, we must therefore assume that certain nonbinding corner constraints play no role in determining the effects of a

broad range of fiscal policies. Our analysis then establishes that
these policies are irrelevant.

D. Extensions and Qualifications
In Section 2, we pointed out that changing a price is analogous to
imposing a tax on one party to a transaction, and distributing the

proceeds to the other party. We therefore claimed that, when consumers
are linked through operative transfers, prices are indeterminant (at

-38-

least locally), and price changes within the region of indeterminacy

have no effect on the allocation of resources. While this argument may
appear straightforward, it is not strictly correct within the context of

the model considered here. Indeed, small changes in prices may well
affect the resulting allocation of resources. However, this occurs only
because consumers and firms exercise peculiar forms of myopia. In both
cases, this myopia is disguised as assumptions about perfect
competition.

Specifically, each consumer trades with the market, rather than

with some set of other consumers. When he contemplates changing his
purchases or sales, he does not realize that this must affect the

purchases or sales of others. If he considers buying more (selling
less), he assumes that the market supplies the incremental goods, and no

one else is affected. Similarly, if he considers buying less (selling
more), the market picks up the residual slack in demand.
Suppose instead that we formulate the process of competitive

exchange as follows. Each consumer takes the market price as fixed, and
announces demand for (supply of) each good. If aggregate supply exceeds
aggregate demand, transactions are rationed to suppliers so that each

supplier sells the same fraction of his announcement. If aggregate
demand exceeds aggregate supply, transactions are rationed so that each

purchaser buys the same fraction of his announcement. Equilibrium
consists of a price and a set of announcements for which aggregate
supply and demand are equal, and no one wishes to alter his
announcement.

—39—

Note that on this formulation, each agent believes that he can
effectively buy and sell as much of each good as he likes at the going

price. However, a supplier (similar statements hold for purchasers)
rationally acknowledges that an increase in his sales must either
increase total purchases comensurately (when purchasers are rationed),
or must reduce sales by others commensurately (when suppliers are

rationed). In either case, the impact of his action is divided evenly
between either all purchasers or all suppliers, so that in large

populations, the effect on any given individual is negligible. On this
basis, one typically ignores these effects in competitive models, just
as one ignores budget-balancing distributions of marginal tax revenues

generated by a change in some individual's behavior. Analogously to our
discussion of taxes, this leads one astray under the current set of

assumptions, regardless of population size. For once we have paired
buyers and sellers to form complete transactions, a change in price is
indeed analytically equivalent to a tax levied on one party, and

distributed to the other. Since adoption of this alternative framework
does not alter our central result,J/ both taxes and prices will be
neutral.

The preceding argument applies directly only if both parties to a

transaction are individuals. If one party is a firm, matters are more
complex. Indeed, one might at first think that in this case, prices

must matter. After all, unless prices are chosen to lie on the factor
price frontier (see Diamond [1965]), constant returns—to—scale firms
will either shut down, or attempt to produce infinite quantities of

-40-

output. Yet this argument is misleading, since it presupposes that
competitive firms will act as profit maximizing automata. Under our
current set of assumptions, profit maximization is simply not a sensible

objective. Firms ought to be creatures of their owners; they should
attempt to earn profits only if this benefits their owners. A fall in
the price of labor does indeed cause the firm to earn profits. However,
since these profits are distributed to the owners of the firm, the price
change is equivalent to a redistribution between the workers and the

owners. We know that private transfers will offset this
redistribution. It is therefore clear that, nets of these transfers,
the benefit to owners from adjusting production does not vary with the
price of labor.

If prices are irrelevant, then our competitive pricing assumption

is plainly inessential. Even the assumption of price—taking behavior
becomes vacuuous, since one can change the price for any given

transaction without effect. It is therefore not surprising that one can
also introduce market power without altering our central result.
Suppose in addition to a non-monopolized consumption good, c,

there is also a monopolized consumption good, x. The monopolist's price
will, of course, be indeterminant, at least within some range. He will
exercise his market power by deciding who will consume x, and in what
amounts. We can thing of the monopolist as making operative tranfere

of x to others (the recipients of x may in turn pass some of it
on). At the same time, there will be a network of operative transfers

in c. Redistributions of c (x) between people who are operatively

—41 -

linked

in c (x) will be irrelevant. If the linkage hypothesis is

satisfied for c, then our central result applies with respect to

redistributions of c. One may even condition such redistributione on
transfers of x (i.e., tax the exercise of market power) without
effect. Thus, if government fiscal policy entails redistribution of
units of account (dollars), the relevant question is whether the linkage

hypothesis is satisfied for units of account. However, even if it is
satisfied, market power will still matter——changing the identity of the
monopolist will necessarily alter the pattern of operative linkages in
x (certainly, the original monopolist will be driven to corners), and
will therefore have real allocative effects.

By now, it should be clear that other restrictive featuresof the
model are not central to our analysis. It is, for example, relatively
easy to disaggregate consumption, capital, and labor. One can thei
establish that excise taxes and various partial factor taxes are

irrelevant. One may also dispense with the assumption of constant
returns—to-scale; we maintained this assumption simply to avoid the

necessity of accounting for distributed profits. Perhaps the most
important restrictions concern uncertainty and information. Our model
describes a deterministic world in which all individuals are perfectly

informed. For the most part, we believe that these restrictions are
also inessential.
First, suppose we introduce uncertainty concerning length of life,

outputs, wages, or gross returns. This would have no effect on our
analysis whatsoever. One could simply view nature as a "player," who

—42—

selects

current values of these variables according to some random

scheme. One would then include nature's choices in the description of a

proceed

t—history, and

as before. Insurance effects, such as those

described in Barsky, Mankiw, and Zeldes [i984], would not materialize,
since interpersonal transfers would neutralize government redistributive
policies for each realization.
Similar

remarks apply to uncertainty concerning future government

policy. Even if the government randomizes its actions, individuals may

condition transfers on policy realizations. Thus, each realization
induces

a game which is strategically equivalent to the "no policy" game

with perturbed corner constraints. Clearly, randomization between
equivalent games changes nothing of substance.
Next, suppose individuals have incomplete information about each

other's preferences. Consider, for example, a transfer from individual

A to individual C, where A and C are indirectly linked through B. If C
is uncertain of B's preference, one might think that he would be
reluctant to transfer the entire windfall to B, since he does not know
whether B will choose to pass it on to A, thereby completing the

offset. However, this reasoning is faulty. As long as B and A are
operatively linked, C need not know B's preferences. Certainly,
asymmetric information will affect the nature of equilibrium, but this

was also true in the absence of the transfer policy. For the same
reasons as before, the policy itself does not alter the strategic
environment, except to perturb constraints.
A somewhat more subtle issue concerns information about operative

—43—

linkages.

The chains which connect different individuals may be

complex; indeed, two individuals may not know how they are connected.

Yet it is not clear that this knowledge is at all essential. As long as
individuals correctly perceive the effects of their own actions on
payoffs, it does not matter if they understand the process which

generates these payoffs. Thus, if we prescribe equilibrium actions
which offset the effects of some transfer policy, individuals will be

willing to abide by these prescriptions. However, this sidesteps a deep
and difficult question: how do individuals arrive at the new
prescriptions? This issue is completely analogous to the observation
that if no single agent knows the "big picture" and coordinates actions,
there is no guarantee that an economy will reach a standard competitive

equilibrium. To resolve this issue, we would require a theory of how
agents achieve equilibria; unfortunately, this important problem is

poorly understood. One could envision an iterative process, wherein
each individual would reactively adjust his transfers, with the property

that stationary points correspond to equilibria. To the extent
individuals acknowledge the irrelevance of fiscal policy, the process of

adjustment following a policy change might actually be very simple: all
agents hold real activities (consumption, production) fixed, and allow

transfers to absorb all residual resources. Finally, if one is
uripersuaded

by these arguments and unwilling to dogmatically accept the

implications of equilibrium theory, then one must
dynastic

model with considerable skepticism. As

also regard the

we

argue in

Section 5,

the introduction of myopic concerning patterns of linkages might well

-44-

profoundly alter the implications of dynasticisni.

These waters become still murkier if one allows for uncertainty
concerning future linkages (e.g., those arising from marriages formed

after some individual's death). However, we argue in Section 4 that the
linkage hypothesis is likely to be satisfied for small T——one need only
use links spanning a few generations, so that most of these links might

well be known at the relevant point in time. Even when this is not the
case, one can show that the central result continues to hold as long as,
for each pair of individuals, one can devise an algorithm which
describes transfers as a function of realized linkages (e.g.,

marriages), and which connects this pair with probability one. Given
the wide variety of known links available at each point in time, this

condition does not seem very demanding. Of course, the process by which
agents achieve such an equilibrium is again problematic.
Finally, suppose that individuals cannot observe some set of

actions taken by others. Asymmetric information of this sort may
interfere with the neutralization of distortionary taxes. In the proof
of our central result, we transformed variables differently for subgames

differentiated according to prior choices of taxed activities. For this
to be valid, players with transformed actions must be able to
distinguish between these subgames; that is, they must be able to

observe taxed activities. While this requirement is quite demanding, it
may be stronger than is necessary; in some environments, the ability to
observe a summary statistic, such as government revenue, may suffice.
In any

case,

these issues do not bear on the neutrality of arbitrary

—45-

lump sum redistributions. Indeed, this weaker form of neutrality does

not even require individuals to observe each other's transfers.i!

4.

Interfamily Linkages

The linkage hypothesis may appear excessively demanding. After
all, Barro assumes only that individuals are linked through operative
transfers with their children, while our results require interlinkage of

the entire population. However, we contend that Barro's hypothesis
alone virtually guarantees that our apparently stronger assumption will

be satisfied. Our argument makes explicit reference to the biological
structure of families.

For illustrative purposes, suppose that all individuals marry,
that each marriage produces two children, and that parents are
operatively linked to their children. Then, ignoring redundancies,-i.i
every individual is indirectly linked through common descendents in the

next G generations to

(G) =

members of its own

generation.

22i-1

If we assume (as seems natural) that

spouses are operatively linked to each other, then one fewer generation

is required to establish the same links. Accordingly, to appreciate the
importance of links spanning two, three, and four generations, we note

that for G = 2,

3,

and

4,

(a) is 2, 10, and 42, respectively.

This, however, is only the "tip of the iceburg." Once we have
established that one household is connected to another of same

-46-

generation, we may extend the chain further by moving up and down the

family tree as many times as desired. Thus, operative linkages form
complex networks, perhaps interconnecting large segments of the

population. Indeed, if each couple is connected to ten others (through
grandchildren), then the probability of finding a "cycle' (a set of
interconnected individuals who are isolated from the rest of the
population) seems quite small.

It is possible to formalize this intuition by appealing to

existing results concerning the theory of random graphs. This requires

some simple preliminaries. A random graph FN is an object
consisting of n nodes and N edges (lines connecting two nodes),
where the edges are selected randomly (all potential edges are equally

probable). In our framework, the nodes would represent distinct couples
belonging to the same generation. An edge represents a linkage between
couples generated by a single movement up and down the tree, spanning at

most G generations. Note that we no longer assume every couple is
operatively linked to two children, and that all children marry——the
number of linkages to a particular couple is random, presumably
reflecting differences in the number of children, whether children

marry, and whether operative links with children exist. On average, we
will assume that couples have two children, so that, as a approximation,
N =

Formally, we may now restate our questions as follows: what is
the probability that FflN is completely connected? What is the
expected size of the greatest connected component of

-47-

Unfortunately, these are fabulously complex combinatoric problems

which remain unsolved. There are, however, asymptotic results; for
large populations, we may employ asymptotic approximations.
Specifically, define

Nc =[—nlogn+
cn]
2
where c is an arbitrary fixed real number (so that the number of edges
increases slightly faster than linearly in n).

Erd5s and Renyi [1959]

establish that the number of points outside the greatest connected

component of r
is distributed in the limit accordin€ to Poisson's
n,N
law, with mean value e2c.
To apply this result, we consider a sequence of economies indexed

by n, the number of couples. We fix c at some appropriate level, as

discussed below. For each n, we select G (the maximum allowable
number of generations which a link may span) so that N/n < (G)/2
(note that G will increase extraordinarily slowly with n).J-/

Erdcs

and Renyi's theorem then yields lower bounds on the asymptotic
probability of complete linkage, and on the expected size of the largest

connected component. All that remains is to select an appropriate value

for c.
Suppose we wish to obtain asymptotic approximations for a
population of 25 million couples (roughly the size of one "generation"),

where we consider linkages that span three or fewer generations. Then
n = 25 million, and N = 125 million. This economy corresponds to an

element of the sequence formed by setting c =

3.52.

Using

Erdos and

-48-

Renyi's result, we see that it would be very unusual to find indirect

linkages between all individuals. However, the expected number of
individuals outside of the greatest connected component is only 1119.
If the asymptotic approximation is accurate, all but a negligable subset
of 25 million couples will be indirectly linked through their
grandchildren.

Table 1 summarizes these calculations, as well as analogous

calculations for G = 2

and G = 4.

Surprisingly, even if we restrict

attention to links which span only two generations (parents and
children), on average more than 86% of the population will be indirectly

linked. If we consider links which span as many as four generations,
then it is virtually certain that all couples will be indirectly linked.
Note that the complexity of these networks actually renders

perhaps the majority of interpersonal linkages redundant: typically,
two individuals will be connected through several distinct channels.
Consequently, if for any reason a family's chain of operative linkages
is severed, this does not imply, as in Barro's analysis, that the

neutrality results are inapplicable. Lateral connections between
families will ordinarily suffice to circumvent isolated breaks in any

chain. Thus, the linkage hypothesis is typically satisfied under much
weaker conditions than those imposed by Barro, and our results are
immune to the well—known criticism that Ricardian equivalence holds only

if family chains never break. In addition, other results in the
literature on random graphs (c.f., Bollobas [1981]) suggest that
typically the chains connecting pairs of individuals are surprisingly

-49-

short, so that each link may be used relatively few times to offset any
given policy, as claimed in Section 3C.
Finally, we note two important problems which arise concerning our

application of graph theoretic results. First, contrary to our
assumption, not all links are equally probable. Individuals are most
likely to marry others who live in the same geographic areas, and some
communities, such as the Aniish, are almost entirely self—contained.

Intuitively, one would expect this modification to make very little

qualitative difference. Consider, for instance, a society with a
virtually perfect caste system. Suppose that each caste is internally
linked (every member of a caste is linked to every other member). A
single "intermarriage" will the serve to link the entire population. Of
course, in such a society, families might disown the intermarried

couple. Even if they did not, in acting as a conduit for all resource
flows between the two castes, the couple would undoubtably be driven to

corners, which would render their linkages inoperative. However, for
the most part, the "intermarriages" which concern us here would not
violate social customs, and hence generate severence of financial

ties. In addition, the "single intermarriage" case is extreme; we
suspect that links between most large population groups are far more
common (consider, for example, the frequency of racial intermarriages).
Second, contrary to our assumption, links are not distributed

independently. Most importantly, once an individual is linked to
someone, the probability that he is linked to someone else changes. Our
failure to account for this factor is clearly responsible for the

-50-

conclusion that all individuals are linked through chains spanning four

generations: the presence of childless individuals renders this
conclusion untenable. However, one might well suppose that, ordinarily,
once an individual is operatively linked to anyone else, he becomes
attached to a much larger network.
In both cases, we may be somewhat more formal about our

intuition. Let AnN be the set of graphs consisting only of one
connected subset, and

edge).

isolated

nodes (points which do not support any

Erd5s and Renyi [1959] demonstrate that the probability of

selecting a graph in A,N goes to one as n goes to infinity. This
is true regardless of c, so we may select c to reflect either the low
probability of interinarriages, or some lower bound on the conditional

probability of additional linkages (in each case understating the true

extent of operative networks). The result suggests that, in general,
anyone who is operatively linked to anyone else will be indirectly
linked to everyone, except for those who are completely isolated.

We close this section with one final thought. In practice, people
are connected through operative transfers not just to children, but also
to siblings, nieces, nephews, cousins, charities, political organiza-

tions, and so forth. Thus, we strongly suspect that, even accounting
for the childless, very few individuals or groups of individuals are
truly isolated in the sense discussed here.

—51—

5.

Interpretations

and Conclusions

What should one make of the rather perplexing conclusions reached

in Sections 2 through 4? In particular, several points of
interpretation require further discussion. First, what general
principles drive our neutrality results? Second, what does this
analysis teach us about "real" economics? Third, where do we go from

here? We address these questions in subsections A, B, and C,
respectively.

A. Optimality versus Neutrality
At first, one might suspect that our analysis is closely related
to other results which are known to hold under somewhat special

circumstances. Consider, for example, an economy consisting of a single
(a8 opposed to representative) dynastic family, where family members

have dynamically consistent preferences. In this world, every consumer
acts as though he is part of a "big happy family", which maximizes a

single utility function. Clearly, all lump sum transfers are neutral——
the family responds to any such policy by reestablishing its optimum
(indeed, this is the popular intuition for Barro's theorem).
Furthermore, "distortionary" taxes cannot displace the big happy family
from its optimum.
Of course, when one abandons the dynamically consistent formulation of family preferences, one cannot immediately apply the same set of

arguments. However, there is some reason to believe that the same basic
principles may be operative. In particular, Becker [1974] has argued
that, as long as family members are linked through an altruist, each

—52—

member acts to maximize family welfare. Although Becker establishes his
result in a rather restrictive environment, one might suspect that, in
some sense, our analysis contains a generalization of this "Rotten Kid
Theorem."

However, this reasoning is simply false, and the conclusions which

follow from it invalid. As discussed in Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers
[1985], Becker's "Rotten Kid Theorem" does not hold when one relaxes his
restrictive assumptions, so the current analysis cannot be founded upon

the "big happy family" view. Accordingly, it is essential to understand
that our results concern neutrality, not optimality. Recall Example 2

of Section 2. There we argued that a labor income tax was neutral,
since it left 1 's effective wage unaltered. We did not, however, assert
that

1

chose his labor supply optimally in the initial equilibrium.

Specifically, we did not say that 1 's effective wage was w. Rather, he
faced some shadow wage, which reflected the effect of his labor supply

choices on subsequent transfers. We argued only that this shadow wage

was insensitive to tax and transfer policies. This principle is quite
general: in equilibrium, chosen actions may well be inefficient, but
redistributions contingent upon these choices will not effect behavior.
Aside from delimiting the scope of neutrality, this observation

also implies that our results have no normative implications. Although
all taxes are equivalent to lump sum taxes, lump sum taxation may not be

desirable. Since the equilibrium ordinarily entails preexisting distortions (due to intrafainily conflict), the government would want to

engage in second—best taxation. However, paradoxically, second—best tax

—53-

instruments are unavailable. The government can introduce countervailing distortions only by conditioning real expenditures on consumer
behavior.

B. Policy Implications
Our analysis calls into serious question the usefulness of the
dynastic framework as an analytic tool for studying public policy

issues. Unless one is willing to accept untenable conclusions, it is

necessary to abandon some premise central to this framework. One must
therefore regard any conclusions derived from these premises with
considerable skepticism.

Barro's Ricardian equivalence results, which concern the
neutrality of public deficits and social security, are probably the best

known implications that follow from dynastic assumptions. Yet our
criticism also applies to a variety of other studies which adopt Barro's

model. For example, Abel [1984] demonstrates that social security may
have real effects in a dynastic world by inducing redistributions

between families. In light of our analysis, it is clear that, once one
adopts dynastic assumptions, distributional questions are ill—posed.
Judd [1985] and Chamley [1981] study the welfare effects of capital

income taxation in dynastic models. Yet the premises of these models
may imply neutralization of the very distortion which they purport to
study.

A natural response to our criticism is that one ought to view the
dynastic formulation as only an approximation to reality; one should
therefore expect properties such as Ricardian equivalence to hold only

—54—

as approximations. Taking the premises of this model literally is
simply unfair, and bound to generate some untenable results.

We find this response completely unsatisfactory. It is clear that
both the degree and nature of the approximation will matter a great

deal. If we agree that taxes, transfers, and prices are not even close
to being irrelevant, then we must also agree that in some important,
policy—relevant sense the world is not even close to being dynastic.
One cannot simply assert that the model holds as a good approximation in
one context, but not in another.

It is essential to describe the

approximation explicitly, so that analysts can identify a new set of
assumptions and elucidate their implications.
It may well be that one can modify the dynastic model in a way
which addresses our criticism, while preserving central implications

such as Ricardian equivalence. The first author is pursuing this
possibility in current work with Andrew Abel, but has found the task
quite difficult.

Consider an example. One might argue in defense of Ricardian
equivalence as follows. Our criticism disparages results which depend
on relatively long (although recall our remark in Section 4), indirect

linkages. Individuals may, however, be myopic about effects which work
their way through complex, poorly understood networks, while being

perfectly rational about short, direct chains. Thus, public deficits
redeemed within a few generations may well be approximately irrelevant,
while policies which concern distribution within a generation are not.
Yet a bit of reflection suggests that matters are not nearly so

-.55—

simple. To illustrate, consider a world in which each couple has two

children, and all children marry. Suppose for convenience that the
interest rate is zero. The government undertakes a pure Ricardian
exercise, reducing taxes by $10 on each couple today, and increasing

taxes by $10 on each couple belonging to the next generation. What are
the effects of this policy?
Suppose initially that individuals understand the policy, but are
completely myopic about the behavior of others to whom they are only

indirectly linked. An arbitrary couple (A) belonging to the current
generation will then perceive that the wealth of its family has fallen

by $10——while it receives $10, each child loses $10. Consequently, the
deficit policy will have substantial real effects.
For Ricardian equivalence to hold, couple A must understand that

it is indirectly linked to two other sets of parents (B and c). Even
if A understands this, it must be fairly sophisticated about
coordinating actions with the other parents. There are an infinite
number of ways to offset this policy——each couple could give $5

to

each

child, $10 to one child and nothing to the other, or, more generally, $x

to one child and $10—i to the other. Further, when A worries about
coordinating actions with B and C, it must consider the fact that B and

C face similar problems with two other couples, D and B. If B fails to
coordinate properly with D, then B will in general not wish to join A in
offsetting the policy for their married children, as described above.
Effectively, A must believe that everyone is coordinating actions
through the entire web of linkages, and that this is common knowledge.

—56—

Thus, when families are interlinked, Ricardian equivalence does not
appear to demand a lower level of rationality than do our results.

C. Where Next?
Our arguments depend most heavily upon several central

assumptions. First, we assume that operative linkages are quite
common. Second, we assume that individuals care only about the
consequences of giving, and not directly about the amount given. To
establish the irrelevance of all fiscal policies and prices, we must

also assume that actions are publicly observable. If one relaxes this
last assumption and supposes instead that capital markets are perfect,
it is then possible to demonstrate that all lump sum redistributions are

irrelevant. In order to conduct constructive policy analyses, one must
modify one or more of these basic premises. We consider them in reverse
order.

The last two assumptions are certainly objectionable on empirical

grounds. However, this does not fully account for our skepticism
concerning the model's implications. Suppose hypothetically that the
government adopted and effectively enforced (through enormous penalties)
a new law requiring public disclosure of all private financial

decisions. We would not expect fiscal policy and prices to become
irrelevant as a consequence. We conclude that an important source of
our disbelief must lie elsewhere.

The second assumption might fail for several reasons. Generosity
may be inherently fulfilling. Alternatively, individuals might be
myopic with respect to the actions of their heirs, and simply take the

-57-

size

of transfers as a proxy for well—being. Both views are somewhat

appealing, but neither leads to a satisfactory theory of transfers. For
example, it is difficult to know why an individual would care about the
magnitude of his transfer if it truly did not affect any real outcome.
In both cases, the specification of the transfer motive is necessarily
ad hoc.

Violations of the first assumption fall into two categories:
either a large number of people fail to make positive transfers, or

corners matter despite the fact that transfers are positive. Many
commentators have indeed claimed that corner constraints bind for most

individuals. Barro [1984] offers a theoretical reason for expecting

this outcome, but does not elucidate implications for policy. Our
analysis suggests a somewhat different reason, which raises some
intriguing possibilities.

To illustrate, consider a world in which there are three
successive generations (t =

1,2,3),

each consisting of N households.

For purposes of interpretation, one should think of each household as a

married couple. Each member of generation t =

1

,2 has two children,

but, of course, children are shared (a child—household is formed by the
marriage of two individuals who come from two different parent house-

holds). Suppose that the children of the i-th household in generation 1

belong to the m(i)—th and f(i)—th households in generation 2 (where
these indices are assigned so that everyone in generation 2 has two

forebearers in generation i). Further suppose that the children of
the i—th household in generation 2 belong to the i—th and

1—th

-58-

households

in generation 3 (with the exception that N's children belong

to the N—th and first households). We select this stylized pattern of
linkages in order to guarantee that there is a chain that interconnects
the entire population.

We will assume that all households are identical within
generations.

The utility of household un generation t is given by
+ k(u2
u(c)
1
f(i)

t

u. =

1

2

u(c.)
3.

+

3 +

k(u.1

+ u2

u.31+1

m(i) )

)

u(c)

This

t1
t=2

t3

individual is endowed with initial wealth, w.
Behavior unfolds as follows. First, each member of generation 1

chooses its own consumption, and transfers to its children. Next, each
member of generation 2 does the same. Finally, members of generation 3
consumer their endowments, plus all transfers received.

Suppose that along some symmetric subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
path, all members of generation 2 make operative transfers to their

children.J-V The analysis of Section 3 then establishes that the
consumption of any household in either generation 2 or 3 depends only

upon

the

total resources available to all members of those

generations. If N is large, then the marginal propensity to consume
from wealth for any given individual must be close to zero (this point
is analogous to Sugden's [1982] observation concerning the provision of

charity). Thus, each member of generation 1 knows that his gifts will

—59-

have a negligible impact upon the consumption of his descendents. In
contrast, gifts involve a non-negligible sacrifice of his own

consumption. Thus, under relatively weak conditions, no member of
generation 1 will make an operative transfer.

The main point raised by this discussion is that in large
populations where preferences are dynastic and decisions are sequential,

large numbers of individuals must end up at corners. In addition, the
particular model considered here produces endogenous cycles: one
generation acts altruistically, making transfers to its children, while
the next generation, despite being identical to the first, acts

selfishly (this remains true as one adds generations). While we do not
seriously propose this particular pattern as descriptive of the real
world, our analysis does suggest that endogenous behavior may well give
rise to patterns of operative linkages that do not generate standard
dynastic results, such as Ricardian equivalence.
While there are both empirical and theoretical reasons for
doubting that most individuals make positive transfers, we are unable to

fully attribute our disbelief to this assumption. We suspect that, the
thrill of victory aside, most individuals would prefer winning $1,000 in
a lottery, to learning that one of their siblings has won $1,000,

despite the expectation of future transfers from the parent. Yet
dynasticism implies that one should be indifferent.
We are therefore led to reexamine the other aspect of our first

assumption: corners matter, even though they do not bind, in the
traditional sense. So far as we know, the only fully elaborated

—60-

theories which are compatible with this view envision transfers as a
means of facilitating exchange within families (see, for example,
Kotlikoff and

[1985]).

Spivak

[1981], and

Bernheim,

Shleifer, and Summers

Accordingly, we believe that subsequent policy analyses should

consider more carefully the implications of non-standard alternatives to
the dynastic transfer motive.

—61 —

Footnotes
Overlapping generations models are not only generally less
tractable, but also often give rise to equilibria with undesirable
properties. Specifically, equilibria in overlapping generations
models may fail to be either efficient or locally unique (see
Balasko and Shell [1980] and Kehoe and Levine [1985]). Failure of
local uniqueness is particularly troubling in any exercise
involving comparative statics or dynamics. Thus, Judd [1985]
unabashedly attributes his adoption of the dynastic framework to
analytic convenience. Unfortunately, this advantage may be
illusory. In a recent paper, Gale 1985] has pointed out that,
while Barro's dynastic solution is an equilibrium for the model
which he considers, this model also generally gives rise to a
continuum of subgame perfect intergenerational equilibria (see
Selten [1965, 1975]), many of which are inefficient. By adopting
dynastic assumptions, one therefore does not necessarily succeed
in avoiding the problems which arise in the standard overlapping
generations framework.
Barro [1974, p. 1097] explains that "current generations act
effectively as though they were infinite—lived when they are
connected to future generations by a chain of operative
intergenerational transfers." Subsequent papers reinforced the
notion that Ricardian equivalence is somehow tied to the
dynamically consistent formulation of family preferences; see, for
example, Buiter and Carmichael's [1984] dispute with Burbidge
[1983, 1984].
Equilibria are quite generally inefficient in models with
interlocking families. One important reason has been emphasized
by Nerlove, Razin, and Sadka [1984]: when unrelated individuals
share a common descendent, the consumption of that descendent is a
public good.
In fact, one can think of agent 3 as a public project financed by
voluntary contributions, in which case the analysis of Bergstrom,
Blume and Varian [1984] establishes the neutrality result. We are
aware that Lawrence Kotlikoff also derived this result independently. These authors did not, however, note the strategic
equivalence of the pre- and post—transfer games (which makes the
result substantially more general), nor did they discover the
neutrality of so—called "distortionary" taxes (and the
implications, discussed in Section 5, for the role of prices in
resource allocation). In addition, the framework employed by
Bergstrom, Blume, and Varian is substantially more restrictive
than the general model considered in Section 3 (their neutrality
result was established for networks of interpersonal 1inkaes with
a very specific structure). We also note that Carmichael L1982]

—62—

had previously recognized that the key to Barro's theorem
concerned the preservation of opportunity sets, rather than the
specification of altruism.
In this example, equilibria are generally inefficient due to the
public good problem noted in Footnote 2.
Two games are strategically equivalent if they have the same
extensive forms.

1/

Our central result depends critically on the assumption that
strategically equivalent games yield equivalent equilibria.
Essentially, this implies that we can think entirely in terms of
abstract actions, ignoring the primitive actions to which these
actually correspond. Yet in many situations, primitive actions
may play a role in determining behavior. The most obvious role
arises when the game yields multiple equilibria—-players may
gravitate toward equilibria in which their choices are close to
certain focal alternatives (e.g., zero transfers, or transfers
prior to the policy perturbation). It is, however, difficult to
see how this possibility could invalidate our result without
simultaneously rendering the dynastic framework inapplicable.
Indeed, the purpose of many refinements is to rule out equilibria
which are sensitive to perturbations in either the environment or
in the rules governing behavior (see Fudenberg, Kreps and Levine
[1986]).

.2_I

Of course, if 2 must hurt himself to carry out this threat, 1
might choose to call 2's "bluff"-—accordingly, these equilibria
are not subgame perfect.

19_I

Details

of such calculations are available from the authors upon
request. The reader may also wish to consult Bernheim (1986).
One could also allow consumers to lock in transfers for a number
of years, including transfers to unborn generations. This would
change nothing of substance.

Note that we do not allow z to depend upon current (period t)
choices. Effectively, the gverninent collects tax revenues at the
"end" of each time period (in the last period of life, revenues
must be collected from the individual's estate, or equivalently,
from his heirs). This aspect of our model is an artifact of
discrete time——we model the government policy in this way so that
private and public transfers are on an equal footing (within a
single period, both may be conditioned on the same behavior).

—63—

There is, for example, a growing literature which analyses models
in which each generation cares about its own consumption, and the
consumption of its successor (see, e.g., Arrow [1973], Dasgupta
[1974a,bJ, Kohlberg [1976], Lane and Mitra [1981], Bernheim and
Ray [1983,1986], and Leininger [1986]). Bernheim and Ray [1983]
and Leininger L1986] established existence of Nash equilibria in
the class of continuous consumption functions which are upper
semicontinuous from the left, with limits from the right. Despite
the simplicity of these models, there are no known conditions
which guarantee that these functions will be either continuous or
concave in any reasonably general set of environments. In fact,
Kohlberg [1976] has shown that Nash equilibria in continuously
differentiable strategies do not generally exist.
The reader may verify this through a slight modification of the
argument used in Section 3C.
In example 1, we have assumed that 1 and 2 select transfers
simultaneously. This is equivalent to letting 1 choose first, and
assuming that 2 then selects a transfer without having observed
l's choice.

e.g. the possibility that siblings have different in—laws. For
large populations and small values of G, this is presumably an
excellent approximation.

ill

Each edge represents a link for two couples; hence we divide the
number of links by two to obtain the number of edges.
In particular, for the values of c considered here, it is not
necessary to consider linkages which span more than four
generations until the population size exceeds 1015.

.i11

One can derive relatively weak conditions under which this occurs.

-64-

References

Abel, A. [1984], "Capital Accumulation and Uncertain Lifetimes with
Adverse Selection," mimeograph, Harvard University.
Arrow, K. [1973], "Rawis' Principle of Just Saving," Swedish Journal of
Economics, pp. 323—335.
Balasko, Y. and K. Shell [1980], "The Overlapping Generations Model,
I: The Case of Pure Exchange without Money," Journal of Economic
Theory 23, 281—306.
Barro, R. [1974], "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of
Political Economy 82, pp. 1095—1117.
Barro, R. [1976], "Reply to Feldstein and Buchanan," Journal of
Political Economy 84, pp. 343-350.
Barro, R. [1984], "On Patterns of Interpersonal Transfers," mimeograph,
University of Chicago.
Barsky, R., G. Mankiw, and S. Zeldes [1984], "Ricardian Consumers with
Keynesian Propensities," NBER Working Paper No. 1400.
Becker, G. [1974], "A Theory of Social Interactions," Journal of
Political Economy 82, pp. 1064-1093.
Bergstrom, T., L. Blume, and H. Varian [1984], "on The Private Provision
of Public Goods," mimeograph, University of Michigan.
Bernheim, B. D. [1986], "On the Voluntary and Involuntary Provision of
Public Goods," American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Bernheim, B.D. and D. Ray [1986], "Economic Growth with
Intergenerational Altruism," Review of Economic Studies,
forthcoming.
Bernheim, B.D. and D. Ray [1983], "Altruistic Growth Economies I:
Existence of Bequest Equilibria," Institute for Mathematical
Studies in the Social Sciences, The Economics Series, Technical
Report No. 419, Department of Economics, Stanford University,
Stanford, California.
Bernheim, B.D., A. Shleifer and L. Summers [1985], "The Strategic
Bequest Motive," Journal of Political Economy 93, 1045—1076.
Bollabas, B. [1981], "The Diameter of Random Graphs," Transactions of
the American Mathematical Society, 267, No. 1.

—65—

Buchanan, J. [19'i6], "Barro on the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem,"
Journal of Political Economy 84, 337—342.

Buiter, W. and J. Carmichael [1984], "Government Debt: Comment,"
American Economic Review 74, pp. 762-765.
Burbidge, J. [1983], "Government Debt in an Overlapping-Generations
Model with Bequests and Gifts," American Economic Review, 73,
pp. 222—227.

Burbidge, J. [1984], "Government Debt: Reply," American Economic Review
74, pp. 766-767.
Carmichael, J. [1982], "On Barro's Theorem of Debt Neutrality: The
Irrelevance of Net Wealth," American Economic Review 72,
pp. 202—213.
Chamley, C. [1981], "The Welfare Cost of Capital Taxation in a Growing
Economy," Journal of Political Economy 89, pp. 468—496.
Dasgupta, P. [1974a], "On Some Problems Arising from Professor Rawis'
Conception of Distributive Justive," Theory and Decision 4,
pp. 325—344.
Dasgupta, P. [1974b], "On some Alternative Criteria for Justice between
Generations," Journal of Public Economics 3, pp. 405—423.
Diamond, P. [1965], "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,"
American Economic Review 55, pp. 1126—1150.
Drazen, A. [1979], "Government Debt, Human Capital, and Bequests in a
Life Cycle Model," Journal of Political Economy 86, pp. 505—516.
Erdos, P. and A. Renyi [1959], "On Random Graphs I," Publications
Mathematicae 6, pp. 290—297.

Feldstein, M. [1976], "Perceived Wealth in Bonds and Social Security: A
Comment," Journal of Political Economy 84, pp. 331—336.
Pudenberg, D., D. Kreps, and D. Levine [1986], "On the Robustness of
Equilibrium Refinemenst," Institute for Mathematical Studies in
the Social Sciences, The Economics Series, Technical Report
No. 489, Department of Economics, Stanford University, Stanford,
California.

Gale, D. [1985], "The Strategic Analysis of Bequest Behavior: A
Critique of the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem," mimeograph,
University of Pennsylvania.

—66—

Judd, K. [1985], "The Welfare Cost of Factor Taxation in a Perfect
Foresight Model," mimeograph, Northwestern University.
Kohlberg, E. [1976], "A Model of Economic Growth with Altruism Between
Generations," Journal of Economic Theory 13, PP. 1—13.
Kotlikoff, L. and A. Spivak [1981], "The Family as an Incomplete
Annuities Market," Journal of Political Economy 89, pp. 372—391.
Lane, J. and T, Mitra [1981], "On Nash Equilibrium Programs of Capital
Accumulation under Altruistic Preferences, International Economic
Review 22, pp. 309—331.

Leininger, W. [1983], "The Existence of Nash Equilibria in a Model of
Growth with Altruism Between Generations," mimeograph, University
of Bonn.
Kehoe, T. and D. Levine [1985], "Comparative Statics and Perfect
Foresight in Infinite Horizon Economies," Econometrica 53,
pp. 433-454.
Menchik, P. [1980], "Primogeniture, Equal Sharing, and the US
Distribution of Wealth," Quarterly Journal of Economics 94,
pp. 279—316.

Nerlove, L, A. Razin and E. Sadka [1984], "Bequests and the Size of
Population When Population is Endogenous," Journal of Political
Economy 92, pp. 527—531
Pollak, R. [1968], "Consistent Planning," Review of Economic Studies 35.
Selten, R. [1965], "Spieltheoretische Behandlixngeines Oligopolmodells
mit Nachfraget8agheit," Zeitschrift fur die Gesamte
Straatiswissenschaft 121, pp. 301-324.

Selten, R. [1975], "Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for
Equilibrium Points in Extensive Games," International Journal of
Game Theory 4, pp. 25—55.
Shenshinki, E. and Y. Weiss [1981], "Uncertainty and Optimal Social
Security Systems," Quarterly Journal of Economics 96, pp. 189—206.
Strotz, R. [1956], "Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility
Maximization," Review of Economic Studies 23, pp. 165—180.
Sugden, R. [1982], "On the Economics of Philanthropy," Economic Journal
92, pp. 341—350.

—67—

Tobin, J. and W. Buiter [1980], "Fiscal and Monetary Policies, Capital
Formation, and Economic Activity," in The Government and Capital
Formation, ed, George N. von Furstenberg, Cambridge, NA.:
Ballinger Press.

-68-

Table 1

Asymptotic Approximations for the Distribution of Linked Subsets

G

N

c

Probabil ity of
Complete Linkage

Expected Fraction of
Population in Largest
Linked Subset

2

n

-7.52

0.00

0.86660

3

5n

—3.52

0.00

0.99996

4

21n

12.48

1.00

1.00000

—69_

Figure 1: Schematic Representation of Example 2

i's labor
choice

1

Figure 1(a): Policy z

p1

l's labor

choice

Figure 1(b): Policy z'

