                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   ENDING THE EURO CRISIS?

                                          Martin S. Feldstein

                                         Working Paper 20862
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20862


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2015




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Ending the Euro Crisis?
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 20862
January 2015
JEL No. E5,E6,H2

                                               ABSTRACT

All of the attempts to end the euro crisis and to return the Eurozone countries to healthy growth rates
of income and employment have failed. The options that are currently being discussed are not likely
to be more successful.

If there is a politically feasible way out of the crisis, it will be through revenue neutral fiscal incentives
adopted by the individual Eurozone countries. I describe some of these fiscal options after reviewing
the history of failed attempts and the options that are currently on the table.


Martin S. Feldstein
President Emeritus
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
and NBER
msfeldst@nber.org
ENDING THE EURO CRISIS?

Martin Feldstein

There may be no way to end the euro crisis. That was true even before
the recent political developments in Greece. The euro faced difficult
challenges from the beginning: an attempt to force a heterogeneous
group of countries to use a single currency with a single exchange rate
despite the lack of the de facto labor mobility and the large interstate
fiscal transfers that allow the United States to operate successfully with
a single currency.

All of the attempts to end the euro crisis since it began and return the
Eurozone countries to healthy growth rates of income and employment
have failed. The options that are currently being discussed are not likely
to be more successful.

If there is a politically feasible way out of the crisis, it will be through
revenue neutral fiscal incentives adopted by the individual Eurozone
countries. I will describe some of these fiscal options after reviewing
the history of failed attempts and the options that are currently on the
table.

The Origins

The creation of the euro resulted in an immediate fall in the interest
rates in those countries like Italy and Spain that had previously had high
rates of inflation and interest. The lower rates of interest led to a surge
in mortgage financed home building and in debt financed government
spending. Financial markets came to believe that all Eurozone
government bonds were essentially equivalent, causing interest spreads
among those bonds to be very small.

All was well until the Greek government revealed that it had previously
underestimated the size of its national debt by a considerable amount.


 Professor of Economics, Harvard University. An earlier version of this paper was
presented at the American Economic Association annual meeting on January 3,
2014, in a session entitled “When Will the Euro Crisis End?”


                                         1
The market responded with a sharp jump in the interest rate on Greek
debt followed during the next year by increased interest rates in the
other Eurozone countries that had large amounts of government debt.

By 2011 the government debts of Ireland, Portugal, and Italy exceeded
100 percent of their GDP and the interest rates on ten year bonds were
over 12 percent in Ireland and Portugal and over 7 percent in Italy. With
those interest rates, government budgets were in deficit and debt to
GDP ratios were rising.

Failed Attempts

The Eurozone officials in Brussels and German Chancellor Angela
Merkel responded to this situation by declaring that the crisis had to be
solved at the level of the Eurozone, adding that the crisis was an
opportunity to increase Eurozone solidarity. Their emphasis on higher
taxes and budget austerity had the opposite effect: weakening economic
activity in the peripheral countries, undermining solidarity, and
producing strong anti-German sentiment. Despite the higher tax rates,
the resulting decline in economic growth failed to reduce fiscal deficits
and to stop the rise in the ratio of debt to GDP.

Financial market participants then began to fear that the rising debt
ratios would weaken the stability of the Eurozone itself, causing one or
more of the member countries to leave the Eurozone and create a new
national currency. European Central Bank (ECB) president Mario
Draghi then came to the rescue in July 2012, declaring that the ECB
would “do whatever it takes to save the euro.” The ECB then authorized
financial support to those high debt countries that would present a
credible plan for reducing their fiscal deficits. Although no country
applied, the potential availability of the ECB funds was enough to cause
interest rates to fall sharply, dropping to less than three percent in Italy
and Spain.

In an important sense, this dramatic move by Mario Draghi and the ECB
succeeded too well. In reducing the sovereign bond interest rates to
such low levels, it removed pressure on national politicians and on
union groups to make serous structural reforms.



                                     2
Even with these low interest rates, the euro crisis continued with very
weak growth and no reduction in the debt to GDP ratios. Germany, the
European Commission, and the IMF continued to call for austerity as the
necessary path to recovery and as a condition for financial assistance.

The European Commission then attempted to put itself in charge of the
rescue by putting forward a three part plan: a fiscal compact, a banking
union, and a budget review process.

The fiscal compact, formally adopted by all of the nations, required
countries to reduce their deficits to three percent of GDP and move their
debt to GDP ratios toward 60 percent. Countries that failed to comply
were to be fined. In fact, several countries still continue to have deficits
above three percent and deficits that are over 100 percent and rising.
No country has been fined.

The proposed banking union was supposed to include a shift of banking
supervision from national authorities to the ECB, a Eurozone resolution
authority for failed banks, and deposit insurance at the level of the
Eurozone. Far less was achieved and none of it served to increase cross
boarder bank lending or to stimulate growth.

Giving the European Commission authority to review and modify
national budgets was simply a step too far to even get serious
consideration by the Commission itself.

ECB to the Rescue

After the failure of such ambitious plans on the part of the Commission,
the ECB began pursuing its own strategy for stimulating demand in the
hope that faster GDP growth would lead to lower fiscal deficits and
reduced ratios of debt to GDP. A key feature of the ECB strategy has
been to lower interest rates in order to cause the euro to fall relative to
the dollar and other currencies. Since roughly half of the exports of the
Eurozone countries are to markets outside the Eurozone, a weaker euro
can stimulate demand and GDP in the Eurozone. In addition, the
resulting increase in the cost of imports can raise the rate of inflation
that is now close to zero.



                                     3
At the time of writing this (the end of December 2014), the euro/dollar
exchange rate has fallen from 140 in 2011 to 120, a decline of 14
percent. But with the concurrent currency depreciation in Japan and
Britain, the broad real effective exchange rate index has fallen much
less, down about four percent in 2014 and just back to about the same
level that prevailed in 2011.

Mario Draghi’s remarks in Jackson Hole in August of 2014 emphasized
that the ECB will continue to aim at a more competitive value of the
euro by keeping the Eurozone interest rates low while rates in the U.S.
rise in 2015 and after.

The ECB has also pursued a variety of other strategies to inject funds
into the European banks and therefore into the economy. For example,
the ECB has been buying asset backed securities to inject funds into the
Eurozone markets. Although this is a positive stimulus, the magnitude
is very small because the market for asset backed securities in Europe is
much smaller than in the United States. The ECB has also been offering
to lend funds with four year maturities to commercial banks at a very
low interest rate to provide low cost funds for the banks to lend to
commercial borrowers. The uptake of these funds by the commercial
banks has been very small because of the banks’ concerns about their
capital ratios and the low quality of the borrowers seeking bank credit.

A Three Part Strategy

Looking ahead, Mario Draghi has said that ending the euro crisis
requires a three part strategy: structural reforms to increase
productivity, increased fiscal deficits in those countries that have the
fiscal room to do that, and expansionary monetary policy. The first two
of these are not likely to happen, undermining the strategy as a whole.

It is clear that the countries like Italy and France that are most in need
of structural reforms are not able to achieve such reforms. Substantial
labor reforms in Italy have been rejected by the labor unions, with
widespread strikes. Government proposed reforms in France have been
prevented by the French bureaucracy.




                                    4
Germany, with a nearly balanced budget, is the only country with the
capacity for expansionary fiscal policy. But for reasons rooted in its
history, Germany is determined to achieve and maintain a balanced
budget for itself and is opposed to allowing other Eurozone countries to
continue their fiscal deficits. Even if Germany did run a fiscal deficit, its
impact on Eurozone growth would be relatively small.

So Draghi’s three-part strategy is not going to happen. All that is left is
more expansionary monetary policy. Draghi has indicated that the ECB
may decide in January to buy large amounts of the existing government
bonds of Eurozone countries, what the ECB calls “quantitative easing.”

Quantitative Easting

Lawyers in the Eurozone are now debating the legality of such large-
scale purchases of sovereign bonds by the European Central Bank.
Financial analysts and economists are worrying about the future
stability costs of continuing the current extremely low level of sovereign
interest rates.

The ECB is considering this politically controversial and financially risky
strategy for stimulating the Eurozone economies because individual
member countries of the Eurozone cannot change their interest rates or
their exchange rates. The peripheral countries that are most in need of
stimulus also cannot use government spending or tax cuts because they
already have very high national debts. Quantitative easing therefore
seems to the ECB to be the only option.

If it is tried, it may not succeed. Large scale purchases of government
debt stimulated the United States economy largely by driving down
long-term interest rates, leading to higher equity prices and higher
house prices. The resulting $10 trillion rise in household net worth in
2013 triggered increased consumer spending and a broader recovery of
demand. But interest rates are already extremely low in Europe with the
rate on ten year German bonds at only 0.7 percent. Even the Italian and
Spanish ten year bond rates are less than two percent. Quantitative
easing by the ECB cannot repeat the strategy that worked for the
Federal Reserve.



                                      5
Revenue Neutral Fiscal Incentives

Fortunately, quantitative easing by the ECB is not only risky but also
unnecessary. This brings me at last to what may be the only feasible way
of stimulating Eurozone growth: revenue neutral fiscal incentives
enacted by the individual Eurozone countries. The key to this approach
is to reduce the relevant cost of funds to businesses and households ---
i.e. the net of tax rate of interest and the net of tax cost of equity funds --
and to increase the net of tax return on investments.

There are many ways that changing tax rules can increase aggregate
spending without raising the fiscal deficit. Investment in plant and
equipment can be stimulated by a temporary increase in the tax-
deductible depreciation rate on new investments in plant and
equipment or by an enlarged investment tax credit. It would also be
possible to reduce the net cost of funds by converting the deduction for
business interest to a refundable credit at a higher effective rate. The
cost of equity capital could be reduced by allowing deductions for
dividends on common stock or preferred equity.

The resulting revenue loss could be balanced by a temporary rise in the
corporate tax rate, effectively taxing the return on old capital while
stimulating new investment. The necessary rise in the corporate tax
rate could be adjusted after seeing the favorable effect of the policy on
economic activity and tax revenue. The specific changes would have to
be done carefully to deal in an equitable way with unincorporated
businesses.

Tax changes could also be used to stimulate the construction of new
housing as a substitute for the lower mortgage interest rates brought
about in the U.S. by the Fed’s unconventional monetary policy. A direct
tax incentive to home builders would be passed through to prospective
buyers. Alternatively, mortgage interest payments could be made
deductable in calculating taxable income (as they are in the United
States) , extended to non-itemizers where deduction is currently
allowed, or converted to an optional tax-credit at a higher rate. The
revenue cost could be offset by adjusting tax rates in a revenue neutral
and distributionally neutral way.


                                      6
Yet a further alternative to QE for the Eurozone countries is to modify
their value added taxes with revenue neutral offsets in the income tax.
For example, an individual Eurozone country could commit to raise its
value added tax rate by two percentage points a year for the next five
years with the extra revenue returned in the form of lower income tax
rates. The prospect of future increases in the value added tax would
stimulate consumers to spend before prices rise and would also raise
the rate of consumer price inflation.

Any of these fiscal changes could be enacted at the level of the individual
Eurozone country. There is no need for authorization from the
Commission or from other countries in the Eurozone. Although the
creation of the euro ended the possibility of separate monetary policy
and separate exchange rates for Eurozone countries, it did not stop the
possibility of distinct tax rules and the resulting fiscal incentives.

The strategy of revenue neutral fiscal incentives might not be politically
feasible and, if pursued, might still not reignite growth in the Eurozone.
If that proves to be true, there may be no way to end the euro crisis
while preserving the euro.

END




                                    7
