                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 SPARE TIRE? STOCK MARKETS, BANKING CRISES, AND ECONOMIC RECOVERIES

                                            Ross Levine
                                             Chen Lin
                                             Wensi Xie

                                       Working Paper 20863
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20863


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2015




We thank Franklin Allen, Thorsten Beck, Daniel Berkowitz, Craig Doidge, Erik Gilje, Itay Goldstein,
Todd Gormley, Gary Gorton, Jun-Koo Kang, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Michelle Lowry, Yona
Rubinstein, Luke Taylor, Sheridan Titman, and Luigi Zingales for helpful comments and discussions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Spare Tire? Stock Markets, Banking Crises, and Economic Recoveries
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 20863
January 2015
JEL No. D22,E02,G21,G3,G38,K22

                                              ABSTRACT

Do stock markets act as a “spare tire” during banking crises, providing an alternative corporate financing
channel and mitigating the economic severity of banking crises? Using firm-level data in 36 countries
from 1990 through 2011, we find that the adverse consequences of banking crises on firm profitability,
employment, equity issuances, and investment efficiency are smaller in countries with stronger shareholder
protection laws. These findings are not explained by the development of stock markets or financial
institutions prior to the crises, the severity of the crisis, or overall economic, legal, and institutional
development. The evidence is consistent with the view that stronger shareholder protection laws provide
the legal infrastructure for stock markets to act as alternative sources of finance when banking systems
go flat, easing the impact of the crisis on the economy.


Ross Levine                                          Wensi Xie
Haas School of Business                              Faculty of Business and Economics
University of California at Berkeley                 The University of Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)          wencyxie@hku.hk
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu

Chen Lin
Faculty of Business and Economics
The University of Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk
                                                                                                   1



1. Introduction
       Researchers show that shareholder protection laws shape the functioning of stock markets

and the efficiency of corporate investments. By reducing the ability of corporate insiders to

expropriate resources from minority shareholders, stronger shareholder protection laws boost

stock market development (La Porta et al., 1997, 1998), the dispersion of ownership (La Porta et

al., 1999), market valuations (La Porta et al., 2002), stock market liquidity (Beck et al., 2003;

Brockman and Chung, 2003), the information content of stock prices (Morck et al., 2000), and

the efficiency of corporate investments (Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998; McLean et al.,

2012), with potentially large ramifications on economic growth (Levine and Zervos, 1998).

       Researchers have not, however, assessed whether shareholder protection laws influence
how firms respond to banking crises. When banking systems fail, this disrupts the flow of bank

credit to firms with harmful effects on investment, employment, and economic growth (e.g.,

Kroszner et al., 2007, and Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). In 1999, Alan Greenspan, then Chairman

of the Federal Reserve System, argued that stock markets could mitigate these negative effects.

Using the analogy of a “spare tire,” he conjectured that banking crises in Japan and East Asia

would have been less severe if those countries had built the necessary legal infrastructure, so that

their stock markets could have provided financing to corporations when their banking systems
could not. If firms can substitute equity issuances for bank loans during banking crises, then

banking crises will have less harmful effects on firms and the economy. Although official

entities and others discuss the spare tire argument (e.g., U.S. Financial Crisis Inquiry

Commission, 2011; Wessel, 2009), we are unaware of systematic assessments of this view.

       In this paper, we evaluate several interrelated implications of the spare tire view. First the

spare tire view stresses that if firms can issue equity at low cost when banking crises limit the

flow of bank loans to firms, this will ameliorate the impact of the banking crisis on firm

performance. Put differently, if a banking crisis shuts off bank lending and firms do not have an
alternative source of financing, firms will suffer more than they would in the presence of a stock

market that provides an alternative source of external finance. Second, the benefits of stock
                                                                                                    2



markets when banks reduce lending accrue primarily to firms that depend heavily on external

finance. For those firms that do not rely on external finance, there are likely to be fewer benefits

from having substitute forms of external finance. Third, the spare tire view stresses the ability of

the stock market to provide financing during a banking crisis, not the size and liquidity of the

market before the crisis. Although bank loans might be the preferred source of external financing

during normal time, the spare tire view holds that when this preferred source goes “flat,” equity

issuances can, at least partially, substitute for bank loans. Critically, for the stock market to play

this role, the legal infrastructure must be in place before the banking crisis, so that the market can

respond when the banking system falters. It is the pre-crisis legal infrastructure—not necessarily

the pre-crisis size of the stock market—that allows the market to act as a spare tire in times of

crisis.
          We assess these predictions by combining several datasets and employing a difference-

in-differences methodology. The dependent variable is a measure of firm profitability,

employment, or equity issuances. We obtain these, and other, firm-level data from the

Worldscope database. The key explanatory variable is the interaction term of (1) a measure of

the strength of shareholder protection laws and (2) a systemic banking crisis dummy variable that

equals one in the year of the onset of the crisis and remains one for the next three years. To
measure the strength of shareholder protection laws, we use the Djankov et al. (2008) “Anti-self-

dealing” index, which gauges the degree to which the law protects minority shareholders from

being expropriated by managers or controlling shareholders using self-dealing transactions.

Based on an extensive body of research, we interpret greater values of the Anti-self-dealing

index as indicating that outside investors will feel more confident about buying shares in

companies and this will improve the firms’ accessibility to equity market financing. To date

systemic banking crisis, we use Laeven and Valencia (2012). If the key interaction term enters

positively in the performance, employment, and equity issuance regressions, then this would
suggest that firm performance and employment deteriorate less following a systemic crisis when

the country has stronger shareholder protection laws, and that such comparatively strong firm
                                                                                                     3



performance is associated with an increase in equity issuances. The regressions also include an

assortment of time-varying country and firm characteristics, as well as firm and year fixed

effects. Our sample includes about 3,600 firms, in 36 countries, over the period from 1990

through 2011.

       The findings are consistent with the view that stronger shareholder protection laws (a)

facilitate stock market financing of corporations when the banking system fails and (b) reduce

the adverse effects of systemic banking crises on firm profitability and employment. During

banking crises, corporate equity issuances increase more and corporate profits decline less in

economies with stronger Anti-self-dealing laws. The effects are large. Although systemic crises

are associated with a drop in firm earnings, the drop is much less pronounced in economies with

stronger shareholder protection laws. The estimated economic effects are large. Consider two

countries, one that has the sample average value of the Anti-self-dealing index and the other has

a one standard deviation larger Anti-self-dealing index. If both countries have average values of

the other country characteristics, our estimates indicate that in response to a banking crisis, the

stronger Anti-self-dealing country will experience a 36% smaller drop in profitability than the

country with comparatively weak shareholder protection laws.

       But, do these results isolate the independent role of shareholder protection laws in
mitigating the effects of banking crises on firm performance? Perhaps, stronger shareholder

protection laws proxy for some other factor that helps firms recover from a banking crisis.

Perhaps, stronger shareholder protections do not actually help firms raise more external finance

and perform more robustly during a banking crisis. We partially address such concerns by

showing that firms actually raise more external finance through equity issuances during banking

crises in economies with stronger shareholder protection laws than in countries with weaker such

laws. But, we further address these concerns by testing other implications of the spare tire view.

       We test whether— and confirm that—the particular firms that the spare tire view predicts
will benefit most from stronger shareholder protections actually do benefit most. The spare tire

view stresses that firms that rely heavily on external finance will benefit more from the spare tire
                                                                                                      4



financing mechanisms fostered by stronger shareholder protection laws than other firms. Put

differently, if some firms do not use bank financing, then having a replacement source of

external finance will not matter much for their performance. We therefore test whether externally

dependent firms, as defined by Rajan and Zingales (1998), benefit more from stronger

shareholder protection laws during a banking crisis than less financially dependent firms. Our

findings confirm this hypothesis. When there is a systemic banking crisis, the positive

association between Anti-self-dealing laws and firm performance is more pronounced in

industries with greater external financing needs.

       We also show that these findings reflect cross-country differences in shareholder

protection laws in particular, not differences in stock market development prior to the crisis, the

size of the banking crisis, the level of financial institution development, or other country

characteristics. For example, when we include the interaction between stock market development

prior to the crisis and the crisis dummy variable, we find that the interaction term between the

Anti-self-dealing index and the crisis dummy variable enters positively and significantly.

Similarly, when we include other interaction terms between the crisis dummy and (a) financial

institution development, (b) the rule of law, (c) an overall index of the degree to which legal and

other institutions effectively promote the protection of property rights (Fraser Institute, 2013),

the rights of creditors (Djankov et al., 2007), the rule of law, political stability, the ability of the

public to choose public officials and hold those official accountable, government effectiveness,

regulatory quality, and control of official corruption (Kaufmann et al., 2013), and (d) the level of

Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita, we continue to find that the interaction term between

the Anti-self-dealing index and the systemic crisis dummy variable enters the firm performance

and firm equity issuance regressions positively and significantly. These results are consistent

with the view that the pre-crisis strength of shareholder protection laws per se boosts the

financing and performance of firms following banking crises. Furthermore, we interact the crisis
dummy with the size of the credit contraction associated with the crisis. Including this interaction

term controls for the possibility that the size of the systemic banking crisis is correlated with the
                                                                                                5



shareholder protection laws. Including this term, however, does not change the results. In sum,

these findings support the spare tire view: economies do not necessarily use the spare tire during

normal times, but when banking crises hit, having the right legal infrastructure in place allows

the stock market to mitigate the effects of the crisis on firm performance and unemployment.

       We consider two extensions. First, the spare tire view suggests that strong Anti-self-

dealing rights can mitigate the effects of systemic banking crises on the efficiency of corporate

investment. When crises shutdown the bank lending channel, this can tighten financing

constraints and force firms to forgo efficient investments. If an alternative financing channel is

available, however, firms will substitute out of bank finance and into this alternative, reducing

the adverse effects of crises on firm investment efficiency. We test whether economies with

stronger shareholder protection laws experience a smaller deterioration in corporate investment

efficiency following banking crises than economies with weaker such laws.
       We find that in economies with stronger Anti-self-dealing laws, firm investment

efficiency falls less in response to a banking crisis than in other economies. To measure

investment efficiency, we use the sensitivity of real investment to investment opportunities, as

measured by Tobin’s Q. During systemic banking crises, we find that real investment sensitivity

to Q falls by less in economies with stronger shareholder protection laws than in economies with

weaker such laws.

       Second, we extend the work on firm employment by considering the role of labor

regulations. We assess whether the relationship between firm employment and shareholder

protection laws varies with the degree of labor market rigidity, as measured by the regulatory-

induced cost of firing workers measure constructed by Botero et al. (2004). If the costs of firing

workers are a large impediment to firms changing their labor forces, then other factors—

including the availability of external finance—will have less of an impact on firm employment in

a banking crisis. From this perspective, it is only when the costs of firing workers are not too
high that shareholder protections laws can materially mitigate the employment effects of a crisis.

Our results confirm this view: When the costs of firing workers are not especially high, firm
                                                                                                 6



employment falls much less during systemic banking crises when the economy has stronger

Anti-self-dealing laws. However, strong Anti-self-dealing laws do not have the same mitigating

effects on the drop in employment when labor regulations make it very expensive to fire workers.

       A major concern with our investigation is that shareholder protection laws might

influence the severity of banking crises, not the ability of firms to recover from crises. Several

observations, however, suggest that our results do not reflect the impact of shareholder

protection laws on crises. First, we show that shareholder protection laws do not account for

cross-country differences in the severity of banking crises, as measured by the reduction of bank

credit. Second, all of the results in the paper hold when controlling for the size of the crisis.

Third, even when controlling for many other features that might account for differences in the

size, severity, and enduring effects of banking crises, such as the size of banks and stock markets

before the crisis, and the overall level of legal and institutional development, we find that

shareholder protections are strongly associated with firm performance, employment, and

investment efficiency after systemic banking crises. Finally, we show that following the onset of

a crisis, stronger shareholder protections are associated with a sharp increase in the amount of

funds raised through equity issuances. Thus, regardless of the size of the crisis, firms tend to
increase equity issuances when stronger shareholder protection laws provide a spare tire

financing mechanism. Taken together, our research findings are consistent with the “spare tire”

view: when strong shareholder protection laws provide the basis for stock markets to act as

alternative sources of external financing during systemic banking crises, this tends to reduce the

economic severity of and expedite the economic recovery from banking crises.

       Our findings relate to recent research on finance and employment. Pagano and Volpin

(2008) and Beck et al. (2010) stress that well-developed financial systems can encourage

employment growth, and Chodorow-Reich (2014) shows that deterioration in the functioning of

a bank has adverse effects on employment in its client firms. However, deeper financial systems
might increase employment risk and volatility by forcing inefficient firms to shut down or

restructure (Atanassov and Kim, 2009). We focus on a narrower question: Does the ability to
                                                                                                   7



access stock markets in times of banking distress mitigate the adverse impact of banking crises

on employment? Our analyses provide an affirmative answer. When the costs of firing workers

are not very high, economies with stronger shareholder protection laws experience a much

smaller reduction in employment following banking crises.

       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the data, variables and

empirical methodology. Section III presents our empirical findings. Section IV concludes.



2. Data, Variables, and Empirical Methodology
       2.1 Sample

       We include a country and its firms in our analyses if the following criteria are satisfied.

First, the country must be one of the 72 countries for which Djankov et al. (2008) provide

information on shareholder protection laws. Second, the country must experience at least one

systemic banking crisis over the 1990-2011 period, as defined in Laeven and Valencia’s (2012)

database on systemic banking crises. Third, we require that the Worldscope database by

Thomson Reuters provides complete financial data on at least three of a country’s firms during

the seven-year window centered on the onset of the crisis year, [t-3, t+3], where t is the start year

of the banking crisis according to Laeven and Valencia (2012). Finally, we exclude the United

States from our sample because we use the U.S. as the benchmark country for defining industries

by their degree of external dependence, though the conclusions are robust to including U.S. firms.

Thus, assuming a balanced sample during the seven-year window around a crisis, we have 7×the

number of firms in the crisis country firm-year observations for each crisis.

       Based on these criteria, we compile data on over 3,600 firms across 36 countries during

the period from 1990 through 2011. We use data on publicly listed manufacturing companies

with the U.S. standard industrial classification (SIC) code between 2000-3999. We start in 1990

because of data availability in Worldscope. Except as indicated below, all of the firm-level data
are from Worldscope. In total, we have over 23,000 firm-year observations.
                                                                                                    8



       2.2 Shareholder protections measure

       We use the Djankov et al. (2008) Anti-self-dealing measure of the degree to which

minority shareholders are protected from large shareholders engaging in self-dealing transactions

that benefit the large shareholders at the expense of the small ones. The Anti-self-dealing index

is constructed to measure the hurdles impeding a controlling shareholder from engaging in self-

dealing transactions.

       Djankov et al. (2008) construct the Anti-self-dealing index by surveying attorneys from

Lex Mundi, which is an association of international law firms. The survey includes questions

about a hypothetical self-dealing transaction between two companies called “Buyer” and “Seller.”
In the stylized transaction, Mr. James owns 90% of Seller and 60% of Buyer. Mr. James

proposes that Buyer purchase trucks from Seller. Mr. James can benefit personally by having

Buyer overpay Seller given his unequal ownership. The Anti-self-dealing index represents the

hurdles that James must overcome to complete such a transaction. The index is composed of ex

ante and ex post hurdles. The ex ante hurdles include the degree to which the transactions

requires (1) approval by disinterested shareholders, (2) disclosure of the details of the transaction,

(3) disclosure of the precise nature of Mr. James’s relationships with the companies, and (4) an

independent evaluation (e.g., by a financial expert or an independent auditor). The ex post

impediments to self-dealing include: (1) whether disclosure in periodic filings (such as annual

reports) is required, (2) whether a 10% shareholder can sue Mr. James or other corporate

decision makers if the transaction loses money, (3) the ease of holding Mr. James or other

authorities legally liable for civil damages, and (4) the ease with which potential plaintiffs can

acquire evidence from the firms. The index ranges from zero to one, with higher value indicating

stronger legal protections of minority shareholders. Appendix Table A1 shows that Ukraine and

Mexico have weak shareholder protection laws, while Malaysia and the United Kingdom have

strong ones. In our sample of countries, the index has an average value of 0.44, with a standard
deviation of 0.21.
                                                                                                    9




        2.3 Banking-crisis event window

        Laeven and Valencia (2012) provide information on the start year of each systemic

banking crisis during the period from 1970 through 2011. The start year of a ‘systemic’ banking

crisis is defined as the first year when there are significant signs of financial distress in the

banking sector, such as bank runs, a general realization that systemically important financial

institutions are in trouble, bank liquidations, or significant policy interventions to assist or

intervene in the banking system. Laeven and Valencia (2012) focus on systemic crises—

disruptions to the entire banking system, not just to isolated institutions.

        Appendix Table A1 lists the start year of each crisis for the 36 countries in our sample. It

shows that 21 crises coincide with the 2008 global financial crisis, and that six crises overlap

with the 1997 Asian financial crisis. Over this period, 35 countries had one systemic banking
crisis with the requisite firm-level data in Worldscope. Argentina had two banking crises, one in

1995 and the other in 2001. Since the t+3 date for the first Argentine crisis of our sample is 1998

and the t-3 date of the second crisis is also 1998, we define the pre-crisis period for both crises as

1992-1994. Then, for the first crisis, the post crisis period for the first Argentine crisis is 1995-

1998, and the post crisis period for the second one is 2001-2004. We obtain the same results if

we omit Argentina or if we treat the two crises as completely independent, so that end year of the

first crisis is part of the pre-crisis period of the second Argentine crisis.
                                                                                                  10



       2.4 Firm-level variables

       We use three indicators of firm profitability. Net income to assets equals net earnings

minus dividends during a specific year t as a share of total assets at the close of year t-1, where

net earnings are defined as earnings after interest and taxes. To abstract from short-run

fluctuations in interest and tax expenditures, we also examine EBIT to assets, which equals net

earnings before interest and taxes during year t divided by total assets at the close of year t-1. To

reduce the effects of potential earnings management on our measurement of firm performance,

we also use Cash flow to assets, which equals net earnings after dividends in year t plus

depreciation and amortization divided by total assets at the close of year t-1.

       In addition, we examine whether the impact of a banking crisis on both firm employment
and investment efficiency is smaller when shareholder protection laws are stronger. Firm

employment equals the natural logarithm of the total number of employees and is measured in

thousands of employees, so that a firm with 1000 workers will have a Firm employment value of

0. If we scale the total number of employees by firm assets, the analyses below yield the same

conclusions. To measure Investment efficiency, we run a regression of investment on Tobin’s Q,

which we refer to as “Q,” and an assortment of firm and country controls, and use the coefficient

on Q as the proxy for the sensitivity of investment to Q. Following Baker et al. (2003), we use

two measures of investment. The first measure of investment, Investment 1, equals capital

expenditures plus research and development expenses (R&D) as a share of total assets. The

second measure, Investment 2, equals capital expenditure plus R&D plus all selling, general, and

administrative (SG&A) expenses as a share of total assets.

       Moreover, we consider several measures of external equity finance. Equity issuance

equals the change in the book value of common equity plus the change of deferred taxes minus

the change of retained earnings during a specific year t, all scaled by total assets at the close of

year t-1. We also construct a direct measure of the proceeds from new equity issuances during
year t as a share of total assets at the close of year t-1. This measure, IPO/SEO, equals the

proceeds from public offerings (i.e. IPO and SEO) during a specific year t as a share of total
                                                                                                 11



assets at the close of year t-1. We use data from the Global New Issues in the SDC database

provided by Thomson Reuters. We use the common firm identifiers (SEDOL, ISIN, and Firm

Name) in both the SDC and Worldscope databases to match the issuing data with our other firm-

level data. Though conceptually cleaner than the Equity issuance indicate of equity financing in a

year, the SDC database is less complete in international firm coverage than the Worldscope

database, so that we have much fewer observations on IPO/SEO.

       Tables 1 and 2 provide detailed variable definitions and summary statistics. The statistics

indicate greater heterogeneity. With regard to operating performance, EBIT to assets ranges from

-0.53 to 0.49 with a standard deviation of 0.12. The Net income to assets and Cash flow to assets

exhibit similar diversity. The employment measure ranges from 0 to 13, with a sample mean of 7

and a standard deviation of 1. The investment measures imply that there are firms making zero

real investment in some years, while firms in the 75th percentile of the investment distribution are
investing about ten percent of assets. Furthermore, our analyses control for an assortment of firm

characteristics, such as firm size, leverage, and Tobin’s Q. Tables 1 and 2 provide information on

these variables too. Finally, to reduce the potential impact of outliers, we winsorize firm-level

variables at 1% and 99% levels.

       Figures 1 – 3 suggest that following systemic banking crises firm performance is stronger

in countries with larger values of the Anti-self-dealing index. We provide simple graphs of firm

performance following a crisis while differentiating between high and low shareholder protection

countries. For each firm, we compute the change in firm performance from the average over the

pre-crisis period (years t-3 through t-1) to the average during the crisis period (years t to t+3),

where t in this case refers to the start year of the banking crisis according to Laeven and Valencia

(2012). Then, for firms in the High Anti-self-dealing index countries, we compute the average

value of these changes, and we do the same for Low Anti-self-dealing index countries. Figure 1

examines EBIT to assets and shows that profits drop on average by 1.9% of assets during a crisis
in countries with above median shareholder protection laws and drop by 3.7% in countries below

median values of the Anti-self-dealing index. Similarly, figures 2 and 3 indicate that firm
                                                                                                 12



employment and firm equity issuance fall less in high shareholder protection countries during a

banking crisis.



       2.5 Industrial external finance dependence

       To evaluate the spare tire view, we go beyond examining whether banking crises have

less pernicious effects in countries with stronger shareholder protection laws; we examine

whether the particular firms identified by the spare tire view as most likely to benefit from

stronger shareholder protection actually do benefit more when a banking crisis hits. In particular,

firms that depend heavily on raising money from banks and capital markets will benefit more

from stronger shareholder protection laws when a banking crisis hits than firms that don’t need

any external financing in the first place. That is, the spare tire view suggests that having a spare

tire is most useful when the tires on a car are more easily punctured.

       Following Rajan and Zingales (1998), we use data on U.S. companies to calculate the

degree to which each industry depends on external finance, which we call Financial dependence
and which equals the difference between capital expenditures and cash flow from operations

divided by capital expenditures. The index is calculated at the three-digit U.S. SIC level. Rajan

and Zingales (1998) and others use U.S. firms as a benchmark under the assumption that U.S.

financial markets are comparatively developed, so that the U.S. Financial dependence measures

proxy for the technological level of financial dependence, not the level shaped by frictions in

financial markets. Thus, an extensive body of research (1) treats the Financial dependence

indicator as reflecting the technology-determined demand for external finance in the United

States and (2) assumes that this measure provides information on the technology-determined

demand for external finance in other economies as well. Based on this literature, we assess the

question: Are the attenuating effects of stronger shareholder protection laws on firm performance

in response to a crisis greater for firms that depend heavily on external finance? Or, more
formally, we assess the coefficient estimate on the triple interaction term of banking crises, the

Anti-self-dealing index, and financial dependence by splitting the sample into High and Low
                                                                                                    13



Financial dependence industries and examining the Anti-self-dealing*Crisis terms in subsamples.

To accommodate our relatively longer sample period, we modify the fixed-decade window in the

original Rajan and Zingales (1998) and use instead a rolling ten-year window, [t-10, t-1], where t

denotes the start year of each crisis. For instance, we take the U.S. firms’ data over 1997-2006 to

calculate the Financial dependence index for industries in the United Kingdom, which had a

banking crisis that started in 2007.



        2.6 Other country characteristics

        To help isolate the relationship between firm performance and the interaction between the

existence of a systemic crises and stronger shareholder protection laws, we control for the

potential effect of other national characteristics, Macro controls. We do this by including the
interaction between the existence of systemic crises and the following national traits.

        GDP per capita equals the natural logarithm of real gross domestic product (GDP) per

person measured three years before the crisis. When interacted with the crisis dummy variable

and included in the firm performance regressions, this term assesses whether firms perform

better in response to a crisis in comparatively well-developed economies.

        Stock market development equals the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP

measured three years before the crisis. When interacted with the crisis dummy variable and

included in the firm performance regressions, this term assesses whether firms perform better in

response to a crisis in economies with more highly developed stock markets.

        Private credit contraction equals the slowdown in credit growth, measured as the

average growth rate in bank credit to private firms between t-3 and t-1, where t is the start of the

crisis, minus the minimum annual growth rate of credit during the period between t and t+3. In

this way, we control for the size of the crisis, not just the existence of a systemic crisis.

        Financial institutions development equals credit by deposit money banks and other
financial institutions as a share of GDP, measured at three years before the start of the crisis, i.e.,

t-3.
                                                                                                      14



       Legal protection and institutional quality In robustness tests, we also control for a

broader index of legal system effectiveness and institutional quality to determine whether

shareholder protection laws in particular account for our findings, or whether broader institutions

explain our findings. Specifically, the variable is constructed as the first principal component of

eight institutional measures, namely Creditor rights index (Djankov et al., 2007), Protection of

property rights (Fraser Institute), and six individual components of World Governance Index (i.e.

rule of law, voice and accountability, political stability, government effectiveness, regulatory

quality and control of corruption) constructed by Kaufmann et al. (2013).

       As emphasized above, we examine the interaction between shareholder protection laws

and labor regulations in shaping firm employment during a banking crisis. When we conduct

analyses on firm employment, we differentiate countries by those with above and below the

median values of the Cost of firing workers index constructed by Botero et al. (2004). They

quantify the cost to a firm of firing 20 percent of the workforce and it incorporates information
on the notice period, severance pay, penalties, etc. In this way, we examine whether the

relationship between firm employment and shareholder protection laws during a systemic

banking crisis vary by the regulatory costs of firing workers.

       2.7 Empirical methodology

       The baseline specification is as follows.




                                                                                           , (1)



where Firm Outcomei,c,t refers to firm profitability, employment, or equity issuance by firm i, in

country c, during year t;   is the constant term,    is a firm fixed effect;     is a year fixed effect;
and                                  is the interaction of the Anti-self-dealing index for country c
and the systemic crisis dummy variable,             , that equals one at the start year of the crisis, t,

in country c and for the subsequent three years, and zero otherwise. Note, all time invariant
                                                                                                 15



country characteristics, including the independent term                        are subsumed in the

firm fixed effects. In the specification,                   denotes a set of country-level controls

including GDP per capita, Financial institutions development, Stock market development, and
Private credit contraction. Including the interaction between                and

allows for firm performance following a crisis to vary by the level of economic development, the

level of development of financial intermediaries, the degree of stock market development, and

the size of the banking crisis.

       Including these controls also helps isolate the independent association between firm

performance following a crisis and the strength of shareholder protection laws when controlling
for these other possible influences. Finally,                          includes time-varying firm

characteristics (e.g., Firm size, Leverage, and Tobin’s Q), and      denotes the error term. When

the dependent variable is Firm employment, we split the sample between countries that have

above and below the median values of the Cost of firing workers index. Throughout our analyses,

we use ordinary least squares (OLS), with heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at

the country level to account for the potential correlations among firms within a country.



3. Empirical Results
       3.1 Firm performance and employment

       Table 3 shows that during a systemic banking crisis, firms in countries with strong

shareholder protection laws perform better than those in countries with weaker shareholder

protection laws. As reported in columns (1)-(3), during a crisis, EBIT to assets, Net income to

assets, and Cash flow to assets are all significantly higher in countries with larger Anti-self-

dealing values than they are in countries with weaker shareholder protection laws. This does not

suggest that firm performance improves during a crisis. The crisis dummy enters negatively and

statistically significantly; banking crises are associated with a drop in firm performance, but this
drop is less pronounced in countries with stronger Anti-self-dealing laws.
                                                                                                                      16



         The economic sizes of the coefficients are large. Consider the EBIT to assets regression.

And, consider an “average” country—a hypothetical country with average values of the Anti-

self-dealing index (0.437), GDP per capita (9.24), Financial institutions development (0.80),

Stock market development (0.59), and Private credit contraction (0.30). For such a country, the

coefficient estimates in column (1) suggest that a systemic crisis reduces profits by about 3.35%

of a firm’s total assets.1 Now, consider a “strong” shareholder protection rights country, which

we define as a country that has all of the same traits as the average country except that it has a

value of the Anti-self-dealing index that is one standard deviation (0.214) greater than that in our

hypothetical average country, so that the value for the strong country is 0.651. For these average

and strong shareholder protection countries, hold all other country traits constant at the sample

means. Given that the coefficient estimate on Anti-self-dealing*Crisis enters with a value of

about 0.0557, we estimate that the drop in EBIT to assets for the strong shareholder protection
country will only be 2.16% of total firms assets.2 Thus, compared to the average country, the

strong shareholder rights country experiences a 36% smaller drop in EBIT to assets 3 . To

illustrate this difference using countries, the difference in the Anti-self-dealing indexes between

Norway (0.42) and Hungary (0.18) is about one standard deviation. Thus, our estimates suggest

that the better spare tire in Norway buffers the adverse impact of a systemic banking crisis on

firm profits more effectively than in Hungary.

         Table 3 also indicates that the drop in Firm employment during a banking crisis is smaller

in countries with stronger shareholder protection laws when the regulatory-induced costs of

firing workers is not too high. If labor regulations make it prohibitively expensive to fire workers,

then an effective spare tire channel for raising external finance is likely to have a negligible

  We obtain these estimates by plugging in the values with the corresponding coefficient estimates from column (1):
1

a systemic banking crisis will reduce EBIT to assets in the average country by 3.35% (=0.0557*0.437-
0.107+0.00684*9.242-0.00409*0.801-0.00604*0.588-0.0241*0.300).
2
  Similarly, according to the corresponding coefficient estimates from column (1): EBIT to assets in stronger
shareholder protection law country will fall by 2.16% (=0.0557*0.651-0.107+0.00684*9.242-0.00409*0.801-
0.00604*0.588-0.0241*0.300).
3
  Since the Macroeconomic interaction controls enter insignificantly, we redid the analyses omitting these controls
and obtain estimates on the Anti-self-dealing*Crisis that are also statistically significant and obtain a slightly larger
estimated difference between our “average” and “stronger” shareholder protection countries.
                                                                                                 17



effect on firm employment decisions during a crisis. We test this by splitting the sample between

countries with above the median values of the Cost of firing workers index developed by Botero

et al. (2004) and countries with below the median values. As listed in Appendix Table A1, there

is considerable cross-country variation in the degree to which labor regulations increase the costs

of firing workers. At one end of the spectrum, Indonesia, India, Kazakhstan, Korea, Netherlands,

Portugal, Russia, and Thailand all have values of the Cost of firing workers index greater than

0.6, while Japan and Nigeria have values less than 0.1.

        As reported in columns (4) and (5) of Table 3, the interaction term, Anti-self-

dealing*Crisis, enters positively and significantly in the sample of countries with below the

median values of the Cost of firing workers index, while it enters insignificantly in the sample of

countries with above the median values of the index. This result suggests that when regulations

create prohibitively high costs to firms of adjusting their labor forces, then having an alternative

external financing source during a crisis is associated with a smaller reduction in firm

employment. However, when the regulatory-induced costs of firing workers dominate firm

employment decisions, then the spare tire mechanism plays no role. More formally, the estimated

coefficient on Anti-self-dealing*Crisis among countries with below median firing costs is 0.122,

which is statistically significant at the one percent level, but the estimated coefficient among
countries with high firing cost is statistically insignificant.

        The point estimates suggest that the relationship is economically meaningful. Again,

consider an “average” country—a country with average Anti-self-dealing laws, GDP per capita,

Financial institutions development, Stock market development, and Private credit contraction,

and compare it to a country with “strong” shareholder protection laws—a country with a one

standard deviation above the mean value of the Anti-self-dealing index (0.651), holding all the

other characteristics constant at their average levels. The estimated coefficients in column (4)

suggest that a systemic banking crisis will reduce firm-level workforce in the average country by
                                                                                                               18



17.4%, but workforce in the strong shareholder protection law country will fall by 14.8%.4 Thus,

the estimated drop in firm employment is almost 15% less in the country with strong shareholder

protection laws.

        Critically, to isolate the independent relationships between Anti-self-dealing laws and

firm performance and employment during crises, analyses in Table 3 control for many other

potential explanatory factors. In particular, we were concerned Anti-self-dealing laws might be

highly correlated with the overall economic development, the size of the banking system, the

level of stock market development, or the size of the credit contraction during the crisis. If

shareholder protections are highly correlated with these other likely determinants of the severity

of banking crises, then we need to control for them to capture the independent relationship

between firm performance and employment and the Anti-self-dealing index. We control for the

interactions of banking crises and GDP per capita, Financial institutions development, Stock

market development, and Private credit contraction across the different specifications in Table 3.

Furthermore, we also control for firm and year fixed effects, and time-varying firm traits (Firm

size, Leverage, and Tobin’s Q).

        The results hold when controlling for these potentially confounding factors. Thus, the

findings suggest that the relationships between shareholder protection laws and firm performance

and employment do not simply reflect the level of stock market development before the crisis.

Similarly, the findings indicate the associations between the Anti-self-dealing index and firm

outcomes during the crisis do not only reflect overall economic development or the overall

development of financial institutions. Finally, the results indicate that the relationships between

firm outcomes and shareholder protection laws hold even when controlling for the size of the



4
 We obtain these estimates by plugging in the values with the corresponding coefficient estimates from column (4):
a systemic banking crisis will reduce firm employment in the average country by 17.4% (=0.122*0.437-
0.333+0.0219*9.242-0.00121*0.801+0.00935*0.588-0.339*0.300), but firm employment in the strong shareholder
protection law country will fall by 14.8% (=0.122*0.651-0.333+0.0219 *9.242-0.00121*0.801+0.00935*0.588-
0.339*0.300). We can interpret the impact on firm employment as percentage change because it is defined as the
natural logarithm of total number of workers in a firm.
                                                                                                19



banking crisis; thus, it is not that countries with stronger Anti-self-dealing laws have smaller

systemic crises.

       In Table 4, we extend these analyses and also control for the interaction between the

systemic crisis dummy and (a) an index of the Rule of law that measures the degree to which the

law, rather than more arbitrary and potentially corrupt factors, influence private and official

contracts and (b) an overall index of the Legal protection and institutional quality provided to

private agents, which incorporates information on the legal rights of debt holders, the protection

of private property, the accountability of political officials, political stability, government

effectiveness, regulatory quality, the Rule of law, and control on official corruption. The effects

of the Anti-self-dealing index on firm performance and employment remain statistically

significant and economically meaningful after taking into account these additional factors.



       3.2 Firm performance and employment: Differentiating by Financial dependence

       We now evaluate an additional implication of the spare tire view: During a crisis, the

positive relationships between firm outcomes and the Anti-self-dealing index should be larger

among firms that rely heavily on external finance. If firms do not depend on external finance for

their profitability and employment decisions, then having an alternative external financing

mechanism during a banking crisis should be relatively unimportant. To test this prediction, we
split firms into those that depend heavily on external finance, High Financial dependence, and

those firms in industries with below the median level external financial dependence, Low

Financial dependence.

       Table 5 provides these subsample analyses for firm performance and employment. Panel

A provides the results on EBIT to assets, Net income to assets, and Cash flow to assets, while

Panel B provides the findings on Firm employment, while further splitting the sample by

countries with below and above the median values of the Cost of firing workers index. The
regressors are the same as those in Table 3. The term, Macro interaction controls, indicates that
the regressions control for the four interaction terms between Crisis and GDP per capita,
                                                                                                20



Financial institutions development, Stock market development, and Private credit contraction.

The term, Firm-level controls, indicates that the regressions control for Firm size, Leverage, and

Tobin’s Q (and additional Cash flow to assets in Table 7).

       The results reported in Table 5 are consistent with the spare tire prediction. The estimated

coefficient on the Anti-self-dealing*Crisis interaction term is larger for firms in industries with

High Financial dependence than for firms in Low Financial dependence industries. That is,

during a banking crisis, shareholder protection laws are more important for firms that rely more

heavily on external finance. For instance, consider the EBIT to assets analyses as reported in

columns (1) and (2). The estimated coefficient on the Anti-self-dealing*Crisis interaction term is

0.0911 among firms in High Financial dependence industries, but only 0.0327 among firms in
Low Financial dependence industries. Although both estimates are significantly different from

zero, the two coefficient estimates are significantly different from each other at the 1%

significant level, as reported in the table). In a systemic crisis, the beneficial effects of

shareholder protection laws on firm performance and firm employment are greater among firms

that depend heavily on external financing for their success. According to Panel B, during

systemic crises, the dampening effect of stronger shareholder protection laws on firm

employment—especially among firms in High Financial dependence industries—only exists in
the sample of countries in which the Cost of firing workers is smaller than the median.
                                                                                                 21



       3.3 Shareholder protections and real investment efficiency

       The spare tire view also yields predictions about the impact of systemic banking crises on

real investment efficiency. When banking crises reduce the flow of credit to firms that rely on

external financing to fund their investments, this impedes the ability of those firms to exploit

value-enhancing projects, with adverse repercussions on investment efficiency. If, however,

stronger Anti-self-dealing laws ease corporate financial constraints during banking crisis, then

such laws will dampen the adverse effects of the crisis on investment efficiency for firms that

rely on external funding to make those investments.

       To evaluate whether investment efficiency falls less in response to a banking crisis in

economies with stronger Anti-self-dealing laws, we employ a commonly used measure of

investment efficiency: the sensitivity of real investment to Tobin’s Q. A key assumption

underlying this proxy is that the common empirical measures of Tobin’s Q—the market value of

corporate liabilities relative to the book value of those liabilities—provide a sound estimate of
the market value of installed capital relative to its replacement value. If this holds, then high

Tobin’s Q values (conditional on Tobin’s Q > 1) signal that the market’s expected increase in

firm value from the firm investing more capital is greater than the cost of that capital. This would

tend to encourage firm investment. Therefore, if real investment is insensitive to Tobin’s Q, this

suggests, albeit imperfectly, that something is impeding the efficiency of firm investment. As

defined above, we use two measures of real investment to gauge the sensitivity of investment to

Q: Investment 1 only includes capital and R&D expenditures, while Investment 2 also includes

other investment expenditures on selling and general and administrative investments.

       Methodologically, we employ a standard real investment model, where the dependent

variable is one of our measures of investment. Besides including the lagged value of Tobin’s Q

and the contemporary measure of cash flow, the real investment model includes the interaction

terms, Tobin’s Q*Crisis and Anti-self-dealing*Crisis, and the triple interaction term, Anti-self-
dealing*Tobin's Q*Crisis. The coefficient estimate on the triple interaction term captures the

extent to which shareholder protection laws mitigate the adverse effects of a systemic banking
                                                                                                  22



crisis on investment efficiency, while the coefficient estimate on the Tobin’s Q*crisis interaction

term captures the impact of a systemic crisis on investment efficiency in a country with an Anti-

self-dealing index of zero. Since the link between systemic banking crisis and firm investment

efficiency might be particularly pronounced for firms that depend on external finance to make

investments, we also conduct the analyses when splitting the sample between firms in industries

with High or Low Financial dependence. These regressions also control for firm and year fixed

effects, as well as the full array of Macro interaction controls used in earlier tables.

       The Table 6 results suggest that stronger shareholder protection laws mitigate the adverse

effects of systemic crises on investment efficiency. The interaction term, Tobin’s Q*Crisis enters

negatively and significantly in the full sample regressions and in the sample limited to firms in

High Financial dependence industries. This indicates that systemic crises exert a direct, negative

effect on investment efficiency. The estimated coefficient on the triple interaction term, Anti-

self-dealing*Tobin’s Q*Crisis, in the full sample and High Financial dependence firms indicates

that during banking crises, stronger shareholder protection laws boost investment efficiency. We

are not the first to find that the law shapes investment efficiency. For instance, Mclean et al.

(2012) find that stronger investor protection laws boost the efficiency of corporate investment.

We are, however, the first to show that when economies experience systemic banking crises,

stronger shareholder protections facilitate equity issuances and dampen the adverse effects of

banking crises on investment efficiency.

       To assess the economic size of the effect, we consider the full sample results using

Investment 1 in column (1). We again compare a country with an average value of the Anti-self-

dealing index (0.437) and a country with a high Anti-self-dealing index of one standard deviation

greater than average (0.651), holding the other macro controls at their average levels.

Furthermore, for simplicity, we consider firms with Tobin’s Q equal to one. Thus, the estimated

coefficients indicate that investment efficiency drops by 0.005 (=-0.019 + 0.031*0.437) for this
representative firm in the “average” firm country, but would essentially remain unchanged 0.001

(= -0.019 + 0.031*0.651) in the same representative firm in the high Anti-self-dealing country.
                                                                                                 23



       Columns (2) and (3) for Investment 1 and columns (5) and (6) for Investment 2 provide

the same analyses on subsamples of firms with High and Low Financial dependence respectively.

The coefficient of interest is statistically significant at the one percent level in the sample of

firms in high financial dependent industries, but not for firms in the sample of low financial

dependent industries. For the Investment 2 analyses, we also discover that the coefficient

estimates on the triple interaction term in the High and Low Financial dependence regressions

are significantly different from each other, though this does not hold for the Investment 1 results.

The Table 6 findings are consistent with the view that stronger shareholder protections dampen

the negative impact of banking crises on investment efficiency, and there is some evidence that

these effects are particularly large for firms that depend on external financing to undertake

capital investments.



       3.3 Shareholder protections and external finance

       The spare tire view further holds that during a banking crisis that curtails the flow of bank

credit to firms, corporations in economies with strong shareholder protection laws can instead

issue equities and reduce the adverse impact of the crisis on firm performance, employment,

investment efficiency. Although we have shown that during crises, firms in economies with

stronger Anti-self-dealing laws suffer less than firms in economies with weaker such laws, we

have not yet examined the financing channel directly. More specifically, we have not examined

whether firms in strong shareholder protection law countries actually raise more money through

equity issuance during systemic banking crises than similar firms in economies with weaker

Anti-self-dealing laws.

       This subsection tests whether during a systemic banking crisis firms raise more money

through equity issuances in countries with stronger Anti-self-dealing laws. We examine the two

measures of equity issuances defined above: Equity issuance, which infers equity issuances from
the Worldscope database, and IPO/SEO, which is a direct measure of the value of equity sales
                                                                                                   24



from the SDC Platinum database. Although the IPO/SEO data are more precise, they are

available for a smaller sample of mostly the largest firms.

       We follow the same specification as above. The dependent variable is a firm outcome

variable that measures equity finance: Equity issuance or IPO/SEO. The variable of interest is

the interaction term, Anti-self-dealing*Crisis. We then control for the Crisis dummy, the full

array of Firm-level controls and Macro interaction controls, as well as firm and year fixed

effects. We again examine the full sample firms and provide estimates in which we split the

sample into firms in industries with High Financial dependence and firms in industries with Low

Financial dependence.
       The results reported in Table 7 support the view that firms in countries with stronger

Anti-self-dealing laws raise more funds through equity issuances during banking crises. Consider

the full sample estimates for the Equity issuance measure in column (1) of Panel A. Anti-self-

dealing*Crisis enters positively and significantly. Economically, a one standard deviation

increase in the Anti-self-dealing index enables a firm to issue additional equity equal to about 0.8%

of its total assets (=0.0357*0.214) during a systemic banking crisis. This is not small, as it is

equivalent to 26% of the sample mean of equity issuances per year, and seven times larger than

the sample median. When splitting the sample between High and Low Financial dependence, we

find that all of the additional equity issuing activity during a crisis associated with countries

having stronger Anti-self-dealing laws arises in firms that rely heavily on external finance. This

is fully consistent with the spare tire view and it is also fully consistent with the earlier findings

on firm performance, employment, and investment efficiency. The Panel B results provide

additional support for the spare tire view. We find that during crises, IPO/SEO is much larger in

countries with stronger shareholder protection laws for firms that are heavily dependent on

external finance, but not for firms in Low Financial dependence industries.
                                                                                                    25



4. Conclusion
       Do shareholder protection laws influence how firms respond to systemic banking crises?

While considerable research examines the impact of shareholder protection laws on the operation

of stock markets, corporate financial decisions, and the efficiency of corporate investment, we

provide the first assessment of the role of shareholder protection laws in shaping the response of

firms to banking crises. In particular, we evaluate the spare tire view which holds that when

banking crises reduce the flow of bank loans to firms, stronger shareholder protection laws

provide the basis for an alternative financing channel: equity issuances. If stronger shareholder

protection laws lower the costs of issuing equity, this spare tire financing option will dampen the

adverse impact of the banking crisis on firms.

       We find that in response to systemic banking crises, firms in countries with stronger

shareholder protection laws tend to experience (1) a smaller drop in firm profits, employment,

and investment efficiency and (2) an increase in the volume of equity issuances. These results

hold particularly strongly for firms that depend heavily on external finance, further suggesting

that shareholder protections ameliorate the adverse effects of banking crises by providing an

alternative financing mechanism. Moreover, the findings do not reflect (a) the level of stock

market development prior to the crisis, (b) the overall level of economic development, (c) the

severity of the credit contraction from the crisis, (d) the size of the banking sector, (e) the overall

level of legal and institutional development. Taken together, the findings are consistent with the

spare tire view: when banking crises hit, stronger shareholder protection laws contribute to a

legal infrastructure that allows stock markets to act as an alternative source of external financing,

easing the ramifications of banking crises on the economy.
                                                                                              26


References

Atanassov, J., Kim, E.H., 2009. Labor and Corporate Governance: International Evidence from
Restructuring Decisions. Journal of Finance 64, 341-374.

Baker, M., Stein, J.C., Wurgler, J., 2003. When Does the Market Matter? Stock Prices and the
Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 969-1005.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2003. Law, Endowments, and Finance. Journal of
Financial Economics 70, 137-181.

Beck, T., Levine, R., Levkov, A., 2010. Big Bad Banks? The Winners and Losers from Bank
Deregulation in the United States. Journal of Finance 65, 1637-1667.

Botero, J.C., Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2004. The Regulation
of Labor. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1339-1382.

Brockman, P., Chung, D.Y., 2003. Investor Protection and Firm Liquidity. The Journal of
Finance 58, 921-937.

Chodorow-Reich, G., 2014. The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-level
Evidence from the 2008–9 Financial Crisis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1-59.

Čihák, M., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Feyen, E., Levine, R., 2013. Financial Development in 205
Countries, 1960 to 2010. Journal of Financial Perspectives 12, 1-19.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 1998. Law, Finance, and Firm Growth. Journal of Finance
53, 2107-2137.

Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2008. The Law and Economics of
Self-dealing. Journal of Financial Economics 88, 430-465.

Djankov, S., McLiesh, C., Shleifer, A., 2007. Private Credit in 129 Countries. Journal of
Financial Economics 84, 299-329.

Greenspan, A., 1999. Do Efficient Financial Markets Mitigate Financial Crises? Before the
Financial Markets Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Sea Island, Georgia.

Greenspan, A., 1999. Lessons From the Global Crises. Before the World Bank Group and the
International Monetary Fund, Program of Seminars, Washington, D.C.

Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., Mastruzzi, M., 2011. The Worldwide Governance Indicators:
Methodology and Analytical Issues. Hague Journal on the Rule of Law 3, 220-246.

Kroszner, R.S., Laeven, L., Klingebiel, D., 2007. Banking Crises, Financial Dependence, and
Growth. Journal of Financial Economics 84, 187-228.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 1999. Corporate Ownership around the World.
The Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.
                                                                                              27


La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997. Legal Determinants of
External Finance. The Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1998. Law and Finance. Journal
of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2002. Investor Protection and
Corporate Valuation. The Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.

Laeven, L., Valencia, F., 2012. Systemic Banking Crises Database. IMF Economic Review 61(2)
225-270.

Levine, R., Zervos, S., 1998. Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth. American Economic
Review, 537-558.

McLean, R.D., Zhang, T., Zhao, M., 2012. Why Does the Law Matter? Investor Protection and
Its Effects on Investment, Finance, and Growth. The Journal of Finance 67, 313-350.

Morck, R., Yeung, B., Yu, W., 2000. The Information Content of Stock Markets: Why Do
Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movements? Journal of Financial Economics
58, 215-260.

National Commission on the Causes and Consequences of the Financial and Economic Crisis in
the United States, 2011. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report. New York, NY: Public Affairs.

Pagano, M., Volpin, P., 2008. Labor and Finance. London Business School.

Rajan, R.G., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial Dependence and Growth. The American Economic
Review 88, 559-586.

Reinhart, C. M., Rogoff, K. S., 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.
Princeton University Press.

Wessel, D., 2009. In Fed We Trust. New York, NY: Crown Publishing Group.
                                                                                                                     28



                                0.000

                                -0.005

                                -0.010
     Change of EBIT to assets




                                -0.015

                                -0.020

                                -0.025

                                -0.030

                                -0.035

                                -0.040


                                    High Anti-self-dealing Index countries   Low Anti-self-dealing Index countries


Figure 1. Firm profits during a banking crisis, differentiating between countries with high
and low Anti-self-dealing index values
Each bar in the figure represents the average change of the ratio of earnings before income and
taxes (EBIT) to total assets for firms in countries with above (High) and below (Low) the median
value of the Anti-self-dealing index respectively. Specifically, we first calculate for each firm the
difference between the ratio of EBIT to total assets during a crisis, [t, t+3], and that before the
crisis, [t-3, t-1]. We then average this difference across all of the firms in High and Low Anti-
self-dealing countries respectively.
                                                                                                            29


                        0.000


                        -0.050


                        -0.100
     ln(Employees/TA)
         Change of




                        -0.150


                        -0.200


                        -0.250


                        -0.300


                           High Anti-self-dealing Index countries   Low Anti-self-dealing Index countries



Figure 2. Firm employment during a banking crisis, differentiating between countries with
high and low Anti-self-dealing index values
Each bar in the figure represents the average change in the natural logarithm of the ratio of the
number of employees to total assets for firms in countries with above (High) and below (Low)
the median value of the Anti-self-dealing index respectively. Specifically, we first calculate for
each firm the difference between the natural logarithm of the ratio of the number of employees to
total assets during a crisis, [t, t+3], and that before the crisis, [t-3, t-1]. We then average this
difference across all of the firms in High and Low Anti-self-dealing countries respectively.
                                                                                                               30



                           0.000


                       -0.001


                       -0.002
       Change of IPO/SEO




                       -0.003


                       -0.004


                       -0.005


                       -0.006


                       -0.007


                              High Anti-self-dealing Index countries   Low Anti-self-dealing Index countries


Figure 3. Firm equity issuances during a banking crisis, differentiating between countries
with high and low Anti-self-dealing index values
Each bar in the figure represents the average change in the ratio of the total amount of funds
raised through IPOs and SEOs to total assets (IPO/SEO for firms in countries with above (High)
and below (Low) the median value of the Anti-self-dealing index respectively. Specifically, we
first calculate for each firm the difference between IPO/SEO during a crisis, [t, t+3], and that
before the crisis, [t-3, t-1]. We then average this difference across all of the firms in High and
Low Anti-self-dealing countries respectively.
                                                                                                                                                31

Table 1 Variable definitions and data sources

Variable            Definition                                                                              Source
                                                               Legal protection measure
                    Average of approvals of disinterested shareholders, ex-ante disclosure (disclosure
Anti-self-dealing   by buyer and main owner of the seller, and independent review by a professional
                                                                                                            Djankov et al. (2008)
index               third party), and ex-post disclosure (periodic filings and ease of proving
                    wrongdoing).
                                                                Systemic banking crises
                    Equals to one in the start year of a crisis and three years after, [t, t+3], and zero
Systemic banking
                    otherwise, [t-3, t-1]. The start year of a systemic banking crisis shows significant    Laeven and Valencia (2012)
crisis dummy
                    signs of banking sector distress, and significant policy intervention.
                                                                    Firm-level data
EBIT to assets      Earnings before interest and tax (EBIT)/ Total assets lagged one year                   Worldscope
Net income to
                    (Net income after dividends) / Total assets lagged one year                             Worldscope
assets
Cash flow to        (Net Income after dividends + Depreciations & Amortizations) / Total assets
                                                                                                            Worldscope
assets              lagged one year
Firm employment     Natural logarithm of the total number of employees                                      Worldscope
Investment 1        (Capital expenditure + R&D ) / Total assets lagged one year                             Worldscope
                    (Capital expenditure + R&D + Selling, General and Administrative expenses) /
Investment 2                                                                                                Worldscope
                    Total assets lagged one year
                    (∆Common equity + ∆Deferred Tax - ∆Retained earnings) / Total assets lagged
Equity issuance                                                                                             Worldscope
                    one year
IPO/SEO             Total proceeds from new equity issuance (IPO/SEO) / Total assets lagged one year        SDC Global Equity Issuance
Firm Size           Natural logarithm of total assets                                                       Worldscope
Leverage            Total debt / Total assets                                                               Worldscope
                    Natural logarithm of (Market value of equity + book value of assets - book value
Tobin's Q                                                                                                   Worldscope
                    of equity) / Book value of assets
                                                              Industry Characteristics
                    Equals to (Capital expenditures - Cash flow from operations) / Capital
                    expenditures, where both capital expenditures and cash flow are summed over a
Financial                                                                                                   Calculated by the authors; Compustat,
                    ten-year window for each U.S. firm. We then take the median value of the ratio
dependence                                                                                                  CRSP, Rajan and Zingales (1998)
                    among firms with the same three-digit U.S. SIC code as the financial dependence
                    index for that particular industry for the crisis country.
                                                           Other Country Characteristics
GDP per capita      Natural logarithm of real GDP per capita, measured at the three year before the         World Development Indicators, the
                                                                                                                                                   32

                    start year of a banking crisis.                                                          World Bank
Stock market        Stock market capitalization to GDP, measured at the three year before the start
development         year of a banking crisis.
Financial                                                                                                    Čihák et al. (2013)
                    Private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP,
institutions
                    measured at the three year before the start year of a banking crisis.
development
                    It captures the trough of bank credit during crisis periods, and is calculated for
                                                                                                             Calculated by the authors; World
Private credit      each crisis country, as the difference between the pre-crisis growth rate of bank
                                                                                                             development indicators (WDI), World
contraction         credits to the private sector averaged over [t-3, t-1], and its lowest growth over the
                                                                                                             Bank
                    crisis window, [t, t+3]. Greater value indicates more severe credit contraction.

                    "The extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by the rules of society,
                                                                                                             World Governance Indicators (WGI);
Rule of law         and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, property rights, the police,
                                                                                                             Kaufmann et al. (2013)
                    and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence".
                    It is constructed as the first principal component of the eight variables, namely
                                                                                                             Calculated by the authors based on
Legal protection    Creditor rights index (Djankov et al., 2007), Protection of property rights (Fraser
                                                                                                             Economic Freedom Worlds (EFW)
and institutional   Institute), and six individual components of WGI (i.e. rule of law, voice and
                                                                                                             datasets, Djankov et al., (2007); Fraser
quality             accountability, political stability, government effectiveness, regulatory quality and
                                                                                                             Institute, Kaufmann et al. (2013)
                    control of corruption) constructed by Kaufmann et al. (2013).
                    It measures the cost of firing 20 percent of the firm’s workers, and equals to the
                    ratio of the new wage bill to the old one. The new wage bill is calculated as the
                    normal wage of the remaining workers plus the cost of firing workers. Specifically,
Cost of firing
                    the cost of firing a worker is defined as the sum of the notice period, severance        Botero et al. (2004)
workers
                    pay, and any mandatory penalties established by law or mandatory collective
                    agreements for a worker with three years of tenure with the firm. If dismissal is
                    illegal, the cost of firing is set as the annual wage.
                                                                                                                     33

Table 2 Summary statistics

Variables                                     N      mean      sd       min        p25          p50      p75     max
                                                                      Country-level Measures
Anti-self-dealing index                       36     0.437    0.214     0.081      0.283       0.425     0.522    0.950
GDP per capita                                36     9.242    1.466     5.999      8.265       9.570    10.506   11.301
Financial institutions development            36     0.801    0.508     0.121      0.314       0.737     1.130    1.997
Stock market development                      36     0.588    0.594     0.049      0.189       0.416     0.776    2.792
Private credit contraction                    36     0.300    0.230     0.018      0.105       0.241     0.471    0.780
Rule of law                                   36     0.687    0.992    -1.081     -0.088       0.764     1.640    1.945
Legal protection and institutional quality    35     0.095    2.484    -4.434     -2.343       0.252     2.727    3.479
Cost of firing workers                        35     0.465    0.177     0.036      0.358       0.527     0.605    0.688
                                                                       Firm-level Variables
EBIT to assets                               23095    0.057   0.121    -0.527      0.018        0.051    0.103    0.494
Net income to assets                         23415    0.021   0.103    -0.540      0.001        0.021    0.060    0.352
Cash flow to assets                          22064    0.063   0.109    -0.486      0.025        0.061    0.109    0.429
Employment                                   20891    7.081   1.842     0.000      5.971        6.959    8.171   13.126
Investment1                                  18318    0.076   0.079     0.000      0.028        0.055    0.097    0.541
Investment2                                  14352    0.297   0.207     0.018      0.162        0.245    0.370    1.318
Equity Issuance                              18494    0.029   0.149    -0.275     -0.007        0.001    0.018    1.195
Proceeds of IPO/SEO                           9393    0.024   0.126     0.000      0.000        0.000    0.000    1.277
Firm size                                    23426   12.739   1.930     7.773     11.478       12.646   13.903   17.929
Leverage                                     23426    0.250   0.175     0.000      0.105        0.238    0.373    0.700
Tobin's Q                                    23426    0.255   0.443    -0.665     -0.016        0.185    0.442    1.893
                                                                                                                               34


Table 3: Anti-self-dealing and firm performance over crises, [t-3, t+3]: Overall sample
This table displays the effects of the Anti-self-dealing index on firm performance over the crisis episodes [t-3, t+3], where t is
the start year of a systemic banking crisis defined in Laeven and Valencia (2012). The dependent variables are EBIT to
assets, Net income to assets, Cash flow to assets and Firm employment. “All” represents the full sample of firms and
countries. In columns (4) and (5), we split the sample of countries in those with above the median values of the Botero et al.
(2004) index of the regulatory Costs of firing workers and those countries with below the median values of this index. Firm-
level controls include Firm size, Leverage and Tobin’s Q, which are all lagged one year relative to the firm performance
measures. Macro interaction controls include interactions between Crisis and (1) GDP per capita, (2) Financial institutions
development, (3) Stock market development, and (4) Private credit contraction. P-values are reported in parenthesis and
calculated using heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country level. *, **, and *** represent significant
level at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                      (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)
                                                                                                         Firm employment
                                                   EBIT to        Net income       Cash flow           Below          Above
                                                    assets         to assets        to assets         median         median
                                                                                                    firing cost    firing cost
                                                All                    All              All              All            All
Anti-self-dealing*Crisis                   0.0557***              0.0512***        0.0492***         0.122***         -0.123
                                             (0.000)                (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.004)        (0.627)
Crisis                                     -0.107***              -0.0790**        -0.0793**           -0.333         -0.202
                                             (0.005)                (0.022)          (0.031)          (0.712)        (0.650)
GDP per capita*Crisis                        0.00684                0.00548          0.00523           0.0219       -0.00887
                                             (0.167)                (0.175)          (0.217)          (0.805)        (0.825)
Financial institutions development*Crisis -0.00409                 -0.00220        -0.000314         -0.00121         0.226*
                                             (0.654)                (0.762)          (0.964)          (0.988)        (0.099)
Stock market development*Crisis             -0.00604               -0.00616         -0.00652          0.00935         0.284*
                                             (0.263)                (0.186)          (0.157)          (0.647)        (0.073)
Private credit contraction*Crisis            -0.0241               -0.0355*         -0.0412*           -0.339          0.166
                                             (0.386)                (0.073)          (0.061)          (0.354)        (0.438)
Firm size                                 -0.0311***               -0.0206*       -0.0304***         0.553***      0.471***
                                             (0.006)                (0.070)          (0.005)          (0.000)        (0.000)
Leverage                                     -0.0284              -0.0523**        -0.0414**           -0.119         -0.118
                                             (0.101)                (0.012)          (0.024)          (0.188)        (0.339)
Tobin's Q                                  0.0560***              0.0478***        0.0494***        0.0785***        -0.0554
                                             (0.000)                (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)        (0.244)
Constant                                    0.395***                 0.245*         0.385***           0.0161          1.254
                                             (0.003)                (0.082)          (0.003)          (0.976)        (0.159)
Firm FE                                         Yes                    Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes
Year FE                                         Yes                    Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes
Country cluster                                 36                     36               36               18             16
Observations                                  23,095                 23,415           22,064           17,155          3,736
R2                                             0.705                  0.658            0.682            0.979          0.981
Adjusted R2                                    0.650                  0.595            0.621            0.975          0.976
                                                                                                                             35


Table 4: Anti-self-dealing and firm performance over [t-3, t+3]: horserace tests with legal protection and
institutional quality

This table shows the effects of the anti-self-dealing index on firm performance while controlling for measures of legal and
institutional development. The dependent variables in Panel A are EBIT to assets, Net income to assets, Cash flow to assets
and those in Panel B are Firm employment. “All” represents the full sample of firms and countries. In Panel B, we split the
sample of countries in those with above the median values of the Botero et al. (2004) index of the regulatory Costs of firing
workers and those countries with below the median values of this index. Columns with odd number add Rule of law*Crisis as
additional controls, whereas those with even number add Legal protection and institutional quality*Crisis. Firm-level
controls include Firm size, Leverage and Tobin’s Q, which are all lagged one year relative to the firm performance measures.
Macro interaction controls include interactions between Crisis and (1) GDP per capita, (2) Financial institutions
development, (3) Stock market development, and (4) Private credit contraction. P-values are reported in parenthesis and
calculated using heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country level. *, **, and *** represent significant
level at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

Panel A: Firm operating performance

                                              (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)

                                               EBIT to assets            Net income to assets          Cash flow to assets

                                              All       All       All       All       All       All
Anti-self-dealing*Crisis                  0.0557*** 0.0538*** 0.0513*** 0.0506*** 0.0493*** 0.0488***
                                            (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Crisis                                     -0.0705*  -0.0484   -0.0618*  -0.0549   -0.0713*  -0.0647
                                            (0.081)   (0.273)   (0.074)   (0.156)   (0.063)   (0.141)
Rule of law*Crisis                        0.0178***             0.00869             0.00415
                                            (0.008)             (0.109)             (0.495)
Legal protection and
                                                         0.00818**                     0.00344                      0.00216
institutional quality*Crisis
                                                           (0.011)                      (0.178)                      (0.462)
Firm-level controls                          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
Macro interaction controls                   Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
Firm FE                                      Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
Year FE                                      Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
Country cluster                               36             35            36             35            36             35
Observations                                23,095         23,037        23,415         23,357        22,064         22,006
R2                                          0.706           0.705         0.658          0.658         0.682          0.681
Adjusted R2                                 0.651           0.651         0.595          0.594         0.621          0.621
                                                                                                        36


Panel B: Firm employment

                                                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
                                                                     Firm employment
                                                    Below median firing cost   Above median firing cost
Anti-self-dealing*Crisis                            0.110***      0.119***      0.00968       0.0159
                                                     (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.964)       (0.944)
Crisis                                               -0.422        -0.492        0.825        1.042*
                                                     (0.594)       (0.563)      (0.118)       (0.076)
Rule of law*Crisis                                  -0.0837*                   0.294***
                                                     (0.050)                    (0.000)
Legal protection and institutional quality*Crisis                  -0.0282                   0.118***
                                                                   (0.212)                    (0.000)
Firm-level controls                                    Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
Macro interaction controls                             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
Firm FE                                                Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
Year FE                                                Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
Country cluster                                        18             18          16            16
Observations                                         17,155         17,155       3,736         3,736
R2                                                    0.979          0.979       0.981         0.981
Adjusted R2                                           0.975          0.975       0.977         0.977
                                                                                                                              37


Table 5: Anti-self-dealing and firm performance over [t-3, t+3]: split sample by industry financial
dependence
This table shows the effects of the Anti-self-dealing index on real firm performance after splitting firms into those that are in
industries with above the median values (High) of Financial dependence and those with below (Low) the median values. The
extent to which firms depend on external finance is calculated at U.S SIC 3-digit level following the method in Rajan and
Zingales (1998). The dependent variables in Panel A are EBIT to assets, Net income to assets, Cash flow to assets and those
in Panel B are Firm employment. Columns with odd number represent industries with Financial dependence above the
median, while those with even number are those below the median. We apply the same specification on the split sample in
this table as that in Table 3. Firm-level controls include Firm size, Leverage and Tobin’s Q, which are all lagged one year
relative to the firm performance measures. Macro interaction controls include interactions between Crisis and (1) GDP per
capita, (2) Financial institutions development, (3) Stock market development, and (4) Private credit contraction. P-values are
reported in parenthesis and calculated using heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country level. *, **, and
*** represent significant level at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

Panel A: Firm operating performance

                                     (1)              (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)              (6)

                                      EBIT to assets             Net income to assets            Cash flow to assets

                               High       Low        High       Low        High       Low
                             Financial Financial   Financial Financial   Financial Financial
                           dependence dependence dependence dependence dependence dependence
Anti-self-dealing*Crisis 0.0911*** 0.0327*** 0.0812*** 0.0316*** 0.0785*** 0.0293***
                              (0.000)   (0.002)     (0.000)   (0.001)     (0.000)   (0.004)
Crisis                      -0.178***   -0.0533   -0.139***   -0.0398   -0.130***   -0.0467
                              (0.001)   (0.317)     (0.009)   (0.388)     (0.010)   (0.345)
Firm-level controls             Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Macro interaction controls      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Firm FE                         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Year FE                         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Country cluster                 35         36         35         36         35         35
Observations                  11,356     11,739     11,496     11,919     11,022     11,042
R2                             0.731      0.674      0.691      0.616      0.700      0.655
Adjusted R2                    0.681      0.612      0.634      0.543      0.642      0.588

F statistic                                12.66***                       9.44***                        10.29***
P-value                                    (0.0004)                       (0.0021)                       (0.0013)
                                                                                        38


Panel B: Firm employment

                                (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                   Firm employment
                               Below median firing cost         Above median firing cost
                                High              Low            High              Low
                              Financial        Financial      Financial         Financial
                             dependence       dependence     dependence        dependence
Anti-self-dealing*Crisis      0.169***         0.0868**         -0.383             0.130
                               (0.003)          (0.033)        (0.283)           (0.605)
Crisis                         -1.451            0.159         -0.0451            -0.209
                               (0.245)          (0.822)        (0.916)           (0.720)
Firm-level controls              Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Macro interaction controls       Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Firm FE                          Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Year FE                          Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Country cluster                  18                18             16                15
Observations                    8,553            8,602           1,866             1,870
R2                              0.977            0.980           0.977             0.985
Adjusted R2                     0.972            0.976           0.971             0.982

F statistic                            4.47**                           4.71**
P-value                               (0.0345)                         (0.0299)
                                                                                                                                39


Table 6: The effects of Anti-self-dealing on investment to Q sensitivity over [t-3, t+3]

This table reports the effects of the Anti-self-dealing index on investment sensitivity to Q over crisis episodes [t-3, t+3].
Following Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003), we construct two variables as our investment measure. One is (Capital
expenditure + R&D) to lagged assets in columns (1)-(3), the other is (Capital expenditure + R&D + Selling, General and
Administrative expenses) to lagged assets in columns (4)-(6), respectively. “All” represents the full sample of firms and
countries, while High (Low) Financial dependence represents the subsample of firms that are in industries above the median
values of Financial dependence, which measures the extent to which firms depend on external finance and which is
calculated at U.S SIC 3-digit level following the method in Rajan and Zingales (1998). Firm-level controls include lagged
Tobin’s Q and contemporary Cash flow to assets. Macro interaction controls include interactions between Crisis and (1)
GDP per capita, (2) Financial institutions development, (3) Stock market development, and (4) Private credit contraction. P-
values are reported in parenthesis and calculated using heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country level.
*, **, and *** represent significant level at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                              (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)           (5)              (6)
                                                       Investment 1                                 Investment 2
                                                           High       Low                               High       Low
                                             All         Financial  Financial              All        Financial  Financial
                                                       dependence dependence                         dependence dependence
 Anti-self-dealing*Tobin's
                                          0.0310**      0.0452***         0.0219      0.0816***       0.121***        0.0369
 Q*Crisis
                                           (0.013)   (0.001)             (0.210)         (0.001)   (0.000)    (0.214)
 Tobin's Q*Crisis                        -0.0190** -0.0323***           -0.00804      -0.0708*** -0.0979*** -0.0422**
                                           (0.020)   (0.001)             (0.388)         (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.027)
 Anti-self-dealing*Tobin's Q              0.000529   -0.0230              0.0185        0.0635*     0.0524  0.0695***
                                           (0.970)   (0.150)             (0.516)         (0.088)   (0.346)    (0.003)
 Anti-self-dealing*Crisis                 -0.00772   -0.0143            -0.00489       -0.0272**   -0.0195  -0.0351**
                                           (0.419)   (0.156)             (0.728)         (0.042)   (0.340)    (0.043)
 Crisis                                    -0.0123   -0.0132             -0.0124         0.107*     0.0836    0.123*
                                           (0.760)   (0.732)             (0.754)         (0.059)   (0.170)    (0.067)
 Tobin's Q                               0.0382*** 0.0611***              0.0162       0.0716*** 0.0967*** 0.0450**
                                           (0.001)   (0.000)             (0.263)         (0.005)   (0.008)    (0.029)
 Cash flow to assets                       0.0630*    0.0491            0.0774**        0.147**     0.0761   0.233***
                                           (0.080)   (0.194)             (0.032)         (0.033)   (0.418)    (0.000)
 Macro interaction controls                  Yes        Yes                 Yes            Yes        Yes       Yes
 Firm FE                                     Yes        Yes                 Yes            Yes        Yes       Yes
 Year FE                                     Yes        Yes                 Yes            Yes        Yes       Yes
 Country cluster                              36        36                  35             34         31        33
 Observations                               18,318     9,098               9,220         14,352      7,131     7,221
 R2                                         0.621      0.650               0.575          0.831      0.822     0.843
 Adjusted R2                                0.545      0.578               0.490          0.796      0.784     0.810

 F statistic                                                         1.86                                      6.98***
 P-value                                                           (0.1726)                                    (0.0082)
                                                                                                                              40


Table 7 Anti-self-dealing and external finance

This table displays the effects of the Anti-self-dealing index on the external finance of firms over crisis episodes [t-3, t+3].
The dependent variables are Equity issuance in Panel A and IPO/SEO in Panel B,. “All” represents the full sample of firms
and countries, while High (Low) Financial dependence represents the subsample with Financial dependence above (below)
the median value. Firm-level controls include Firm size, Leverage, Tobin’s Q, which are all measured at the beginning of a
year, as well as contemporary Cash flow to assets. Macro interaction controls include interactions between Crisis and (1)
GDP per capita, (2) Financial institutions development, (3) Stock market development, and (4) Private credit contraction. P-
values are reported in parenthesis and calculated using heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country level.
*, **, and *** represent significant level at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

Panel A: Equity issuance

                                               (1)                             (2)                              (3)

                                                                         Equity Issuance
                                                                             High                             Low
                                               All                         Financial                        Financial
                                                                          dependence                       dependence
Anti-self-dealing*Crisis                   0.0357**                        0.0579**                          0.0226
                                            (0.016)                         (0.018)                          (0.126)
Crisis                                      0.0897                           0.100                           0.0885
                                            (0.150)                         (0.237)                          (0.494)
Firm-level controls                           Yes                             Yes                              Yes
Macro interaction controls                    Yes                             Yes                              Yes
Firm FE                                       Yes                             Yes                              Yes
Year FE                                       Yes                             Yes                              Yes
Country cluster                               34                              33                               33
Observations                                18,494                           9,136                            9,358
R2                                           0.420                           0.438                            0.401
Adjusted R2                                  0.306                           0.327                            0.280

F statistic                                                                                  3.46*
P-value                                                                                     (0.0627)
                                                                                                 41


Panel B: Proceeds from equity issuance events, IPO/SEO

                                      (1)                     (2)                      (3)

                                                         Proceeds of IPO/SEO

                                                              High                      Low
                                      All                   Financial                Financial
                                                           dependence               dependence
Anti-self-dealing*Crisis             0.0184                 0.0508**                 -0.00475
                                    (0.147)                  (0.015)                  (0.703)
Crisis                              -0.0171                  -0.0327                  -0.0276
                                    (0.708)                  (0.621)                  (0.546)
Firm-level controls                   Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Macro interaction controls            Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Firm FE                               Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Year FE                               Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Country cluster                        34                       31                       33
Observations                         9,393                    4,676                    4,717
R2                                   0.316                    0.342                    0.288
Adjusted R2                          0.184                    0.211                    0.148

F statistic                                                              8.62***
P-value                                                                  (0.0033)
                                                                                                                                               42

Appendix

Table A1: List of the macro country characteristics

                                                 Anti-                                                                        Legal
                                                           GDP       Financial                      Private                               Cost of
                       Country    Start year      self-                            Stock market                  Rule    protection and
     Country name                                          per      institutions                    credit                                 firing
                        code       of crises    dealing                            development                  of law    institutional
                                                          capita   development                    contraction                             workers
                                                 index                                                                       quality
 1   Argentina          ARG       1995, 2001     0.342     8.295      0.129           0.082         0.501        0.037       -1.291        0.273
 2   Austria            AUT         2008         0.213    10.520      1.082           0.346         0.077        1.863        2.928        0.217
 3   Belgium            BEL         2008         0.544    10.492      0.715           0.751         0.126        1.240        2.035        0.160
 4   Switzerland        CHE         2008         0.267    10.854      1.543           2.290         0.090        1.899        3.150        0.165
 5   China, Mainland    CHN         1998         0.763     6.657      0.741           0.061         0.139       -0.431       -2.890        0.599
 6   Colombia           COL         1998         0.573     8.058      0.306           0.169         0.372       -0.892       -3.287        0.549
 7   Germany            DEU         2008         0.282    10.421      1.118           0.437         0.019        1.656        2.727        0.485
 8   Denmark            DNK         2008         0.463    10.769      1.616           0.642         0.157        1.945        3.479        0.505
 9   Spain              ESP         2008         0.374    10.162      1.299           0.840         0.262        1.097        1.449        0.358
10   Finland            FIN         1991         0.457    10.198      0.702           0.260         0.282        1.876        2.901        0.531
11   France             FRA         2008         0.379    10.429      0.902           0.779         0.099        1.400        1.996        0.433
12   United Kingdom     GBR         2007         0.950    10.532      1.424           1.267         0.135        1.623        2.636        0.487
13   Greece             GRC         2008         0.217     9.981      0.732           0.563         0.214        0.776        0.499        0.566
14   Hungary            HUN         2008         0.181     9.300      0.476           0.283         0.220        0.826        0.992        0.352
15   Indonesia          IDN         1997         0.653     6.964      0.473           0.224         0.780       -0.366       -3.030        0.685
16   India              IND         1993         0.579     5.999      0.241           0.097         0.018        0.259       -2.343        0.623
17   Ireland            IRL         2008         0.789    10.793      1.413           0.564         0.346        1.580        2.804        0.546
18   Italy              ITA         2008         0.421    10.325      0.855           0.446         0.084        0.468        0.252        0.452
19   Japan              JPN         1997         0.499    10.387      1.997           0.721         0.038        1.318        1.081        0.080
20   Kazakhstan         KAZ         2008         0.483     8.235      0.276           0.126         0.694       -0.824       -3.152        0.605
21   Korea              KOR         1997         0.469     9.327      0.550           0.395         0.101        0.752       -0.503        0.617
22   Luxembourg         LUX         2008         0.283    11.301      1.127           1.351         0.368        1.825           .            .
23   Latvia             LVA         2008         0.319     8.877      0.553           0.128         0.595        0.590        0.223        0.527
24   Mexico             MEX         1994         0.172     8.808      0.172           0.198         0.581       -0.759       -2.288        0.426
25   Malaysia           MYS         1997         0.950     8.309      1.010           2.792         0.262        0.607       -0.285        0.195
26   Nigeria            NGA         2009         0.433     6.742      0.121           0.184         0.773       -1.081       -4.434        0.036
27   Netherlands        NLD         2008         0.203    10.574      1.592           0.894         0.160        1.747        3.106        0.688
28   Norway             NOR         1991         0.421    10.686      0.782           0.193         0.113        1.889        3.050        0.527
                                                                                                                                                             43

29   Philippines          PHL            1997         0.215        6.878      0.323          0.774             0.468        -0.005        -1.994     0.575
30   Portugal             PRT            2008         0.444        9.813      1.358          0.357             0.110         1.198         1.607     0.615
31   Russia               RUS            2008         0.440        8.582      0.233          0.539             0.425        -0.905        -3.605     0.609
32   Slovak Rep           SVK            1998         0.290        8.938      0.358          0.049             0.474         0.153        -0.650     0.651
33   Sweden               SWE            2008         0.333       10.622      1.026          1.044             0.087         1.776         3.020     0.529
34   Thailand             THA            1997         0.813        7.652      1.132          0.921             0.398         0.541        -1.308     0.632
35   Turkey               TUR            2000         0.429        8.710      0.191          0.180             0.514        -0.171        -2.426     0.414
36   Ukraine              UKR            2008         0.081        7.511      0.259          0.215             0.734        -0.790        -3.132     0.570
     Average                           2002.946       0.437        9.242      0.801          0.588             0.300         0.687         0.095     0.465

Table A2 Correlation matrix of the macro country characteristics

                                                                Financial                                                      Legal protection    Cost of
                            Anti-self-     GDP per                            Stock market    Private credit
                                                               institutions                                     Rule of law    and institutional    firing
                          dealing index     capita                            development      contraction
                                                              development                                                           quality        workers
Anti-self-dealing index      1.0000

GDP per capita              -0.1836         1.0000
                            (0.2838)

Financial institutions
                             0.2042        0.6790*               1.0000
development
                            (0.2323)       (0.0000)
Stock market
                             0.2708         0.3274              0.5292*          1.0000
development
                            (0.1101)       (0.0513)             (0.0009)
Private credit
                            -0.1007        -0.5533*            -0.6149*          -0.2993         1.0000
contraction
                            (0.5591)       (0.0005)             (0.0001)         (0.0762)
Rule of law                 -0.0203        0.8243*              0.7789*           0.4126        -0.7131*          1.0000
                            (0.9065)       (0.0000)             (0.0000)         (0.0124)       (0.0000)
Legal protection and
                            -0.0718        0.8895*              0.7579*          0.3640         -0.6957*         0.9782*             1.0000
institutional quality
                            (0.6819)       (0.0000)             (0.0000)         (0.0316)       (0.0000)         (0.0000)
Cost of firing workers       0.0314        -0.2022              -0.1690          -0.3570         0.1105          -0.1358             -0.1454       1.0000
                            (0.8580)       (0.2440)             (0.3318)         (0.0353)       (0.5276)         (0.4365)            (0.4045)
                                                                                                   44


Table A3: The impact of shareholder protection laws on the size of crises shocks

                                                    (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)

                                                              Private credit contraction

Anti-self-dealing                                 -0.108        -0.124        -0.158       -0.0873
                                                  (0.497)       (0.312)       (0.219)      (0.555)
Rule of law                                                   -0.166***
                                                                (0.000)
Legal protection and institutional quality                                  -0.0662***
                                                                              (0.000)
GDP per capita                                                                              -0.0468
                                                                                            (0.268)
Financial institutions development                                                         -0.189**
                                                                                            (0.011)
Stock market development                                                                     0.0160
                                                                                            (0.701)
Constant                                         0.348***     0.468***       0.374***       0.913**
                                                  (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.022)
Observations                                         36          36             35             36
R2                                                 0.010        0.522          0.505          0.418
Adjusted R2                                       -0.0190       0.493          0.474          0.342
