                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             MICROECONOMIC ORIGINS OF MACROECONOMIC TAIL RISKS

                                           Daron Acemoglu
                                          Asuman Ozdaglar
                                         Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi

                                         Working Paper 20865
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20865


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2015




This paper is partially based on the previously unpublished results in the working paper of Acemoglu,
Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2010). An earlier draft of this paper was circulated under the title “the
network origins of large economic downturns.” We thank the editor and three anonymous referees
for very helpful remarks and suggestions. We are grateful to Pablo Azar for excellent research assistance
and thank Nick Bloom, Vasco Carvalho, Victor Chernozhukov, Xavier Gabaix, Paul Glasserman,Lars
Hansen, Ali Jadbabaie, Pete Klenow, Peter Kondor, Jennifer La’O, Mihalis Markakis, Emi Nakamura,
Ali Shourideh, Jón Steinsson, Andrea Vedolin, Venky Venkateswaran, José Zubizarreta, and seminar
participants at Chicago Booth, Columbia Business School and the Society for Economic Dynamics
Annual Meeting for fruitful conversations. Acemoglu and Ozdaglar gratefully acknowledge financial
support from the Army Research Office, Grant MURI W911NF- 12-1-0509. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Daron Acemoglu, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Microeconomic Origins of Macroeconomic Tail Risks
Daron Acemoglu, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi
NBER Working Paper No. 20865
January 2015, Revised August 2015
JEL No. C67,E32

                                             ABSTRACT

We document that even though the normal distribution provides a good approximation to GDP fluctuations,
it severely underpredicts “macroeconomic tail risks,” that is, the frequency of large economic downturns.
Using a multi-sector general equilibrium model, we show that the interplay of idiosyncratic microeconomic
shocks and sectoral heterogeneity results in systematic departures in the likelihood of large economic
downturns relative to what is implied by the normal distribution. Notably, we also show that such
departures can happen while GDP is approximately normally distributed away from the tails, highlighting
the qualitatively different behavior of large economic downturns from small or moderate fluctuations.
We further demonstrate the special role that input-output linkages play in generating “tail comovements,”
whereby large recessions involve not only significant GDP contractions, but also large simultaneous
declines across a wide range of sectors.


Daron Acemoglu                                      Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi
Department of Economics, E18-269D                   Columbia Business School
MIT                                                 3022 Broadway, 418 Uris Hall
77 Massachusetts Avenue                             New York, NY 10027
Cambridge, MA 02139                                 alirezat@columbia.edu
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu

Asuman Ozdaglar
Dept of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave, E40-130
Cambridge, MA 02139
asuman@mit.edu
1    Introduction

Most empirical studies in macroeconomics approximate the deviations of aggregate economic
variables from their trends with a normal distribution. Besides its relative success in capturing salient
features of the behavior of aggregate variables in the U.S. and other OECD countries, this approach
has a natural justification: since most macro variables, such as GDP, are obtained from combining
more disaggregated ones, it is reasonable to expect that a central limit theorem-type result should
imply that they are normally distributed. As an implicit corollary to this observation, most of the
literature treats the standard deviations of aggregate variables as sufficient statistics for measuring
aggregate economic fluctuations.
    That the normal distribution is, for the most part, a good approximation to aggregate fluctuations
can be seen from panels (a) and (b) of Figure 1. These panels depict the quantile-quantile (Q-Q) plots
of the U.S. postwar quarterly output growth and the HP-detrended GDP against the standard normal
distribution, while excluding tail risks or large deviations from the sample — defined as quarters
in which GDP growth or detrended output are above the top 5% or below the bottom 5% of their
empirical distributions. The close correspondence between the normal distribution, shown as the
dashed red line, and the two truncated data series shows that, once large deviations are excluded,
the normal distribution provides a good approximation to GDP fluctuations.1
    This picture changes dramatically, however, once large deviations are also taken into account.
Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 1 show the same quantile-quantile plots for the entire U.S. postwar
sample. Both graphs now exhibit sizable and systematic departures from the normal line at the ends.2
This observation highlights that even though the normal distribution provides a good approximation
to GDP fluctuations in most of the sample, it severely underestimates what is perhaps the most
consequential aspect of economic fluctuations: the likelihood of large economic downturns.
    In this paper, we argue that such macroeconomic tail risks can have their origins in idiosyncratic
microeconomic shocks to disaggregated sectors, and demonstrate that sufficiently high levels
of sectoral heterogeneity can lead to systematic departures in the frequency of large economic
downturns from what is implied by the normal distribution.                            Crucially, we also prove that
macroeconomic tail risks can coexist with approximately normally distributed fluctuations away
from the tails, consistent with the pattern of U.S. GDP fluctuations documented in Figure 1.
Consequently, our results show that the microeconomic nature of macroeconomic tail risks can be
   1
     To test for this claim formally, we first excluded the top and bottom 5% of observations from U.S. GDP growth and
detrended log GDP between 1947:Q1 and 2015:Q1, and then performed the Anderson-Darling and Jarque-Bera tests of
normality. The resulting test statistics for GDP growth are 0.64 and 1.07, respectively, and the test statistics for detrended
(with HP filter 1600) log GDP are, respectively, 0.40 and 0.57. In none of these cases we can reject normality at the 10%
significance level.
   2
     Repeating the tests in footnote 1 for the full sample of log GDP growth and detrended quarterly GDP leads to a strong
rejection of normality in both cases: the Anderson-Darling and Jarque-Bera tests yield, respectively, test statistics of 1.91
and 21.65 for GDP growth, hence rejecting normality at the 1% level. Similarly for the detrended quarterly GDP, the two
tests lead to test statistics of 2.14 and 27.38, again rejecting normality at the 1% level.



                                                              1
           .04                                                     400


                                                                   200
           .02

                                                                     0

             0
                                                                 −200


                                                                 −400
         −.02
             −3        −1.5       0          1.5     3                −3      −1.5        0        1.5       3
                  (a) truncated GDP growth rate                     (b) HP-detrended and truncated output

           .04                                                     400


                                                                   200
           .02

                                                                     0
             0
                                                                 −200
         −.02
                                                                 −400

             −3        −1.5       0          1.5     3                −3      −1.5        0        1.5       3
                       (c) GDP growth rate                                 (d) HP-detrended output

Figure 1. The quantile-quantile (Q-Q) plots of the postwar U.S. GDP fluctuations (1947:Q1 to 2015:Q1) versus the standard
normal distribution, shown by the dashed red line. The horizontal and vertical axes correspond, respectively, to the
quantiles of the standard normal distribution and the sample data. Panels (a) and (b) depict the Q-Q plots for the GDP
growth rate and HP-detrended output. The linearity of the points suggests that both truncated datasets are approximately
normally distributed. Panels (c) and (d) depict the Q-Q plots of the two datasets after removing the top and bottom 5%
of data points. The deviation from the dashed red line suggests that both datasets exhibit heavier tails compared to the
normal distribution.


quite distinct from the determinants of small or moderate fluctuations, underscoring the importance
of separately focusing on large downturns.
    We develop these ideas in the context of a model economy comprising of n competitive sectors
that are linked to one another via input-output linkages and are subject to idiosyncratic productivity
shocks. Using an argument similar to those of Hulten (1978) and Gabaix (2011), we first show that
aggregate output depends on the distribution of microeconomic shocks as well as the empirical
distribution of (sectoral) Domar weights, defined as sectoral sales divided by GDP. We also establish
that the empirical distribution of Domar weights is in turn determined by the extent of heterogeneity
in (i) the weights households place on the consumption of each sector’s output (which we refer to as
primitive heterogeneity); and (ii) the sectors’ role as input-suppliers to one another (which we refer
to as network heterogeneity).

                                                           2
    Using this characterization, we investigate whether microeconomic shocks can translate into
significant macroeconomic tail risks, defined as systematic departures in the frequency of large
economic downturns from what is predicted by the normal distribution.3 Our main result establishes
that macroeconomic tail risks can emerge if two conditions are satisfied. First, microeconomic
shocks themselves need to exhibit some minimal degree of tail risk relative to the normal distribution
(e.g., by having exponential tails), as aggregating normally distributed shocks can only result in
normally distributed GDP fluctuations. Second, the economy needs to exhibit sufficient levels of
sectoral dominance, in the sense that the most dominant disaggregated sectors (i.e., those with the
largest Domar weights) ought to be sufficiently large relative to the variation in the importance of all
sectors. This condition guarantees that the tail risks present at the micro level do not wash out after
aggregation. We then demonstrate that macroeconomic tail risks can emerge even if the central limit
theorem holds so that, in a pattern consistent with Figure 1, fluctuations are normally distributed
away from the tails.
    Our result that high levels of sectoral dominance transform microeconomic shocks into sizable
macroeconomic tail risks is related to the findings of Gabaix (2011) and Acemoglu, Carvalho,
Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012), who show that microeconomic shocks can lead to aggregate
volatility (measured by the standard deviation of GDP) if some sectors are much larger than others
or play much more important roles as input-suppliers in the economy. However, the role played by
the heterogeneity in Domar weights in generating aggregate volatility is quite distinct from its role
in generating tail risks. Indeed, we show that structural changes in an economy can simultaneously
reduce aggregate volatility while increasing macroeconomic tail risks, in a manner reminiscent of the
experience of the U.S. economy over the last several decades, where the likelihood of large economic
downturns may have increase behind the façade of the “Great Moderation”.
    Our main results show that the distribution of microeconomic shocks and the Domar weights in
the economy serve as sufficient statistics for the likelihood of large economic downturns. Hence, two
economies with identical Domar weights exhibit equal levels of macroeconomic tail risks, regardless
of the extent of network and primitive heterogeneity. Nevertheless, we also establish that economic
downturns that arise due to the presence of each type of heterogeneity are meaningfully different
in nature. In an economy with no network heterogeneity — where Domar weights simply reflect
the differential importance of the disaggregated sectors in household preferences — large economic
downturns are a consequence of contractions in sectors with high Domar weights, while other
sectors are, on average, in a normal state. In contrast, large economic downturns that arise from
the interplay of microeconomic shocks and network heterogeneity display tail comovements: they
involve not only very large drops in GDP, but also significant simultaneous contractions across a wide
   3
     Formally, we measure the extent of macroeconomic tail risks by the likelihood of a τ standard deviation decline in log
GDP relative to the likelihood of a similar decline under the normal distribution in a sequence of economies with both the
number of sectors (n) and the size of the deviation (τ ) growing to infinity. The justification for these choices is provided in
Section 3.



                                                               3
range of sectors within the economy.4 This observation motivates our next result, where we show
that an economy with high levels of sectoral interconnectivity (such as an economy with substantial
network heterogeneity) exhibits more tail comovements relative to another economy with identical
Domar weights, but with only primitive heterogeneity.
    As our final theoretical result, we characterize the extent of macroeconomic tail risk in the
presence of heavy-tailed microeconomic shocks (e.g., shocks with Pareto tails).                              Using this
characterization, we demonstrate that sufficient levels of sectoral dominance can translate light-
tailed (such as exponential) shocks into macroeconomic tail risks that would have only emerged in
the absence of such heterogeneity with heavy-tailed shocks.5
    We conclude the paper by undertaking a simple quantitative exercise to further illustrate our
main results. Assuming that microeconomic shocks have exponential tails — chosen in a way that is
consistent with GDP volatility observed in the U.S. data — we find that the empirical distribution
of Domar weights in the U.S. economy is capable of generating departures from the normal
distribution similar to the patterns documented in Figure 1. We then demonstrate that the extent
of network heterogeneity in the U.S. economy plays an important role in creating macroeconomic
tail risks. Finally, we show that input-output linkages in the U.S. data can lead to tail comovements,
highlighting the importance of intersectoral linkages in translating microeconomic shocks into
macroeconomic tail risks.


Related Literature        Our paper belongs to the small literature that focuses on large economic
downturns. A number of papers, including Cole and Ohanian (1999, 2002) and Kehoe and Prescott
(2002), have used the neoclassical growth framework to study Great Depression-type events in the
United States and other countries. More recently, there has been a growing emphasis on deep
Keynesian recessions due to liquidity traps and the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates
(such as Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Eggertsson
and Mehrotra (2014)). Relatedly, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2015) argue that financial
frictions can account for the key features of the recent economic crisis. Though our paper shares
with this literature the emphasis on large economic downturns, both the focus and the underlying
economic mechanisms are substantially different.
    4
      In fact, using shipments data for 459 manufacturing industries from the NBER productivity database between 1958–
2009 suggests that there are significant levels of tail comovements. In particular, we find that a two standard deviation
decline in GDP, which takes place on annual data in 1973 and 2008, is associated with a two standard deviation decline in
10.68% and 13.73% of manufacturing industries, respectively. These numbers are much greater than the average in the rest
of the sample (3.17%) or more relevantly, the average in the rest of the sample once we also exclude 1974 and 2009 (2.06%),
the years immediately following 1973 and 2008, where the fraction of manufacturing industries experiencing more than two
standard deviation declines is also very high. Clearly, they are also much greater than what we should observe if shipments
in these industries were independently distributed.
    5
      Fama (1963) and Ibragimov and Walden (2007) observe that the presence of extremely heavy-tailed shocks with infinite
variances leads to the break down of the central limit theorem, and hence, to systematic deviations from the normal
distribution. Our results, in contrast, are about the (arguably more subtle and interesting phenomenon of) emergence
of macroeconomic tail risks in the absence of heavy-tailed micro or macro shocks.



                                                            4
       Our paper is also related to the literature on “rare disasters”, such as Rietz (1988), Barro (2006),
Gabaix (2012), Nakamura, Steinsson, Barro, and Ursúa (2013) and Farhi and Gabaix (2015), which
argues that the possibility of rare but extreme disasters is an important determinant of risk premia
in asset markets. Gourio (2012) studies a real business cycle model with a small risk of economic
disaster. This literature, however, treats the frequency and the severity of such rare disasters as
exogenous. In contrast, we provide a possible explanation for the endogenous emergence of such
macroeconomic tail risks due to the propagation and amplification of microeconomic shocks.
Furthermore, we characterize how the distributional properties of micro shocks coupled with the
input-output linkages of the economy shape the likelihood and depth of large economic downturns.
       Our paper is most closely related to and builds on the literature that studies the microeconomic
origins of economic fluctuations. Gabaix (2011) argues that if the firm size distribution is sufficiently
heavy-tailed (in the sense that the largest firms contribute disproportionally to GDP), firm-level
idiosyncratic shocks may translate into aggregate fluctuations. Relatedly, Acemoglu et al. (2012) show
that the propagation of microeconomic shocks over input-output linkages can result in aggregate
volatility. On the empirical side, Carvalho and Gabaix (2013) explore whether changes in the sectoral
composition of the postwar U.S. economy can account for the Great Moderation and its unwinding,
while Foerster, Sarte, and Watson (2011) and Atalay (2014) study the relative importance of aggregate
and sectoral shocks in aggregate economic fluctuations. Complementing these studies, di Giovanni,
Levchenko, and Méjean (2014) use a database covering the universe of French firms and document
that firm-level shocks contribute significantly to aggregate volatility, while Carvalho, Nirei, Saito,
and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015) and Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2015a) provide firm and sectoral-level
evidence for the transmission of shocks over input-output linkages.6
       Even though the current paper has much in common with the above mentioned studies, it
also features major differences from the rest of the literature. First, rather than the focusing on
the standard deviation of GDP as a notion of aggregate fluctuations, we study the determinants
of macroeconomic tail risks, which, to the best of our knowledge, is new.                           Second and more
importantly, this shift in focus leads to a novel set of economic insights: our results establish more
than the limitations of the standard deviation of GDP as a measure of the frequency and depth
of large economic downturns. They also show that the extent of such macroeconomic tail risks is
determined by the interplay between the shape of the distribution of microeconomic shocks and the
heterogeneity in Domar weights (as captured by our notion of sectoral dominance), a result with no
counterpart in the previous literature.
       Our paper is also related to Fagiolo, Napoletano, and Roventini (2008), Cúrdia, Del Negro,
and Greenwald (2014) and Ascari, Fagiolo, and Roventini (2015), who document that the normal
distribution does not provide a good approximation to many macroeconomic variables in OECD
   6
    Other studies in this literature include Jovanovic (1987), Durlauf (1993), Horvath (1998, 2000), Dupor (1999), Carvalho
(2010) and Burlon (2012). For a survey of this literature, see Carvalho (2014). Kozeniauskas, Orlik, and Veldkamp (2014)
study how uncertainty in microeconomic and macroeconomic variables are linked.


                                                            5
countries. Similarly, Atalay and Drautzburg (2015) find substantial differences in the extent to which
different industries’ employment growth rates depart from the normal distribution and compute the
contribution of the independent component of industry-specific productivity shocks to the skewness
and kurtosis of aggregate variables. In contrast, we provide a theoretical framework for how such
departures from normality may arise.
        Finally, our paper is linked to the growing literature that focuses on the role of power laws and
large deviations in various contexts. For example, Gabaix, Gopikrishnan, Plerou, and Stanley (2003,
2006) provide a theory of excess stock market volatility in which market movements are due to trades
by very large institutional investors, whereas Kelly and Jiang (2015) investigate the effects of time-
varying extreme events in asset markets.


Outline of the Paper       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We present the model in Section
2. In Section 3, we formally define our notion of tail risks. Our main results are presented in Section
4, where we show that the severity of macroeconomic tail risks is determined by the interaction
between the nature of heterogeneity in the economy’s Domar weights and the distribution of
microeconomic shocks. We present our results on tail comovements and the extent of tail risks in the
presence of heavy-tailed microeconomic shocks in Sections 5 and 6, respectively. Section 7 contains
our quantitative exercises and Section 8 concludes. All proofs and some additional mathematical
details are provided in the Appendix.


2        Microeconomic Model

In this section, we present a simple multi-sector model that forms the basis of our analysis. The
model is a static variant of the model of Long and Plosser (1983), which is also analyzed by Acemoglu
et al. (2012).
        Consider a static economy consisting of n competitive sectors denoted by {1, 2, . . . , n}, each
producing a distinct product. Each product can be either consumed or used as input for production
of other goods. Firms in each sector employ Cobb-Douglas production technologies with constant
returns to scale that transform labor and intermediate goods into final products. In particular,
                                                                µ
                                                         n
                                                            a
                                      xi = Ξi ζi li1−µ 
                                                         Y
                                                           xijij  ,                                                          (1)
                                                                        j=1

where xi is the output of sector i, Ξi is a Hicks-neutral productivity shock, li is the amount of labor
hired by the firms in sector i, xij is the amount of good j used for production of good i, µ ∈ [0, 1) is the
share of material goods in production, and ζi > 0 is some normalization constant.7 The exponent
aij ≥ 0 in (1) represents the share of good j in the production technology of good i. A larger aij
                                                 Qn
    In what follows, we set ζi = (1 − µ)−(1−µ)
    7
                                                  j=1 (µaij )
                                                                −µaij
                                                                        , which simplifies the key expressions without any bearing
on our results.


                                                                  6
means that good j is more important in producing i, whereas aij = 0 implies that good j is not a
required input for i’s production technology.8 We summarize the intersectoral input-output linkages
with matrix A = [aij ], which we refer to as the economy’s input-output matrix.
      We assume that productivity shocks Ξi are independent and identically distributed across sectors
and denote the common cumulative distribution function (CDF) of i = log(Ξi ) by F . We assume
that the microeconomic shock to sector i, i , has a symmetric distribution around the origin with full
support over R and a finite standard deviation, which, without much loss of generality, we normalize
to one. Following Foss, Korshunov, and Zachary (2011), we say i has light tails if E[exp(bi )] < ∞
for some b > 0. This assumption ensures that all moments of i are finite. In contrast, we say
microeconomic shocks have heavy tails if E[exp(bi )] = ∞ for all b > 0.
      The economy is also populated by a representative household, who supplies one unit of labor
inelastically. We assume that the representative household has logarithmic preferences over the n
goods given by
                                                                     n
                                                                     X
                                             u(c1 , . . . , cn ) =         βi log(ci ),
                                                                     i=1

where ci is the amount of good i consumed and β i > 0 is i’s share in the household’s utility function.
Without loss of generality, we assume that ni=1 β i = 1.
                                          P

      The competitive equilibrium of this economy is defined in the usual way: it consists of a collection
of prices and quantities such that (i) the representative household maximizes her utility; (ii) the
representative firm in each sector maximizes its profits while taking the prices and the wage as given;
and (iii) all markets clear.
      Throughout the paper, we refer to the logarithm of real value added in the economy as aggregate
output and denote it by y . Our first result provides a convenient characterization of aggregate output
as a function of microeconomic shocks and the technology and preference parameters.

Proposition 1. The aggregate output of the economy is given by
                                                                           n
                                                                           X
                                               y = log(GDP) =                    v i i ,                                (2)
                                                                           i=1

where
                                                                       n
                                                         pi xi   X
                                                 vi =          =   βj `ji                                                (3)
                                                         GDP
                                                                      j=1

and `ji is the (j, i) element of the economy’s Leontief inverse L = (I − µA)−1 .

      This result is related to Hulten (1978), who shows that in a competitive economy with constant
returns to scale technologies, aggregate output is a linear combination of sectoral-level productivity
shocks, with coefficients vi given by the Domar weights (Domar, 1961; Hulten, 1978), defined as
  8                                                                                          Pn
      The assumption that firms employ constant returns to scale technologies implies that    j=1   aij = 1 for all i.


                                                                7
the sectoral sales divided by GDP. Proposition 1, however, also establishes that with Cobb-Douglas
preferences and technologies, these weights take a particularly simple form: the Domar weight of
each sector depends only on the preference shares, (β1 , . . . , βn ), and the corresponding column of
the economy’s Leontief inverse, which measures that sector’s importance as an input-supplier to
other sectors in the economy.
        The heterogeneity in Domar weights plays a central role in our analysis. Equation (3) provides
a clear decomposition of this heterogeneity in terms of the structural parameters of the economy.
At one extreme, corresponding to an economy with no input-output linkages (i.e., µ = 0), the
heterogeneity in Domar weights simply reflects differences in preference shares: vi = βi for all
sectors i. We refer to this source of heterogeneity in Domar weights as primitive heterogeneity.9
At the other extreme, corresponding to an economy with identical β i ’s, the heterogeneity in vi ’s
reflects differences in the roles of different sectors as input-suppliers to the rest of the economy (as
in Acemoglu et al. (2012)), a source of heterogeneity which we refer to as network heterogeneity. In
general, the empirical distribution of Domar weights is determined by the combination of primitive
and network heterogeneity.
        Finally, we define a simple economy as an economy with symmetric preferences (i.e., βi = 1/n)
and no input-output linkages (i.e., µ = 0). As such, a simple economy exhibits neither primitive nor
network heterogeneity. Hence, all sectors have identical Domar weights and the economy’s aggregate
output is a simple average of microeconomic shocks: y = n1 ni=1 i .
                                                           P



3        Defining Tail Risks

The central question this paper focuses on is whether idiosyncratic, microeconomic shocks to
disaggregated sectors can lead to the emergence of macroeconomic tail risks. In this section, we first
provide a formal definition of this notion and then explain the motivation for our choice. We then
argue that to formally capture whether macroeconomic tail risks can originate from microeconomic
shocks, one needs to focus on the extent of tail risks in a sequence of economies in which the number
of sectors grows.

3.1       Macroeconomic Tail Risks

As explained in the Introduction, our purpose is to measure the likelihood of (very) large deviations
of macroeconomic variables from their trends. That is, the “tail risks” we are interested in do not
correspond to small or regular variations in output, but rather represent the frequency and likelihood
of events such as the Great Depression or the severe recession following the recent financial crisis.
    9
    We use the term primitive heterogeneity as opposed to “preference heterogeneity” since, in general (with non-Cobb-
Douglas technologies), differences in the other “primitives” (such as average sectoral productivities) play a similar role to
the βi ’s in the determination of the Domar weights.




                                                             8
       We therefore define an economy’s τ -tail ratio as the likelihood that aggregate output deviates
τ standard deviations from its mean relative to the likelihood of an identical deviation under the
normal distribution:
                                                     log P(y < −τ σ)
                                           R(τ ) =                   ,
                                                        log Φ(−τ )
where τ is a positive constant, σ = stdev(y) is the standard deviation of the economy’s aggregate
output (which we refer to as aggregate volatility), and Φ is the CDF of the standard normal
distribution.10 This ratio, which is always a positive number, has a natural interpretation: R(τ ) < 1
if and only if the likelihood of a τ standard deviation decline in aggregate output is greater than
the corresponding likelihood under the normal distribution. Moreover, the further an economy’s
τ -tail ratio is below unity, the larger the likelihood of observing a τ σ deviation relative to the normal
distribution.

Definition 1. The economy exhibits macroeconomic tail risks (relative to the normal distribution) if

                                                 lim R(τ ) = 0.
                                                τ →∞

       In other words, if an economy exhibits macroeconomic tail risks, then for any arbitrary r > 1
there exists a large enough T such that for all τ > T , the likelihood that aggregate output exhibits a
τ σ deviation from the mean is at least r times larger than the corresponding likelihood under the
normal distribution. This definition therefore provides a natural notion for deviations from the
normal distribution at the tails. In addition, the limiting behavior of R(τ ) provides an attractive
measure for the extent of macroeconomic tail risks in a given economy: a more rapid rate of decay of
R(τ ) corresponds to a greater risk that aggregate output exhibits large deviations from its mean.
       Observe that, by construction, our notion of tail risk does not reflect differences in the magnitude
of aggregate volatility, as it compares the likelihood of large deviations relative to a normally
distributed random variable of the same standard deviation. Hence, even though increasing the
standard deviation of sectoral shocks impacts the economy’s aggregate volatility, it does not have
an impact on the extent of macroeconomic tail risks.
       We also remark that even though measures such as kurtosis — frequently invoked to measure
deviations from normality (Fagiolo, Napoletano, and Roventini, 2008; Atalay and Drautzburg, 2015)
— are informative about the likelihood of large deviations, their major shortcoming as measures of
tail risk is that they are also affected by regular fluctuations in aggregate output. In contrast, the
notion of tail risk introduced in Definition 1 depends only on the distribution of aggregate output far
away from the mean. The following example highlights the distinction between our notion of tail risk
and kurtosis.

  10
    The assumption that microeconomic shocks have a symmetric distribution around the origin guarantees that mean
aggregate output is equal to zero; that is, Ey = 0.




                                                        9
Example 1. Consider an economy in which aggregate output y has the following distribution: with
probability p > 0, it has a symmetric exponential distribution with mean zero and variance σ 2 ,
whereas with probability 1 − p, it is uniformly distributed with the same mean and variance. It is
easy to verify that the excess kurtosis of aggregate output, defined as κy = E[y 4 ]/E2 [y 2 ] − 3, satisfies

                                               κy = (1 − p)κuni + pκexp ,                                                 (4)

where κuni < 0 and κexp > 0 are, respectively, the excess kurtoses of the uniform and exponential
distributions.11 Therefore, for small enough values of p, aggregate output exhibits a smaller kurtosis
relative to that of the normal distribution. This is despite the fact that, for all values of p > 0, the
likelihood that y exhibits a large enough deviation is greater than what is predicted by the normal
distribution. In contrast, our notion adequately captures this type of tail risk: for any p > 0, there
exists a τ large enough such that R(τ ) < 1, and the economy exhibits macroeconomic tail risks in the
sense of Definition 1.

      A similar argument to that in Example 1 readily shows that any normalized moment of aggregate
output satisfies a relationship identical to (4), and is similarly inadequate as a measure of tail risk.

3.2     Micro-Originated Tail Risks

Definition 1 formally defines macroeconomic tail risk in a given economy, regardless of its origins.
However, what we are interested in is whether such tail risks can emerge as a consequence of
idiosyncratic shocks to disaggregated sectors.                In what follows, we argue that to meaningfully
represent whether macroeconomic tail risks can originate from microeconomic shocks, one needs
to focus on the extent of tail risks in “large economies”, formally represented as a sequence of
economies where the number of sectors grows, i.e., where n → ∞. This increase in the number
of sectors can be interpreted as focusing on finer and finer levels of disaggregation.12
      The key observation is that in any economy that consists of finitely many sectors, idiosyncratic
microeconomic shocks do not fully wash out, and as a result, would have some macroeconomic
impact. Put differently, even in the presence of independent, sectoral-level shocks (1 , . . . , n ), the
economy as a whole is subject to some residual level of aggregate uncertainty, irrespective of how
large n is. The following result formalizes this idea:

Proposition 2. If microeconomic shocks exhibit tail risks, any economy consisting of finitely many
sectors exhibits macroeconomic tail risks.
  11
     Excess kurtosis is defined as the difference between the kurtosis of a random variable and that of a normally distributed
random variable. Therefore, the excess kurtosis of the normal distribution is normalized to zero, whereas the excess
kurtoses of uniform and symmetric exponential distributions are equal to −5/6 and 3, respectively.
  12
     In Appendix B, we show that, as far as Domar weights are concerned, the only restriction necessary for a sequence to
correspond to different levels of disaggregations is for the Domar weight of an aggregated sector to be equal to the sum of
the Domar weights of the subindustries that belong to that sector.




                                                             10
   This observation underscores that to asses whether microeconomic shocks lead to the emergence
of macroeconomic tail risks in a meaningful fashion, one has to focus on a sequence of economies
with n → ∞ and measure how the extent of tail risks decreases along this sequence. This is indeed
the strategy adopted by Gabaix (2011) and Acemoglu et al. (2012) who study whether microeconomic
shocks can lead to non-trivial levels of aggregate volatility (and is implicit in Lucas’(1977) famous
argument that micro shocks should be irrelevant at the aggregate level).
   Yet, this strategy raises another technical issue. As highlighted by Definition 1, our notion of tail
risks entails studying the deviations of aggregate output from its mean as τ → ∞. This means that
the order in which τ and n are taken to infinity becomes crucial. To highlight the dependence of the
rates at which these two limits are taken, we index τ by the level of disaggregation of the economy, n,
and study the limiting behavior of the sequence of tail ratios,
                                                   log P(yn < −τn σn )
                                      Rn (τn ) =                       ,
                                                       log Φ(−τn )
as n → ∞, where yn is the aggregate output of the economy consisting of n sectors, σn = stdev(yn )
is the corresponding aggregate volatility, and {τn } is an increasing sequence of positive real numbers
such that limn→∞ τn = ∞.
   To determine how the sequence {τn } should depend on the level of disaggregation, n, we rely
on Lucas’(1977) irrelevance argument, which maintains that idiosyncratic, sectoral-level shocks in a
simple economy with no network or primitive heterogeneity should have no aggregate impact as the
size of the economy grows. Our next result uses this argument to pin down the rate of dependence of
τ on n.

Proposition 3. Consider a sequence of simple economies; that is, µ = 0 and β i = 1/n for all i.
                  √
(a) If limn→∞ τn / n = 0, then limn→∞ Rn (τn ) = 1 for all light-tailed microeconomic shocks.
                  √
(b) If limn→∞ τn / n = ∞, then there exist light-tailed micro shocks such that limn→∞ Rn (τn ) = 0.
                                         √
   In other words, as long as limn→∞ τn / n = 0, the rate at which we take the two limits is
consistent with the idea that in simple economies (with no primitive or network heterogeneity across
firms/sectors), microeconomic shocks have no major macroeconomic impact. In contrast, if the rate
                                           √
of growth of τn is so fast that limn→∞ τn / n = ∞, then Lucas’(1977) argument for the irrelevance of
microeconomic shocks in a simple economy would break down. Motivated by these observations, in
                                       √
the remainder of the paper, we set τn = n and obtain the following definition:

Definition 2. A sequence of economies exhibits macroeconomic tail risks if
                                                     √
                                             lim Rn ( n) = 0.
                                            n→∞

    As a final remark, note that as in the case of a single economy, this definition also suggests that the
                  √
rate at which Rn ( n) converges to zero provides a natural measure for the extent of macroeconomic

                                                      11
                                                                               √
tail risks in a given sequence of economies: a more rapid rate of decay of Rn ( n) corresponds to a
greater likelihood of a large deviation of aggregate output from its mean.13


4         Micro Shocks, Macro Tail Risks

In this section, we study whether idiosyncratic microeconomic shocks can translate into sizable
macroeconomic tail risks and present our main results. Taken together, our results illustrate that
the severity of macroeconomic tail risks is determined by the interaction between the extent of
heterogeneity in Domar weights and the distribution of microeconomic shocks.

4.1        Normal Shocks

We first focus on the case in which microeconomic shocks are normally distributed.                             Besides
providing us with an analytically tractable example of a distribution with extremely light tails, the
normal distribution serves as a natural benchmark for the rest of our results.

Proposition 4. Suppose microeconomic shocks are normally distributed.                         Then, no sequence of
economies exhibits macroeconomic tail risks.

         Thus, in the presence of normally distributed microeconomic shocks, GDP fluctuations can be
well-approximated by a normal distribution, even at the tails. More importantly, this result holds
irrespective of the nature of input-output linkages or firm size distribution.

4.2        Exponential-Tailed Shocks

Next, we focus on economies in which microeconomic shocks belong to the subclass of light-tailed
distributions with exponential tails. Formally, we say that microeconomic shocks have exponential
tails if there exists a constant γ > 0 such that
                                                1
                                             lim  log(1 − F (z)) = −γ.
                                            z→∞ z

For example, any microeconomic shock with a CDF given by 1 − F (z) = Q(z)e−γz for z ≥ 0 and some
polynomial function Q(z) belongs to the class of shocks with exponential tails, with the case where
Q(z) is constant corresponding to the (symmetric) exponential distribution.
         Note that in our terminology, even though exponential-tailed shocks belong to the class of light-
tailed distributions, they exhibit microeconomic tail risks, as they have tails that are heavier than that
of the normal distribution. Our main result in this section provides a characterization of when such
microeconomic tail risks translate into macroeconomic tail risks.
    13
    We provide a more formal definition for comparing the extent of tail risks across different sequences of economies in
Section 6.2.




                                                           12
       To present our results, we introduce the measure of sectoral dominance of a given economy as
                                                         vmax
                                                   δ=       √ ,
                                                        kvk/ n
                                                                                                                2 1/2
                                                                                                        Pn        
where n is the number of sectors in the economy, vmax = max{v1 , . . . , vn } and kvk =                    i=1 vi
is the second (uncentered) moment of the economy’s Domar weights. Intuitively, δ measures how
important the most dominant sector in the economy is compared to the variation in the importance
                                                            √
of all sectors as measured by kvk. The normalization factor n reflects the fact that δ captures the
                                                                                          √
extent of this dominance relative to a simple economy, for which vmax = 1/n and kvk = 1/ n. This
of course implies that the sectoral dominance of a simple economy is equal to 1. We also remark
that even though, formally, sectoral dominance depends on the largest Domar weight, a high value
of δ does not necessarily imply that a single sector is overwhelmingly important relative to the rest
of the economy. Rather, the presence of a group of sectors that are large relative to the amount of
dispersion in Domar weights would also translate into a high level of sectoral dominance. The next
theorem contains our main results.14

Theorem 1. Suppose that microeconomic shocks have exponential tails.

(a) A sequence of economies exhibits macroeconomic tail risks if and only if limn→∞ δ = ∞.

(b) Consider two sequences of economies with sectoral dominances δ and δ 0 that exhibit
       macroeconomic tail risks.         The first sequence exhibits greater macroeconomic tail risks
       if limn→∞   δ/δ 0   = ∞.
                                               √
(c) A sequence of economies for which limn→∞ δ/ n = 0 and limn→∞ δ = ∞ exhibits macroeconomic
       tail risks, even though aggregate output is asymptotically normally distributed, in the sense that
       y/σ → N (0, 1) in distribution.

       Statement (a) of the theorem states that in the presence of exponentially-tailed shocks, economies
with limited sectoral dominance, defined as those for which lim inf n→∞ δ < ∞, exhibit no
macroeconomic tail risks. This is due to the fact that in the absence of a dominant sector or a group of
sectors, microeconomic tail risks wash out in the aggregate with no sizable macroeconomic effects.
In contrast, in economies with non-trivial sectoral dominance (where δ → ∞), microeconomic tail
risks do not entirely cancel each other out, even in a very large economy, leading to the emergence
of aggregate tail risks. This result thus complements those of Gabaix (2011) and Acemoglu et al.
(2012) by establishing that heterogeneity in Domar weights is key not only in generating aggregate
volatility, but also in translating microeconomic tail risks into macroeconomic tail risks. However,
as we show in Subsection 4.4, the role played by the heterogeneity in Domar weights in creating
aggregate volatility is fundamentally distinct from its role in generating tail risks.
  14
    Note that when we work with a sequence of economies, all our key objects, including δ, vmax and kvk depend on the
level of disaggregation n. However, in what follows, we simplify the notation by suppressing their dependence on n. We
make the dependence on n clear in the proofs in the Appendix.


                                                         13
   Statement (b) of Theorem 1 establishes that the limiting behavior of the economies’ sectoral
dominance determines not just the presence but also the extent of macroeconomic tail risk.
   Finally, the last part of the theorem shows that significant macroeconomic tail risks can coexist
with a normally distributed aggregate output, as predicted by the central limit theorem. Though
it may appear contradictory at first, this coexistence is quite intuitive: the notion of asymptotic
normality implied by the central limit theorem considers the likelihood of a τ σ deviation from
the mean as the number of sectors grows, while keeping the size of the deviations τ fixed. In
contrast, per our discussion in Section 3, tail risks correspond to the likelihood of large deviations,
formally captured by taking the limit τ → ∞. Statement (c) of Theorem 1 thus underscores that the
determinants of large deviations can be fundamentally distinct from the origins of small or moderate
deviations. This result also explains how, consistent with the patterns documented for the U.S. in
Figure 1, aggregate output can be well-approximated by a normal distribution away from the tails,
even though it may exhibit significantly greater likelihood of tail events.
   The juxtaposition of Theorem 1 and Proposition 4 also highlights the important role that the
nature of microeconomic shocks play in shaping aggregate tail risks. In particular, replacing normally
distributed microeconomic shocks with exponential shocks — which have only slightly heavier tails
— may dramatically increase the likelihood of large economic downturns. This is despite the fact
that the distribution of microeconomic shocks has no impact on the standard deviation of GDP or
the shape of its distribution away from the tails (as shown by part (c) of the Theorem 1).

Example 2. Consider the sequence of economies depicted in Figure 2 in which sector 1 is the sole
supplier to k sectors, whereas the output of the rest of the sectors are not used as intermediate goods
for production by other sectors. Furthermore, suppose that the economies in this sequence exhibit
no primitive heterogeneity, in the sense that households assign an equal weight to all goods produced
in the economy; that is, βi = 1/n for all i. It is easy to verify that Domar weights satisfy
                                                         µk     1
                                        vmax = v1 =           +
                                                      n(1 − µ) n
and
                                   1    p
                       kvk =              (µk + 1 − µ)2 + (k − 1)(1 − µ)2 + n − k.
                               n(1 − µ)
As a result, as we increase the level of disaggregation, δ → ∞ if and only if k → ∞. Thus, by
Theorem 1, exponentially distributed microeconomic shocks in such a sequence of economies lead
to macroeconomic tail risks provided that k → ∞. Note that macroeconomic tail risks can be present
even if sector 1 is an input-supplier to a diminishing fraction of sectors. For example, if k = log n,
the fraction of sectors that rely on sector 1 satisfies limn→∞ k/n = 0, and the central limit theorem
applies.

   The next example shows that macroeconomic tail risks can arise in the absence of network
heterogeneity as long as the economy exhibits sufficient levels of primitive heterogeneity.

                                                    14
                                               1




                                    2      3             k                             n

                    Figure 2. An economy in which sector 1 is the input-supplier to k sectors.


Example 3. Consider a sequence of economies with no input-output linkages (i.e., µ = 0) and
suppose that the weights assigned by the representative household to different goods are given by
β1 = s/n and βi = (1 − β1 )/(n − 1) for all i 6= 1. Thus, the representative household values good 1
more than all other goods as long as s > 1. Then,

                                                     vmax = s/n,

whereas
                                                   1p 2
                                          kvk =      s + (n − s)2 /(n − 1)
                                                   n
for the economy consisting of n sectors. Therefore, as long s → ∞, this sequence of economies
exhibits non-trivial sectoral dominance and sizable levels of macroeconomic tail risks.
       Contrasting this observation with Example 2 shows that either network or primitive heterogeneity
would be sufficient for the emergence of macroeconomic tail risks.

       Though Theorem 1 provides a complete characterization of the conditions under which
macroeconomic tail risks emerge from the aggregation of microeconomic shocks, its conditions are
in terms of the limiting behavior of our measure of sectoral dominance, δ , which in turn depends
on the entire distribution of Domar weights. Our next result focuses on a subclass of economies for
which we can directly compute the extent of sectoral dominance.

Definition 3. An economy has Pareto Domar weights with exponent η > 0 if vi = ci−1/η for all i and
some constant c > 0.

       In an economy with Pareto Domar weights, the fraction of sectors with Domar weights greater
than or equal to any given k is proportional to k −η . Consequently, a smaller η corresponds to more
heterogeneity in Domar weights and hence a (weakly) larger measure of sectoral dominance. It is
easy to verify that if η < 2 the measure of sectoral dominance of such a sequence of economies grows
       √
at rate n, whereas for η > 2, it grows at rate n1/η .15 Nevertheless, in either case, limn→∞ δ = ∞, thus
leading to the following corollary to Theorem 1:
  15
                                                                               p
    In the knife edge case where η = 2, sectoral dominance grows at the rate    n/ log n. See the proof of Corollary 1 for the
exact derivations.




                                                             15
Corollary 1. Consider a sequence of economies with Pareto Domar weights with common exponent η
and suppose that microeconomic shocks have exponential tails.

(a) The sequence exhibits macroeconomic tail risks for all η > 0.

(b) y/σ → N (0, 1) in distribution if η ≥ 2.

       Consequently, if η ≥ 2, exponential-tailed microeconomic shocks lead to macroeconomic tail
risks, even though aggregate output is asymptotically normally distributed.

4.3       Generalization: Super-Exponential Shocks

In the previous subsection, for the sake of tractability, we focused on economies in which
microeconomic shocks have exponential tails. In this subsection, we show that our main results
presented in Theorem 1 generalize to a larger subclass of light-tailed microeconomic shocks that
are not necessarily exponential. More specifically, we focus on economies in which microeconomic
shocks belong to the subclass of super-exponential distributions with shape parameter α ∈ (1, 2), in
the sense that
                                                        1
                                                lim        log[1 − F (z)] = −c,                                              (5)
                                               z→∞    z −α
where F is the common CDF of microeconomic shocks and c > 0 is some constant.16 For example,
any shock with a CDF satisfying 1 − F (z) = Q(z) exp(−cz α ) for some polynomial function Q(z)
belongs to this family. Note that we are ruling our the cases of α = 1 and α = 2 as in such cases
microeconomic shocks would have exponential and normal tails, respectively. This observation also
highlights that shocks belonging to this subclass of super-exponential distributions have tails that
are heavier than that of the normal and lighter than that of the exponential distribution.

Proposition 5. Suppose that microeconomic shocks have super-exponential tails with shape
parameter α ∈ (1, 2).

(a) If lim inf n→∞ δ < ∞, then the sequence of economies exhibits no macroeconomic tail risks.

(b) If limn→∞ δ/n(α−1)/α = ∞, then the sequence of economies exhibits macroeconomic tail risks.

       This result thus indicates that the insights of Theorem 1 generalize to economies that are subject
to super-exponential shocks. As in the case of exponential-tailed shocks, Proposition 5 shows that
the economy’s sectoral dominance δ plays a central role in translating microeconomic shocks into
macroeconomic tail risks.
  16
       We provide a characterization for a broader class of super-exponential distributions in the proof of Proposition 5.




                                                               16
4.4       Macroeconomic Tail Risks and Aggregate Volatility

We end this section with a discussion clarifying the distinction between the role of sectoral
heterogeneity in creating macroeconomic tail risks on the one hand and aggregate volatility on the
other.
       Recall from Theorem 1 that in the presence of exponential-tailed microeconomic shocks, a
sequence of economies with sufficiently high levels of sectoral dominance exhibits macroeconomic
tail risks. In particular, microeconomic shocks translate into sizable aggregate tail risks if and only if
                                                              vmax
                                                lim δ = lim      √ = ∞.                                                 (6)
                                               n→∞       n→∞ kvk/ n

As already mentioned in Subsection 4.2, this condition holds whenever a sector or a group of sectors
play a significant role in determining macroeconomic outcomes relative to the variation in the
Domar weights of all sectors.
       On the other hand, the characterization in equation (2) implies that aggregate volatility is equal
to σ = stdev(y) = kvk.17 Therefore, as argued by Gabaix (2011) and Acemoglu et al. (2012), micro
                                                                                   √
shocks generate aggregate volatility if kvk decays to zero at a rate slower than 1/ n; that is, if
                                                          kvk
                                                      lim  √ = ∞.                                                       (7)
                                                     n→∞ 1/ n

       Contrasting (7) with (6) highlights that even though the intensity of both micro-originated
aggregate volatility and tail risks are determined by the extent of heterogeneity in Domar weights,
this heterogeneity manifests itself differently in each case: whereas the level of microeconomic tail
risks is highly sensitive to the largest Domar weight in the economy, aggregate volatility is determined
by the second moment of the distribution of Domar weights. Furthermore, recall from the discussion
in Subsections 4.1 and 4.2 that the nature of microeconomic shocks plays a critical role in shaping
the extent of macroeconomic tail risks. In contrast, as far as aggregate volatility is concerned, the
shape and distributions of micro-shocks (beyond their variance) are immaterial.
       Taken together, these observations imply that a sequence of economies may exhibit
macroeconomic tail risks even if it does not display non-trivial levels of aggregate volatility, and vice
versa. The following examples illustrate these possibilities.

Example 4. Consider a sequence of economies with Pareto Domar weights with common exponent
η , that is, vi = ci−1/η for all sectors i. It is easy to verify that as long as η > 2, aggregate volatility in this
                                                     √
sequence of economies decays at the rate 1/ n (or more precisely, lim supn→∞ 1/kvk           √ < ∞), regardless
                                                                                              n
of the distribution of microeconomic shocks. Hence, microeconomic shocks in such a sequence
of economies have no meaningful impact on aggregate volatility. This is despite the fact that, as
established in Corollary 1, exponentially-tailed microeconomic shocks lead to macroeconomic tail
risks for all positive values of η .
  17
       This object coincides with what Carvalho and Gabaix (2013) refer to as the economy’s “fundamental volatility”.


                                                              17
Example 5. Next, consider any sequence of economies for which (7) is satisfied.                               As already
argued, in this case, microeconomic shocks lead to non-trivial aggregate volatility, regardless of how
microeconomic shocks are distributed. Yet, from Proposition 4, when microeconomic shocks are
normally distributed, this sequence of economies exhibits no macroeconomic tail risks.

         We end this discussion by showing that the distinct natures of aggregate volatility and
macroeconomic tail risks mean that structural changes in an economy can lead to a reduction in
the former while simultaneously increasing the latter.

Example 6. Suppose that a structural change in the economy results in a reduction in kvk while
vmax remains constant. This will reduce the economy’s aggregate volatility but increase its sectoral
dominance, leading to aggregate fluctuations that are generally more stable but also exhibit greater
tail risks. Clearly, the same can be true even if vmax declines, provided that this is less than the
reduction in kvk. The possibility of simultaneous declines in aggregate volatility (during “regular
times”) and increases in the likelihood of large economic downturns suggests a different perspective
on the well-known episode of Great Moderation (referring to the decline in the standard deviation
of GDP in the U.S. economy since the 1970s), which came to an end in 2007 with the most severe
recession the U.S. economy had experienced since the Great Depression.


5         Tail Comovements

Our results in the previous section show that sufficient levels of sectoral dominance can translate
microeconomic tail risks into macroeconomic tail risks. Very deep recessions such as the Great
Depression, however, involve not only very large drops in aggregate output, but also significant
simultaneous contractions across a range of sectors within the economy.                            In this section, we
investigate this issue and argue that intersectoral input-output linkages play a key role in translating
idiosyncratic microeconomic shocks into such simultaneous sectoral contractions.
         We start our analysis by formally defining tail comovements as the likelihood that all sectors
experience a simultaneous τ standard deviation decline in their respective outputs conditional on
a τ σ drop in aggregate output.18 More specifically, for an economy consisting of n sectors, we define
                                                                                  
                                   C(τ ) = P x̂i < Ex̂i − τ σ̂i for all i y < −τ σ ,                                    (8)

where x̂i = log(xi ) is the log output of sector i, σ̂i = stdev(x̂i ) is output volatility of sector i,
and σ = stdev(y) is the economy’s aggregate volatility. This statistic measures whether a large
contraction in aggregate output would necessarily imply that all sectoral outputs also experience
    18
   As discussed in footnote 4, two standard deviation contractions in the U.S. economy are associated with about
10% of four-digit sectors experiencing similarly large declines. Though it is possible to define tail comovements as the
conditional likelihood that 10% (or any other fraction) of sectors experience large declines, it is conceptually simpler and
mathematically more convenient to focus on the likelihood that all sectors experience such a decline.



                                                            18
a large decline with high probability. Therefore, in an economy with high levels of tail comovements,
micro-originated recessions are very similar to recessions that are consequences of economy-wide
aggregate shocks.
      In the remainder of this section, we show that the extent of tail comovements, as measured by
(8), is determined by the nature of input-output linkages across different sectors. We establish that
keeping the distribution of microeconomic shocks and the heterogeneity in Domar weights constant,
increasing the extent of sectoral interconnectivity leads to higher levels of tail comovements.

5.1     Sectoral Interconnectivity

Before presenting our main results, we provide a formal notion to compare the extent of sectoral
interconnectivity across two economies.
      Recall from equation (2) that Domar weights serve as a sufficient statistic for the role of
microeconomic shocks in shaping the behavior of aggregate output. On the other hand, equation
(3) establishes that Domar weights are in turn determined by the preference parameters, (β1 , . . . , βn ),
and the economy’s input-output linkages as summarized by its Leontief inverse matrix L. As a result,
two economies may exhibit different levels of primitive and network heterogeneity, even though
their Domar weights are identical. To provide a comparison across such economies, we define the
following concept:

Definition 4. Consider two economies with identical Domar weights; i.e., vi = vi0 for all i. The latter
economy exhibits more sectoral interconnectivity relative to the former if there exists a stochastic
matrix B such that

                                                           L0 = BL,                                                    (9)

where L and L0 are the corresponding Leontief inverse matrices of the two economies, respectively.19

      Intuitively, pre-multiplication of the Leontief inverse matrix L by the stochastic matrix B ensures
that the entries of the resulting Leontief matrix L0 are more evenly distributed while at the same time
its diagonal elements are smaller than the corresponding elements of L. Therefore, the resulting
economy not only exhibits more intersectoral linkages, but also the intensity of such linkages are
more equally distributed across pairs of sectors. The following examples clarify these properties.

Example 7. Consider two economies with identical Domar weights and input-output matrices
A = [aij ] and A0 = [a0ij ]. Furthermore, suppose that input-output linkages in the two economies
are related via                                                                      
                                                1                  ρ(1 − µ) ρ
                                    a0ij =                 aij +           − I{i=j}
                                             (1 − ρ)                  nµ    µ
 19
    A square matrix is stochastic if it is element-wise nonnegative and each of whose rows add up to 1. The assumption that
matrix B is stochastic guarantees that the share of material inputs, µ, in the two economies are equal.


                                                               19
for some constant 0 ≤ ρ ≤ µ mini aii , with I{·} denoting the indicator function (where the restriction
on ρ ensures that a0ij ≥ 0 for all i and j ). This transformation reduces the value of aii for all sectors
i (i.e., a0ii < aii ) and redistributes it evenly across pairs of sectors j 6= i. As a result, input-output
linkages in the latter economy are more uniformly distributed.
      Indeed, it is easy to show that this intuitive argument is consistent with our formal notion of
sectoral interconnectivity in Definition 4: the Leontief inverse matrices of the two economies are
related to one another via equation (9) for the stochastic matrix B = [bij ] whose elements are given
by bij = ρ/n + (1 − ρ)I{i=j} , thus guaranteeing that the latter economy exhibits greater sectoral
interconnectivity.

Example 8. Consider an economy with no input-output linkages, that is, aij = 0 for all pairs of sectors
i 6= j , so that the economy’s Leontief inverse matrix is given by L = I/(1 − µ), where µ is the share
of material goods in the firms’ production technology and I is the identity matrix. Domar weights in
this economy are proportional to the corresponding preference parameters, i.e., vi = βi /(1 − µ) for
all i.
      This economy exhibits less sectoral interconnectivity, in the sense of Definition 4, relative to all
other economies with identical Domar weights. To see this, consider an economy with Leontief
inverse matrix L0 with a pair of sectors i 6= j such that a0ij > 0 and vk0 = vk for all k . Since the Leontief
inverse matrices of the two economies satisfy equation (9) for B = (1 − µ)L0 , it is then immediate that
the latter economy exhibits higher levels of sectoral interconnectivity.

      We end this discussion with a remark on the relationship between primitive and network
heterogeneity. Recall that Definition 4 provides a comparison for the extent of interconnectivity
across two economies with identical Domar weights. Consequently, in order for all Domar weights
to remain unchanged, the transformation in (9) not only impacts the nature of input-output
linkages (as summarized by the Leontief inverse matrices), but would also necessarily alter the
economy’s primitive heterogeneity as well. More specifically, if an economy exhibits more sectoral
interconnectivity than another in the sense of (9), the preference shares of the two economies has to
be related via βi = nj=1 bji βj0 , so that vi = vi0 for all i. This in turn suggests that preference shares in
                   P

the economy with less sectoral interconnectivity are more evenly distributed across the n goods.

5.2      Input-Output Linkages and Tail Comovements

We now present the main result of this section:

Proposition 6. If an economy exhibits more sectoral interconnectivity relative to another economy
with identical Domar weights, then it also exhibits more tail comovements.

      This result thus highlights the importance of input-output linkages in creating tail comovements
across different sectors: given two economies with identical Domar weights, the one with a higher


                                                     20
level of sectoral interconnectivity exhibits more tail comovements, in spite of the fact that the two
economies are indistinguishable at the aggregate level.
    Proposition 6 also clarifies a key distinction between the nature of economic fluctuations in (i)
economies with no input-output linkages but a significant level of primitive heterogeneity (such
as the baseline model in Gabaix (2011)) on the one hand, and (ii) economies with a high level of
network heterogeneity (such as the ones studied by Acemoglu et al. (2012)) on the other. Whereas
large economic downturns of the first type mostly arise as a consequence of negative shocks to
sectors with high βi , fluctuations in the latter category are due to the propagation of shocks over
the economy’s input-output linkages. Even though the two mechanisms may not be distinguishable
in the aggregate, they lead to significantly different levels of tail comovements.
    To further clarify this point, consider the economy with no input-output linkages studied in
Example 8, which is reminiscent of the islands economies of Gabaix (2011). As our arguments in
Section 4 highlight, so long as preference shares are heterogenous enough, the economy exhibits
non-trivial levels of macroeconomic tail risks. Nevertheless, Example 8 and Proposition 6 together
imply that such an economy exhibits the least amount of tail comovements relative to all other
economies with the same Domar weights. In other words, the latter economy experiences large
economic downturns at the same frequency of the former, but these downturns are associated with
severe contractions across a larger collection of sectors.
    We end this section by remarking that even though we presented Proposition 6 for a pair of
economies with a given number of sectors n, an identical result holds for two sequences of economies
as n grows:

Corollary 2. Consider two sequences of economies with identical Domar weights. If all economies in
the first sequence exhibit more sectoral interconnectivity relative to the corresponding economy in the
second sequence, then lim inf n→∞ Cn (τn )/Cn0 (τn ) ≥ 1 for all sequences {τn }.


6    Heavy-Tailed Shocks: An Equivalence Result

In this section, we strengthen our previous results by showing that the presence of primitive or
network heterogeneity can translate light-tailed (e.g., exponential-tailed) idiosyncratic shocks into
aggregate effects that can only arise, in the absence of such heterogeneity, with heavy-tailed shocks.
In other words, we show that sufficient levels of heterogeneity in the economy’s Domar weights
have the same effect on the size of macroeconomic tail risks as subjecting firms to shocks with
significantly heavier tails. This equivalence result is interesting in part because it clarifies how
sectoral heterogeneity magnifies the effects of relatively unlikely shocks by concentrating the risk
at the tails.




                                                     21
6.1     Pareto-Tailed Shocks

To present the main result of this section, we focus on an important subclass of heavy-tailed
microeconomic shocks, namely shocks with Pareto tails. Formally, we say microeconomic shocks
have Pareto tails if
                                            1
                                       lim      log[1 − F (z)] = −λ,
                                      z→∞ log z

where λ > 2 is the corresponding Pareto index. The smaller the index parameter λ, the heavier the
tail of the distribution. The condition that λ > 2 is meant to guarantee that the standard deviation of
microeconomic shocks is well-defined and finite.

Proposition 7. Suppose that microeconomic shocks are Pareto-tailed.               Then, any sequence of
economies exhibits macroeconomic tail risks.

      The intuition for this result is instructive: when microeconomic shocks have Pareto tails, the
likelihood that at leasts one sector is hit with a large shock is high. As a result, regardless of the extent
of heterogeneity in Domar weights, aggregate output experiences large declines with a relatively high
probability, resulting in macroeconomic tail risks. This contrasts with the the case of exponentially-
tailed shocks, where macroeconomic tail risks can emerge only if the underlying economy exhibits
sizable sectoral dominance.

6.2     Tail Risks Equivalence

We now show that the presence of sufficient level of heterogeneity in Domar weights has the same
effect on the size of macroeconomic tail risks as subjecting firms to shocks with Pareto tails.

Definition 5. Consider two sequences of economies with tail risk ratios Rn (τ ) and Rn0 (τ ). The former
exhibits more macroeconomic tail risks than the latter, if there exists a sequence τn → ∞ such that
limn→∞ Rn (τn ) = 0 and lim supn→∞ Rn0 (τn ) > 0.

      In other words, a sequence of economies exhibits more macroeconomic tail risks than another
if the likelihood of a τ σ deviation in the former can be arbitrarily higher for large enough values of
τ . Note that this definition does not require the two sequences to be subject to shocks drawn from
the same distribution, and hence, can be used to compare the extent of tail risks across economies
subject to different types of shocks. However, in the special case where shocks to the two sequences
are drawn from a common distribution, it is sufficient to use the rate at which the corresponding τ -
tail ratio decays to zero as the measure of macroeconomic tail risks. In this case, Definition 5 provides
a natural generalization for the extent of tail risks in a single economy discussed in Subsection 3.1.

Proposition 8. For a sequence of simple economies subject to Pareto-tailed microeconomic shocks,
there exists a sequence of economies subject to exponential-tailed shocks that exhibits at least as much
macroeconomic tail risk.

                                                     22
         This result underscores that macroeconomic tail risks can emerge not necessarily due to
(aggregate or idiosyncratic) shocks that are drawn from heavy-tailed distributions, but rather as
a consequence of the interplay between relatively light-tailed distributions and heterogeneity in
Domar weights. Put differently, sufficient levels of sectoral dominance can fundamentally reshape
the distribution of aggregate output by concentrating risk at the tails and increasing the likelihood of
large economic downturns from infinitesimal to substantial.20 This observational equivalence result
thus provides a novel solution to what Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996) refer to as the “small
shocks, large cycles puzzle” by showing that substantial levels of primitive or network heterogeneity
can mimic large aggregate shocks.
         Proposition 8 also highlights the distinction between our main results and those of Fama (1963)
and Ibragimov and Walden (2007) who observe that the presence Pareto-tailed shocks with extremely
heavy tails and infinite variances (that is, when the Pareto index satisfies λ < 2) leads to departures
from normality. In contrast to these papers, our results show that sufficient heterogeneity in Domar
weights translates light-tailed microeconomic shocks into aggregate effects that are observationally
equivalent to those that arise due to heavy-tailed shocks.
         We end this discussion with the following corollary to Proposition 8:

Corollary 3. For a sequence of simple economies subject to Pareto-tailed microeconomic shocks,
there exists a sequence of economies with Pareto Domar weights and subject to exponential-tailed
microeconomic shocks that exhibits identical levels of macroeconomic tail risks.

         In other words, Pareto distributed Domar weights have the same impact on the level of
macroeconomic tail risks as that of Pareto-tailed shocks in a simple economy.


7         A Simple Quantitative Illustration

In this section, we provide a simple quantitative exercise to highlight whether and how
microeconomic shocks can lead to macroeconomic tail risks and show that the extent of
heterogeneity in Domar weights in the U.S. data is capable of generating departures from the normal
distribution similar to the patterns documented in Figure 1. We then provide an illustration of the
extent of tail comovements implied by the input-output linkages in the U.S. data.
         Throughout this section, we use the 2007 commodity-by-commodity direct requirements table
and the corresponding sectoral sales data compiled by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Using
the sales data, we compute each sector’s Domar weight as the ratio of its sales over GDP. The direct
requirements table gives us the equivalent of our input-output matrix A, with the typical (i, j) entry
corresponding — under the Cobb-Douglas technology assumption — to the value of spending on
    20
    In particular, as we show in the proof of Propositionp8, a sequence of economies that are subject to exponential-tailed
shocks and whose sectoral dominance satisfy limn→∞ δ (log n)/n = ∞ exhibits at least as much macroeconomic tail risks
as a sequence of simple economies that are subject to Pareto-tailed shocks.


                                                            23
                                      .06

                                      .04

                                      .02

                                        0

                                    −.02

                                    −.04
                                              −4      −2        0     2      4

Figure 3. Q-Q plot for aggregate output versus the normal distribution in the presence of exponential shocks, with Domar
weights matched to the corresponding values in the U.S. data.


commodity j per dollar of production of commodity i.21 Though for the sake of simplicity we have
thus far assumed that the row sums of A are equal to one (i.e., nj=1 aij = 1), we drop this restriction
                                                               P

in this section and instead work with the matrix implied by the direct requirements table.22
       We first study the distribution of aggregate output in our model economy when microeconomic
(sectoral) shocks are drawn from a symmetric exponential distribution. We chose the mean and
variance of these shocks such that the first two moments of the economy’s aggregate output match
the first two moments of the U.S. postwar GDP growth rate. The resulting Q-Q plot is depicted
in Figure 3.23     Confirming our theoretical results, the distribution of aggregate output exhibits
systematic departures from the normal line at the tails, starting from around two standard deviations
away from the mean. The Anderson-Darling and Jarque-Bera tests of normality yield test statistics of
61.22 and 1901.10, respectively, rejecting normality at the 1% level in both cases.
       We next investigate the contribution of network heterogeneity in the U.S. data to the extent of
macroeconomic tail risks. We focus on the distribution of aggregate output in a counterfactual
economy with no primitive heterogeneity, where Domar weights are given by the column sums of
the economy’s Leontief inverse (divided by 1/n). The resulting Q-Q plot is depicted in panel (a) of
Figure 4. As the figure suggests, the distribution of aggregate output exhibits non-trivial departures
from normality at both ends, highlighting the role of network heterogeneity in the emergence of
macroeconomic tail risks. The corresponding Anderson-Darling and Jarque-Bera test statistics are,
respectively, 35.82 and 1021.35, once again rejecting normality at the 1% level. Finally, Panel (b) of
Figure 4 depicts the Q-Q plot of aggregate output when both sources of heterogeneity are shut down,
with all Domar weights set equal to 1/n. Consistent with our theoretical results, aggregate output
in this case does not exhibit any meaningful departures from normality (with the Anderson-Darling
  21
     To better approximate the private sector of the economy, in this analysis we exclude 13 sectors corresponding to
housing, residential structures, and federal and local government activities. See Acemoglu et al. (2012) for some basic
descriptive statistics about the U.S. economy’s input-output matrices.
  22
     This choice is without any consequence for any of the main points we emphasize in this section, which remain
essentially unchanged if we transform A by normalizing its row sums to 1 and then impose µ = 0.4.
  23
     We take 500,000 draws from the implied distributions to construct these figures and test statistics.


                                                           24
           .06                                                         .06

           .04                                                         .04

           .02                                                         .02

            0                                                            0

         −.02                                                        −.02

         −.04                                                        −.04
                   −4      −2       0       2       4                           −4      −2       0       2       4
                   (a) Network heterogeneity                                       (b) No heterogeneity

Figure 4. The quantile-quantile plots for aggregate output versus the normal distribution in the presence of exponential
shocks. Panel (a) depicts the Q-Q plot for the counterfactual economy with no primitive heterogeneity, with Domar weights
set equal to the corresponding column sums of the Leontief inverse matrix divided by n. Panel (b) depicts the same plot for
the counterfactual economy with all Domar weights set equal to 1/n.


and Jarque-Bera tests failing to reject normality at the 15% level) despite the fact that microeconomic
shocks have an exponential distribution. Taken together, this exercise confirms that the extent of
network heterogeneity in the U.S. data is consistent with the proposition that modest levels of tail
risk at the sectoral level can lead to macroeconomic tail risks.24
       The characterization in Corollary 1 provides an alternative way to asses the role of microeconomic
interactions in the emergence of large economic downturns. Recall that, according to this result,
Pareto distributed Domar weights can translate exponential-tailed microeconomic shocks into
macroeconomic tail risks. Motivated by this observation, Figure 5 plots the empirical counter-
cumulative distribution (defined as one minus the empirical cumulative distribution function) of the
Domar weights in U.S. data on the log-log scale. It also includes the non-parametric estimates for the
empirical counter-cumulative distribution using the Nadaraya-Watson kernel regression (Nadaraya,
1964; Watson, 1964) with a bandwidth selected using least squares cross-validation. The tail of
the distribution of Domar weights appears to be approximately linear, corresponding to a Pareto
distribution. Taking the tail to correspond to 20% of the sample, we estimate the Pareto index, η ,
using an ordinary least squares regression with the Gabaix and Ibragimov (2011) correction. We
obtain an estimate of ηbOLS = 1.45 with a standard error of 0.24. This is very close to the average
slope implied by the non-parametric Nadaraya-Watson regression for the same part of the sample,
which is equal to ηbNW = 1.36. This exercise thus suggests that U.S. Domar weights have a distribution
  24
     Using the manufacturing industry data from the NBER productivity database, we also verified that the exponential
distribution is a reasonable approximation to the tails of the shocks’ distribution at the four-digit level (459 industries). For
this exercise, we used the five-factor TFP, which best approximates industry-level shocks, and followed Fagiolo et al. (2008)
to estimate the shape parameter in equation (5) above, using maximum likelihood. The mean and the median of this
parameter across the 459 manufacturing industries are, respectively, 1.42 and 1.25 (with the 25 and 75 percentiles equal to
0.97 and 1.60, respectively). These results suggest that the exponential distribution provides a better approximation to the
tail of the distribution than normal, which would have implied an estimate of α equal to 2.



                                                              25
                                                     100




                                   Empirical CCDF
                                                    10−1



                                                    10−2



                                                           10−4   10−3       10−2   10−1
                                                                   Domar weights


                    Figure 5. The empirical counter-cumulative distribution of sectoral Domar weights


that is consistent with exponentially-tailed sectoral shocks generating macroeconomic tail risks.25
         As a final exercise, we assessed the implications of input-output linkages observed in the U.S.
data for the extent of tail comovements. Assuming exponentially distributed sectoral shocks, we
computed the probability that 10% or more of sectors experience a two standard deviation decline
when aggregate output itself declines by two standard deviations or more (recall from footnote 4
that 10% is approximately the fraction of manufacturing sectors experiencing such a decline in
the two sharpest U.S. recessions). Given the Domar weights and input-output matrix of the U.S.
economy, we find that this number to be equal to 0.17%. We then computed the same number for
the counterfactual economy in which Domar weights are identical to that of the U.S. economy but are
entirely driven by primitive heterogeneity. Given that, by construction, this counterfactual economy
exhibits lower sectoral interconnectivity than the U.S. economy, our theoretical results imply that it
should also display less tail comovements. Indeed, in this case the conditional probability that 10%
or more of sectors experience a two standard deviation decline is effectively equal to zero, up to seven
digits after the decimal point.


8         Conclusions

A noteworthy feature of modern economic fluctuations is the presence of significant “macroeco-
nomic tail risks,” defined as a much higher likelihood of large economic downturns relative to what
is predicted by the normal distribution. In this paper, we argued that such tail risks may result
from the interplay of microeconomic shocks and sectoral heterogeneity, reflecting either network
heterogeneity (the differential roles of sectors as input-suppliers) or primitive heterogeneity (their
differences in terms of other primitives such as preferences or technology). Our results show that
macroeconomic tail risks emerge under two intuitive conditions. First, microeconomic shocks
    25
    Based on the results of Acemoglu et al. (2012), our estimates for the Pareto index of the distribution of Domar weights
also imply the presence of significant levels of micro-originated aggregate volatility (measured as standard deviation of
aggregate output).


                                                                   26
themselves need to exhibit some tail risks — as combinations of normal shocks will lead to normally
distributed aggregates. Second, there needs to be sufficient sectoral heterogeneity of a certain type,
captured in terms of high levels of “sectoral dominance,” which ensures that the largest disaggregated
sector or sectors are sufficiently important relative to the variation in the importance of all sectors.
We further show that macroeconomic tail risks can emerge even if the central limit theorem applies,
so that aggregate output (log GDP) is approximately normally distributed away from the tails.
   Another major aspect of large economic downturns is their simultaneous manifestation in
many of the economy’s disaggregated sectors, what we refer to as tail comovements. We show
that keeping the empirical distribution of Domar weights constant, an increase in the extent of
sectoral interconnectivity leads to higher levels of tail comovements. This means that when sectoral
heterogeneity, at least in part, reflects network heterogeneity, large recessions involve not only
significant GDP contractions, but also large simultaneous declines across a wide range of sectors
within the economy.
   Finally, our quantitative results show that, despite its stylized nature, with the values of sectoral
and network heterogeneity as observed in U.S. data, our model generates significant macroeconomic
tail risk and tail comovements.
   We see our paper as a first step in a systematic investigation of macroeconomic tail risks. Though
many commentators view large economic downturns as more consequential than a series of small
or moderate recessions, there is relatively little work in understanding whether and how these large
economic downturns emerge and whether they are different from regular fluctuations. Our results
suggest both ways in which they are similar (in that they are generated by the same interplay of
microeconomic shocks and sectoral heterogeneity) and aspects in which they are rather different
(the significant departure from the normal distribution at the tail coupled with the approximately
normal behavior of aggregate output away from the tails). This perspective naturally lends itself
to an investigation of whether certain structural changes can simultaneously stabilize the economy
during regular times, while also increasing tail risks.
   Several important issues remain open to future research. First, the tractability of our model
permits the introduction of various market imperfections into this general framework. This would
not only enable an investigation of whether, in the presence of realistic market structures, network
and primitive heterogeneities play richer (and more distinct) roles, but also whether large economic
downturns necessitate different microeconomic and macroeconomic responses.                Second, our
analysis was simplified by the log-linear nature of our model economy. An interesting question
is whether reasonable nonlinear interactions could exacerbate macroeconomic tail risks.            One
possibility is to generalize the Cobb-Douglas production technologies, in which case even though
versions of equations (2) and (3) would continue to apply, the Domar weights would change
endogenously in response to microeconomic shocks. Consequently, depending on elasticities, the
shares of sectors hit by negative shocks, and thus the likelihood of large economic downturns would


                                                   27
increase. Third, while we have focused on input-output linkages, other aspects of interactions
between microeconomic units may also have major implications for aggregate tail risks. Two natural
candidates are the linkages between financial institutions, and between the financial sector and
the rest of the economy. The nonlinear contagion mechanisms proposed in recent papers such
as Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015b) and Elliott, Golub, and Jackson (2014), as well
as other nonlinearities inherent in financial models, such as those emphasized in Brunnermeier,
Eisenbach, and Sannikov (2013) may lead to even more macroeconomic tail risks. Finally, even
though we have motivated our work with a stylized look at U.S. economic fluctuations, a more
systematic empirical investigation to measure and describe the nature of macroeconomic tail risks
and to link them to quantitative models would be a natural next step. Particularly important
would be to distinguish the economic mechanisms proposed here from alternatives emphasizing
the effects of large aggregate shocks (as in the “rare disasters” literature), the implications of time-
varying shock variances or model parameters (Engle, 1982; Cogley and Sargent, 2005), the role of
financial collapses (Kindleberger, 1978; Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009), and large recessions resulting
from nonlinear financial interactions.


Appendix

A   Proofs

We first state and prove two simple lemmas which will be invoked repeatedly.

Lemma A.1. Let Φ denote the CDF of the standard normal distribution. Then,
                                                1
                                          lim      log Φ(−z) = −1/2.
                                      z→∞       z2
Proof. It is well-known that limz→∞ zΦ(−z)/φ(z) = 1, where φ denotes the standard normal density
function (e.g., Grimmett and Stirzaker (2001, p. 98)). Consequently,

                                          log z + log Φ(−z)
                                          lim               = 1,
                                      z→∞      log φ(z)

which in turn implies that
                                        log z + log Φ(−z)
                                      lim    √            = −1.
                                     z→∞ log 2π + z 2 /2


The statement of the lemma follows immediately.
                              Pn
Lemma A.2. In any economy,      j=1 `ij   = 1/(1−µ) for all i, where L = [`ij ] is the corresponding Leontief
inverse matrix.




                                                      28
Proof. The Leontief inverse matrix, L = (I − µA)−1 , can be written as a power series
                                                     ∞
                                                     X
                                                L=     (µA)k .
                                                     k=0

Multiplying both sides of the above equality by the vector of all ones, 1, implies that L1 =
 P∞ k 
  k=0 µ   1, where we are using the fact that Ak 1 = 1 for all k ≥ 0. Therefore, L1 = (1 − µ)−1 1,
which means that the row sums of L are equal to 1/(1 − µ).

Proof of Proposition 1

The first-order conditions of firms in sector i imply that

                                             xij = µaij pi xi /pj                                      (10)
                                               li = (1 − µ)pi xi /w,                                   (11)

where w denotes the market wage. Plugging the above into firm i’s production function and taking
logarithms yields
                                                                      n
                                                                      X
                               log pi + i = (1 − µ) log w + µ              aij log pj .
                                                                      j=1

Solving for the equilibrium prices in the above system of equations implies that
                                                            n
                                                            X             n
                                                                          X
                                 log pi = (1 − µ) log w           `ij −         `ij j ,
                                                            j=1           j=1

where `ij is the (i, j) element of the economy’s Leontief inverse matrix L = (I − µA)−1 . Consequently,
by Lemma A.2,
                                                               n
                                                               X
                                           log pi = log w −          `ij j .                          (12)
                                                               j=1

Multiplying both sides of the above equation by β i and summing over all sectors i lead to
                                  n
                                  X                            n X
                                                               X n
                                         βi log pi = log w −               βi `ij j .
                                   i=1                         i=1 j=1

Moreover, because there is no capital, all firms make zero profits, and total labor supply is normalized
to 1, GDP is equal to the market wage, w. Now setting the ideal price index as the numeraire (i.e.,
Pn                                       Pn                      Pn                             Pn
  i=1 β i log pi = 0), we obtain log w =  j=1 vj j , where vj =  i=1 β i `ij . Thus log(GDP) =  i=1 vi i .
   To see that vi also coincides with the Domar weight corresponding to sector i, note that the market
clearing condition for good i is given by
                                                           n
                                                           X
                                     xi = βi w/pi + µ            aji pj xj /pi ,
                                                           j=1



                                                       29
where we are using the fact that xji = µaji pj xj /pi and that ci =β i w/pi . Multiplying both sides of the
above equality by pi and solving for the sales of firms in sector i implies
                                                           n
                                                           X
                                              p i xi = w         βj `ji ,
                                                           j=1

thus establishing that vi = pi xi /w = pi xi /GDP.

Proof of Proposition 2

Given that microeconomic shocks are independent with a common distribution that is symmetric
around the origin, it is immediate that
                                                  1
                                     P(y < −τ σ) ≥ P(vi i < −τ σ),
                                                  2
for some arbitrarily chosen sector i. Since vi > 0 for all i (guaranteed by the fact that βi > 0 for all i),
we have
                                              log(1/2)    log F (−τ σ/vi )
                                   R(τ ) ≤              +                  .
                                             log Φ(−τ )     log Φ(−τ )
Given that the above inequality has to hold for all i,

                                            log(1/2)    log F (−τ σ/vmax )
                                 R(τ ) ≤              +                    .                           (13)
                                           log Φ(−τ )       log Φ(−τ )

Taking limits from both sides of the above inequality, we have

                                                  2 log 2           log F (−τ σ/vmax )
                        lim sup R(τ ) ≤ lim sup        2
                                                          + lim sup                    ,
                         τ →∞              τ →∞      τ        τ →∞      log Φ(−τ )

where we are using Lemma A.1. The first term on the right-hand side of this inequality is equal to
zero. On the other hand, the assumption that microeconomic shocks exhibit tail risks implies that
the second term is also equal to zero, thus guaranteeing that lim supτ →∞ R(τ ) = 0.

Proof of Proposition 3

We first state a key result, known as Cramér’s theorem, the proof of which can be found in Petrov
(1975, p. 218).

Theorem A.1 (Cramér’s Theorem). Let 1 , . . . , n be a sequence of i.i.d. light-tailed random variables
                                                             √
with zero mean and unit variance. Let Gn (z) = P(Sn < z n), where Sn = 1 + · · · + n . Then, for any
                              √
sequence zn ≥ 0 such that zn / n → 0,

                                           zn3
                                                                          
                       Gn (−zn )                        zn               zn + 1
                                 = exp − √ Λ − √               1+O        √         ,
                       Φ(−zn )                n          n                   n

as n → ∞, where Λ(z) is a power series with coefficients depending on the cumulants of the random
variable i which converges for sufficiently small values of |z|.

                                                       30
Proof of part (a)   Turning to the proof of Proposition 3, recall that in a simple economy, all Domar
weights are equal to vi = 1/n. Therefore, by Proposition 1, aggregate output is a simple unweighted
                                                                                                   √
average of sectoral shocks; that is, yn = (1/n) ni=1 i . Furthermore, it is immediate that σn = 1/ n.
                                               P
                                                               √
   In view of the above observations, as long as limn→∞ τn / n = 0, Theorem A.1 implies that
                                                   τn3
                                                                                 
                                                              τn                τn + 1
                 P(yn < −τn σn ) = Φ(−τn ) exp − √ Λ − √             1+O         √        ,
                                                     n         n                   n
and consequently,
                                                        τn3       √ 
                                                                                 
                                                                           τn + 1
                    log P(yn < −τn σn ) = log Φ(−τn ) − √ Λ −τn / n + O      √
                                                          n                    n
                                                        τ 3       √
                                        = log Φ(−τn ) − √n Λ −τn / n + o(1).
                                                                    
                                                          n
Dividing both sides of above equality by log Φ(−τn ) and using Lemma A.1 imply that
                                               2τn       √ 
                                Rn (τn ) = 1 + √ Λ τn / n + o(1).
                                                 n
Now the fact that the power series Λ(z) is convergent for small enough values of z guarantees that
                                                                                     √
the second term on the right-hand side above converges to zero as long as limn→∞ τn / n = 0. This
implies that limn→∞ Rn (τn ) = 1.


Proof of part (b)    Recall from the proof of Proposition 2 that inequality (13) is satisfied for any
economy and all τ . Therefore, for any sequence {τn } such that limn→∞ τn = ∞,
                                                                √                       √
                                    2 log 2           log F (−τn n)           log F (−τn n)
         lim sup Rn (τn ) ≤ lim sup         + lim sup               = lim sup               ,
           n→∞                n→∞      τn2      n→∞     log Φ(−τn )     n→∞     log Φ(−τn )
                                                                              √
where we are now using the fact that vmax = 1/n and that σn = 1/ n. Now, suppose that
microeconomic shocks have exponential tails with exponent γ > 0, which clearly belongs to the
family of light-tailed distributions. Given that for such a shock distribution limz→∞ (1/z) log F (−z) =
−γ , we have
                                                                  √
                                                               2γ n
                                    lim sup Rn (τn ) ≤ lim sup      ,
                                      n→∞                n→∞     τn
where we are once again invoking Lemma A.1. Consequently, for any sequence {τn } that satisfies
           √
limn→∞ τn / n = ∞, it is immediate that lim supn→∞ Rn (τn ) = 0.

Proof of Proposition 4
                                                                                    Pn
Recall from Proposition 1, that an economy’s aggregate output is equal to y =         i=1 vi i ,   where vi
is the Domar weight of sector i. Therefore, when microeconomic shocks are normally distributed,
it is immediate that y is also normally distributed, and thus R(τ ) = 1, regardless of the value of
τ and the number of sectors n. Hence, for any given sequence of economies, it must be the case
                √
that limn→∞ Rn ( n) = 1. This implies that the sequence of economies in question does not exhibit
macroeconomic tail risks.

                                                   31
Proof of Theorem 1

Proof of part (a)          We start with proving sufficiency. Recall from inequality (13) in the proof of
Proposition 2 that for any given economy and all values of τ ,
                                                        log(1/2)    log F (−τ σ/vmax )
                                          R(τ ) ≤                 +                    .
                                                       log Φ(−τ )       log Φ(−τ )
The fact that σ = kvk implies that for any given economy consisting of n sectors, we have
                                                               √
                                          log(1/2)    log F (−τ n/δ)
                                R(τ ) ≤             +                ,                    (14)
                                         log Φ(−τ )      log Φ(−τ )
                √
where δ = vmax n/kvk is the economy’s measure of sectoral dominance.
                                                                                     √
   Now, consider a sequence of economies as n → ∞ and suppose that τn = n. For such a
sequence, inequality (14) implies that
                                                              √            2γ
                                                  lim sup Rn ( n) ≤ lim sup ,
                                                    n→∞               n→∞ δn

where δn is the measure of sectoral dominance of the n-sector economy in the sequence. In
deriving this inequality we are using Lemma A.1 and the assumption that microeconomic shocks
have exponential tails with exponent γ > 0. Thus, for any sequence of economies for which
limn→∞ δn = ∞, the right-hand side of the above inequality is equal to zero. Consequently,
           √
limn→∞ Rn ( n) = 0, guaranteeing that the sequence of economies exhibits macroeconomic tail
risks.


       To prove the reverse implication, consider an arbitrary economy consisting of n sectors.26 The
assumption that microeconomic shocks have exponential tails with exponent γ > 0 guarantees that
there exists a constant γ̂ ≤ γ such that

                                                            1 − F (z) < e−γ̂z                           (15)

for all z > 0. On the other hand, given that microeconomic shocks have a symmetric distribution
around the origin, we have
                                                  Z    ∞                Z   ∞
                                   1
                                     E |i |k =             k
                                                           z dF (z) =           kz k−1 (1 − F (z)) dz
                                   2               0                    0

for k ≥ 2, where we have used integration by parts and the fact that

                                        0 ≤ lim z k (1 − F (z)) ≤ lim z k e−γ̂z = 0.
                                             z→∞                            z→∞

Thus, by (15), there exists a positive constant r = 1/γ̂ such that
                                               Z ∞
                                    1       k
                                      E|i | ≤     kz k−1 e−z/r dz = rk k!                              (16)
                                    2           0
  26
       This part of the argument follows steps similar to those of Teicher (1984).


                                                                   32
for all k ≥ 2. Consequently, for any positive constant d,
                                                      ∞
                                                   X  (dvi )k k
                                          E edvi i =          Ei
                                                          k!
                                                              k=0
                                                                    ∞
                                                                    X (dvi )k
                                                         ≤1+                           E |i |k
                                                                              k!
                                                                    k=2
                                                                     X∞
                                                         ≤1+2                 (drvi )k ,
                                                                        k=2

where the last inequality is a consequence of (16). Therefore, if drvmax < 1, using the fact that 1 + z ≤
ez for all z , we have that for all sectors i,
                                                      2(drvi )2                         2(drvi )2
                                                                                                 
                                     dvi i
                               E e                ≤1+           ≤ exp                                   .   (17)
                                                      1 − drvi                         1 − drvmax

On the other hand, from Proposition 1 and Chernoff’s inequality, we have
                                                                                       n
                                                                                         Y         
                                                     −dτ σ         dy            −dτ σ
                             P(y < −τ σ) ≤ e                 E e            =e             E edvi i .
                                                                                         i=1

Combining this inequality with (17) yields
                                                         n
                                                         X  2(drvi )2           2(drkvk)2
                     log P(y < −τ σ) ≤ −dτ σ +                        = −dτ σ +            .
                                                           1 − drvmax           1 − drvmax
                                                         i=1

Letting d = τ σ(4r2 kvk2 +rτ σvmax )−1 (which satisfies the condition required for deriving (17), drvmax <
1) leads to
                                                                             −τ 2 kvk
                                      log P(y < −τ σ) ≤                                  ,
                                                                    8r2 kvk   + 2rτ vmax
where we are using the fact that kvk = σ . Therefore, the τ -tail ratio of any economy consisting of n
sectors satisfies
                                                                      √
                                                      τ 2 (4r2 + rτ δ/ n)−1
                                              R(τ ) ≥                                                       (18)
                                                           −2 log Φ(−τ )
                             √
for all τ > 0, where δ = vmax n/kvk is the economy’s measure of sectoral dominance.
                                                                               √
    Now, consider an arbitrary sequence of economies as n → ∞ and let τn = n. Inequality (18)
then implies
                                                   √                                     1
                                       lim sup Rn ( n) ≥ lim sup                               ,
                                         n→∞                            n→∞       4r2    + rδn
where we have once again used Lemma A.1. Consequently, if lim inf n→∞ δn < ∞, the right-hand side
                                                                                     √
of the above inequality would be strictly positive, establishing that lim supn→∞ Rn ( n) > 0; that is,
the sequence of economies does not exhibit macroeconomic tail risks.




                                                                  33
Proof of part (b)      Recall from (14) that for any given economy and all τ > 0,
                                                                   √
                                              log(1/2)    log F (−τ n/δ)
                                    R(τ ) ≤             +                ,
                                             log Φ(−τ )      log Φ(−τ )

where n is the number of sectors in the economy. Therefore, for any sequence of economies as n → ∞
and for any sequence τn → ∞, we have
                                                                        √
                                                                      2γ n
                                           lim sup Rn (τn ) ≤ lim sup      ,                                             (19)
                                             n→∞                n→∞ τn δn

where γ > 0 is the exponent of the microeconomic shocks and δn is the measure of sectoral
dominance of the n-sector economy in the sequence.
       On the other hand, inequality (18) implies that for any sequence of economies with measures of
sectoral dominance δn0 , we have
                                                                             1
                                     lim sup Rn0 (τn ) ≥ lim sup                     √ .                                 (20)
                                      n→∞                   n→∞     4r2   + rτn δn0 / n
                  √                                                                  √
             n/δn0 . The assumption that limn→∞ δn /δn0 = ∞ means that limn→∞ δn τn / n = ∞. This,
       Set τn =
                                        √
coupled with the observation that δn ≤ n, implies that limn→∞ τn = ∞, guaranteeing that we can
use inequalities (19) and (20). Consequently,
                                                                      1
                                        lim sup Rn0 (τn ) ≥ lim sup        >0
                                          n→∞                n→∞       4r2
                                                                       +r
                                                                   2γδn0
                                        lim sup Rn (τn ) ≤ lim sup       = 0.
                                          n→∞                n→∞    δn
Thus, by Definition 5, the first economy exhibits greater macroeconomic tail risks.


Proof of part (c)       Since limn→∞ δn = ∞, part (a) of the theorem implies that the sequence of
economies exhibits macroeconomic tail risks. On the other hand, recall that for any given economy
                           √
consisting of n sectors, δ/ n = vmax /kvk. Therefore, by Theorem 1 of Acemoglu et al. (2012), in any
                                                 √
sequence of economies that satisfies limn→∞ δn / n = 0, the random variable yn /σn converges in
distribution to the standard normal distribution as n → ∞.

Proof of Corollary 1

Consider an economy consisting of n sectors. By definition, the Domar weight of sector i is given by
vi = ci−1/η , where                                               27
              qP c is a properly chosen normalization constant. It is then immediate that vmax = c
                  n    −2/η . Consequently, the economy’s measure of sectoral dominance is given by
and kvk = c       i=1 i

                                                           n
                                                                    !−1/2
                                                        1 X −2/η
                                                δ=         i                 .
                                                        n
                                                          i=1

   Recall that, by Lemma A.2, n
  27                         P
                                j=1 `ji = 1/(1 − µ) for
                                                      Pall sectorsP
                                                                  j, where
                                                                        Pn µ is the share of intermediate inputs in the firms’
production technologies. Therefore, in any economy, n   i=1 vi =
                                                                    n
                                                                    i=1  j=1 βj `ji = 1/(1 − µ).



                                                               34
   Now consider a sequence of economies with Pareto Domar weights with common Pareto index
η as n → ∞. We analyze the behavior of the measure of sectoral dominance in such a sequence of
economies under three separate cases.
                                                                          Pn    −2/η
   First, suppose that η ∈ (0, 2). In this case, the summation             i=1 i       is convergent and hence
bounded from above. It is thus immediate that limn→∞ δn = ∞, where δn is the measure of sectoral
dominance of the n-sector economy in the sequence.
  Next, suppose that η = 2. In this case, ni=1 i−2/η is nothing but the harmonic series and is
                                           P

therefore upper bounded by 1 + log n for all n. Consequently,
                                                                 −1/2
                                                  1
                                       δn ≥         (1 + log n)
                                                  n

for all n, which implies that limn→∞ δn = ∞.
   Finally, if η > 2, then there exists a constant c̄ > 0, independent of n, such that
                                            n
                                            X
                                                  i−2/η ≤ cn1−2/η
                                            i=1
                             √
for all n. Hence, δn ≥ n1/η / c̄, thus once again implying that limn→∞ δn = ∞.

Proof of Proposition 5

We prove the result for a more general class of super-exponential shocks than the ones considered in
Subsection 4.3. In particular, we assume that the CDF of microeconomic shocks satisfies
                                             1
                                      lim        log[1 − F (z)] = −1
                                     z→∞    ρ(z)

for some non-negative, increasing function ρ(z) such that

                                              lim ρ(z)/z = ∞
                                              z→∞
                                             lim ρ(z)/z 2 = 0.
                                            z→∞

These conditions guarantee that the tail of the distribution is lighter than that of the exponential
distribution, but heavier than that of the normal distribution. It is immediate that the class of
distributions that satisfy (5) correspond to the special case in which ρ(z) = cz α for some constant
α ∈ (1, 2).


Proof of part (a)   Since super-exponential microeconomic shocks exhibit tails that are lighter than
that of the exponential distribution, any given deviation from the mean is more unlikely compared
to an identical deviation under the assumption that microeconomic shocks have exponential tails.
Hence, in the presence of shocks with super-exponential tails, there exists a constant r > 0 such that
inequality (18) is satisfied for any arbitrary economy and all values of τ > 0.


                                                      35
   Consequently, given a sequence of economies as n → ∞, we have
                                               √                         1
                                   lim sup Rn ( n) ≥ lim sup                   .
                                    n→∞                   n→∞      4r2   + rδn
                                                        √
As a result, if lim inf n→∞ δn < ∞, then lim supn→∞ Rn ( n) > 0, guaranteeing that the sequence of
economies does not exhibit macroeconomic tail risks.


Proof of part (b)   Once again, recall from inequality (14) in the Proof of Proposition 2 that the τ -tail
ratio of any arbitrary economy of size n satisfies
                                                                  √
                                             log(1/2)    log F (−τ n/δ)
                                  R(τ ) ≤              +                ,
                                            log Φ(−τ )      log Φ(−τ )
for all values of τ > 0, where δ is the economy’s measure of sectoral dominance.
                                                                      √
    Therefore, for a sequence of economies as n → ∞ and for τn = n, the above inequality implies
that
                                          √              1
                              lim sup Rn ( n) ≤ 2 lim sup log F −nδn−1 ,
                                                                      
                                n→∞                 n→∞ n

where δn is the measure of sectoral dominance of the n-sector economy in the sequence. Given that
shocks have a super-exponential tails, we have
                                               √               ρ(nδn−1 )
                                   lim sup Rn ( n) ≤ 2 lim sup           .
                                     n→∞                 n→∞      n

Therefore, if limn→∞ ρ(nδn−1 )/n = 0, the right-hand side of the above expression is equal to zero,
implying that the sequence of economies exhibits macroeconomic tail risks. Setting ρ(z) = cz α
proves the result for the subclass of super-exponential shocks that satisfy (5).

Proof of Proposition 6

We start by proving three lemmas. The first lemma determines the equilibrium output of each sector,
the second lemma establishes a simple inequality for a collection of non-negative numbers, and our
last lemma provides an expression for an economy’s measure of tail comovement in terms of the
unconditional likelihood that all sectors exhibit a joint deviation from their respective means.
                                                                                         Pn
Lemma A.3. The log output of sector i is equal to x̂i = log(xi ) = log vi +                  j=1 `ij j .

Proof. Recall from Proposition 1 that the equilibrium sales of sector i satisfies pi xi = vi w, where
w is the market wage and vi is sector i’s Domar weight. On the other hand, by equation (12), the
equilibrium price of good i is given by
                                                             n
                                                             X
                                          log pi = log w −         `ij j ,
                                                             j=1
                                                                        Pn
Therefore, the log output of sector i satisfies log xi = log vi +             j=1 `ij j .


                                                     36
Lemma A.4. Let zi and qij be non-negative numbers for all i and j . Then,
                             v
                             u n               !2                1/2
                             uX X    n              n
                                                    X     X n
                                                               2
                             t          zi qij    ≤   zi     qij      .
                                            j=1      i=1                  i=1      j=1

Proof. A simple application of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality guarantees that
                                                    1/2        1/2
                                Xn             n
                                               X            n
                                                            X
                                                  2           2 
                                   qij qkj ≤    qij         qkj
                                        j=1                       j=1              j=1

for all i and k . Multiplying both sides of the above inequality by zi zk and summing over all i and k
thus implies
                                                                       1/2               1/2 
             n     n                  n                     n      n              n      n
                                  !                  !
             X     X                  X                   X X 2   X X 2  
                         zi qij             zk qkj       ≤   zi     qij          zk     qkj      .
             j=1   i=1                k=1                        i=1         j=1            k=1   j=1


Taking square roots from both sides of the above inequality proves the result.

Lemma A.5. For any given economy, the measure of tail comovement is equal to
                                                           P (x̂i < Ex̂i − τ σ̂i for all i)
                                            C(τ ) =                                         ,
                                                                   P(y < −τ σ)
where σ̂i is output volatility of sector i and σ = stdev(y) is the economy’s aggregate volatility.

Proof. From the definition of conditional probability, it is immediate that the statement of the lemma
follows once we show that whenever x̂i < Ex̂i − τ σ̂i for all sectors i, then y < −τ σ . To this end, recall
                                                                           qP
from Lemma A.3 that x̂i = log vi + nj=1 `ij j , which implies that σ̂i =       n    2
                                  P
                                                                                j=1 `ij . Therefore, the fact
that x̂i < Ex̂i − τ σi is equivalent to
                                                                             1/2
                                                  n
                                                  X                   Xn
                                                         `ij j < −τ    `2ij  .
                                                  j=1                        j=1

Multiplying both sides of the above inequality by βi and summing over all sectors implies
                                                            1/2
                                            Xn       Xn
                                     y < −τ     βi     `2ij  ,
                                                                 i=1         j=1
                                                     P
where we are using the fact that y =                     i,j   βi `ij j , established in Proposition 1. Therefore, by Lemma
A.4,
                                                            v           !2
                                                            u n n
                                                            uX X
                                                     y < −τ t     βi `ij .
                                                                    j=1      i=1
                                              Pn
Finally, the observation that vj =                i=1 βi `ij      means that the right-hand side of the above inequality
is simply equal to kvk which is the volatility of aggregate output, σ = stdev(y), thus completing the
proof.

                                                                        37
   We now present the proof of Proposition 6. Consider two economies with identical Domar
weights (i.e., vi = vi0 for all i) and denote their corresponding measures of tail comovement
with C and C 0 , respectively. Furthermore, assume that the latter economy exhibits more sectoral
interconnectivity relative to the former in the sense of Definition 4. In particular, there exists a
stochastic matrix B = [bij ] such that
                                                                  n
                                                                  X
                                                     `0ij   =           bik `kj
                                                                  k=1

for all pairs of sectors and i and j , where L = [`ij ] and L0 = [`0ij ] are the corresponding Leontief inverse
matrices of the two economies, respectively.
   To compare the extent of tail comovements in the two economies, recall from Lemma A.5 that
                                                   P (x̂i < Ex̂i − τ σ̂i for all i)
                                      C(τ ) =                                       ,
                                                           P(y < −τ σ)
where σ̂i = stdev(x̂i ) is the output volatility of sector i. On the other hand, by Lemma A.3, the log
output of sector i is given by x̂i = log vi + nj=1 `ij j , and as a result,
                                                P

                                                                                        
                                                             Xn
                       P (x̂i < Ex̂i − τ σ̂i for all i) = P    `ij j < −τ σ̂i for all i .
                                                                         j=1

Consider the event that
                                            n
                                            X
                                                  `ij j < −τ σ̂i              for all i,
                                            j=1

and pick some arbitrary sector k . Multiplying both sides of the above inequality by bki and summing
over all sectors i implies
                                                                                1/2
                                     n
                                     X                       n
                                                             X           Xn
                                            `0kj j < −τ            bki    `2ij  ,
                                      j=1                     i=1            j=1

where we are using the fact that σ̂i = ( j `2ij )1/2 . Hence, by Lemma A.4,
                                        P

                                             v             !2             1/2
                          n
                          X
                                             u n
                                             uX Xn                  Xn
                                `0kj j < −τ t     bki `ij    = −τ    `02
                                                                        kj
                                                                            .
                          j=1                     j=1       i=1                             j=1

Since the right-hand side of the above inequality is simply equal to −τ σ̂k0 , we have

                         P (x̂i < Ex̂i − τ σ̂i for all i) ≤ P x̂0i < Ex̂0i − τ σ̂i0 for all i ,
                                                                                             


and hence,
                                                   P (x̂0i < Ex̂0i − τ σ̂i0 for all i)
                                      C(τ ) ≤                                          .
                                                            P(y < −τ σ)
Finally, since the two economies have identical Domar weights, it is immediate that the distribution
of aggregate output is also identical in the two economies, and in particular, P(y < −τ σ) = P(y 0 <
−τ σ 0 ). Using Lemma A.5 one more time then implies that C(τ ) ≤ C 0 (τ ).

                                                                  38
Proof of Proposition 7

Recall from inequality (14) that
                                                                   √
                                              log(1/2)    log F (−τ n/δ)
                                     R(τ ) ≤            +
                                             log Φ(−τ )      log Φ(−τ )
for any given economy and any τ > 0. Therefore, when microeconomic shocks have Pareto tails with
                                                                       √
Pareto index λ, for a given sequence of economies as n → ∞ and for τn = n, we have
                                              √               1
                                  lim sup Rn ( n) ≤ 2λ lim sup log (n/δn ) .
                                    n→∞                  n→∞ n

The observation that δn ≥ 1 for any given economy of size n leads to
                                           √               1
                               lim sup Rn ( n) ≤ 2λ lim sup log (n) .
                                 n→∞                  n→∞  n
                                     √
It is then immediate that limn→∞ Rn ( n) = 0.

Proof of Proposition 8

We first state a theorem, the proof of which can be found in Nagaev (1979, Theorem 1.9).

Theorem A.2. Let 1 , . . . , n be zero-mean, unit variance i.i.d. Pareto-tailed random variables with
Pareto index λ > 2. Furthermore, suppose that E|i |2+ξ < ∞ for some ξ > 0. Then,
                                          √ 
                  P(Sn ≥ zn ) = 1 − Φ(zn / n) (1 + o(1)) + n(1 − F (zn ))(1 + o(1)),
                    √
as n → ∞ for zn ≥       n, where Sn = 1 + · · · + n .

   Next, we state and prove a lemma.

Lemma A.6. Consider a sequence of simple economies and suppose that microeconomic shocks are
Pareto-tailed.
                  √
(a) If limn→∞ τn / log n < ∞, then limn→∞ Rn (τn ) > 0.
                  √
(b) If limn→∞ τn / log n = ∞, then limn→∞ Rn (τn ) = 0.

Proof. By Proposition 1, all sectoral Domar weights in a simple economy (that is, an economy with
symmetric preferences and no input-output linkages) are identical and are given by vi = 1/n.
                                            √                                               √
Consequently, yn = (1/n) ni=1 i and σn = 1/ n, which means that P(yn < −τn σn ) = P(Sn > τn n).
                        P

Therefore, for any sequence {τn } such that τn ≥ 1 and limn→∞ τn = ∞, Theorem A.2 implies that
                                                                     √
                        P(yn < −τn σn ) = Φ(−τn )(1 + o(1)) + nF (−τn n)(1 + o(1)).               (21)
                                                   √
   Now, to prove part (a), suppose that limn→∞ τn / log n < ∞. Under this assumption,
                               log Φ(−τn )                 τn2 /2
                         lim           √    = lim                           < ∞,
                        n→∞ log[nF (−τn n)]  n→∞ (λ/2 − 1) log n + λ log τn



                                                          39
implying that the second term on the right-hand side of (21) never dominates the first term as n → ∞.
As a result,
                                             P(yn < −τn σn )
                                         lim                 < ∞,
                                         n→∞    Φ(−τn )
implying that limn→∞ Rn (τn ) > 0.
                                                       √
      Next, to prove part (b), suppose that limn→∞ τn / log n = ∞. For such a sequence, we have
                             log Φ(−τn )                 τn2 /2
                       lim           √    = lim                           = ∞,
                      n→∞ log[nF (−τn n)]  n→∞ (λ/2 − 1) log n + λ log τn

implying that the second term on the right-hand side of (21) dominates the first term as n → ∞, that
is,
                                                          √
                                 P(yn < −τn σn ) = nF (−τn n)(1 + o(1)).

Consequently,
                                                              √
                                                  log[nF (−τn n)]
                              lim Rn (τn ) = lim
                             n→∞             n→∞     log Φ(−τn )
                                                     log τn               log n
                                           = 2λ lim     2
                                                            + (λ − 2) lim       ,
                                               n→∞ τn                n→∞ τn2

where the second equality is due to the assumption that microeconomic shocks have Pareto tails
with index λ. Given that both terms on the right-hand side of the above equality converges to zero, it
is then immediate that limn→∞ Rn (τn ) = 0.

      We now present the proof of Proposition 8. First, consider a sequence of simple economies that
are subject to Pareto-tailed microeconomic shocks and denote the corresponding τ -tail ratios with
                                                         √
Rnpar . Choose the sequence {τn∗ } such that limn→∞ τn∗ / log n = 1. From part (a) of Lemma A.6, it is
immediate that

                                               lim Rnpar (τn∗ ) > 0.                              (22)
                                               n→∞

    Next, consider a sequence of economies subject to exponential-tailed shocks, whose measure
                                       p
of sectoral dominance satisfy limn→∞ δn (log n)/n = ∞. Denote the τ -tail ratio of the n-sector
economy within such a sequence with Rnexp . Inequality (14) implies that
                                                              √
                                                                n
                            lim sup Rnexp (τn∗ ) ≤ 2γ lim sup ∗                                   (23)
                              n→∞                       n→∞ τn δn
                                                                √
                                                                  n
                                                 = 2γ lim sup √      ,
                                                        n→∞ δn log n

thus leading to

                                               lim Rnexp (τn∗ ) = 0.                              (24)
                                               n→∞

Contrasting (24) with (22) completes the proof.

                                                       40
Proof of Corollary 3

Consider a sequence of economies with Pareto Domar weights of common exponent η = 2; that is,
vi = ci−1/2 for all sectors i. For such an economy, it is easy to verify that
                                          p                            p
                         0 < lim inf δn     (log n)/n ≤ lim sup δn         (log n)/n < ∞.              (25)
                               n→∞                               n→∞

Suppose that microeconomic shocks have exponential tails and denote the tail ratio of the n-th
economy in the sequence with Rnexp . On the other hand, consider a sequence of simple economies
subject to Pareto-tailed shocks and denote the corresponding tail ratio with RnPareto . We show that the
two sequence of economies exhibit identical macroeconomic tail risks. To this end, it is sufficient to
show that for any given sequence {τn }, limn→∞ Rnexp (τn ) = 0 if and only if limn→∞ RnPareto (τn ) = 0.
    First, suppose that {τn } is such that limn→∞ RnPareto (τn ) = 0. From part (a) of Lemma A.6
                                  √
it is immediate that limn→∞ τn / log n = ∞. On the other hand, recall from (23) that when
microeconomic shocks have exponential tails,
                                                                           √
                                                                              n
                                      lim sup Rnexp (τn )   ≤ 2γ lim sup         .
                                        n→∞                          n→∞   τn δn
Thus, by (25), it is immediate that    limn→∞ Rnexp (τn )    = 0.
    To prove the converse, suppose that {τn } is such that limn→∞ Rnexp (τn ) = 0. Inequality (18) implies
that for such a sequence,
                                              1
                                lim                  √ ≤ lim Rexp (τn ) = 0.
                               n→∞ 4r 2    + rτn δn / n n→∞ n
                         √                                                             √
Therefore, limn→∞ τn δn / n = ∞. Combining this with (25) thus implies that limn→∞ τn / log n = ∞.
Consequently, by part (b) of Lemma A.6, limn→∞ RnPareto (τn ) = 0, completing the proof.


B    Aggregation and Disaggregation

In this appendix, we illustrate the relationship between input-output matrices at different levels of
disaggregation of an economy with the same input-output structure.
    Suppose we observe an economy at two levels of disaggregations n and m < n. This means
that each sector/industry in the latter representation is a disjoint collection of subindustries in the
former. We use the notation im ←- in to denote that sector in is one of the subindustries at the level
of disaggregation n that has been assigned to the more aggregated sector indexed im .
    Given that both representations capture the same economy, it must be the case that
                                                  X
                                         lim =        lin ,
                                                       in :im ←-in

where lin denotes the amount of labor hired by sector in at the level of disaggregation n. On the other
hand, recall from (11) that
                                              lin = (1 − µ)pin xin /w,

                                                            41
where pin xin is the total sales of industry in and w represents the market wage. Therefore, for any
sector im at the level of disaggregation m,
                                                          X
                                          pim xim =                  pin xin .
                                                       in :im ←-in

Furthermore, by Proposition 1, sectoral sales are related to the corresponding Domar weights via
vin = pin xin /GDP. Consequently, Domar weights at the two levels of disaggregation are related to
one another via
                                                          X
                                              v im =                 v in .
                                                       in :im ←-in

That is, the Domar weight of an aggregated sector is equal to the sum of the Domar weights of the
subindustries that belong to that sector. The above expression is the only restriction imposed on the
Domar weights following disaggregation.
   Next, we obtain the relationship between input-output matrices of the economy at the levels of
disaggregation m and n. Given that both representations capture the same economy, the total dollar
amount of intersectoral trade between two aggregated sectors should be the same regardless of the
level of disaggregation. In particular,
                                                     X          X
                                  pjm xim jm =                                pjn xin jn ,
                                                  in :im ←-in jn :jm ←-jn

where pjn xin jn denotes the value of trade between sectors in and jn at the level of disaggregation n.
On the other hand, recall form (10) that

                                          pjn xin jn = µain jn pin xin ,

where ain jn captures the intensity of the input-output linkages between sectors in and jn at the level
of disaggregation n. Consequently,
                                                     X           X
                               aim jm pim xim =                               ain jn pin xin .
                                                  in :im ←-in jn :jm ←-jn

Replacing for the sectoral sales in terms of the corresponding Domar weights then implies that
                                           P             P
                                            in :im ←-in                 vin ain jn
                                 a im jm =          P jn :jm ←-jn                  ,
                                                        in :im ←-in vin

providing the relationship between the intersectoral input-output matrices of the economy at the
two disaggregation levels.
   Finally, note also that throughout our analysis, we are imposing that microeconomic shocks have
the same distribution at different levels of disaggregation. Therefore, as n changes, the distribution
of aggregate output changes as well.



                                                         42
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr (2015a), “Networks and the macroeconomy: An
  empirical exploration.” In National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual (Martin
  Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker, eds.), volume 30, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2012), “The
  network origins of aggregate fluctuations.” Econometrica, 80, 1977–2016.

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2010), “Cascades in networks and
  aggregate volatility.” NBER Working Paper No. 16516.

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2015b), “Systemic risk and stability
  in financial networks.” American Economic Review, 105, 564–608.

Ascari, Guido, Giorgio Fagiolo, and Andrea Roventini (2015), “Fat-tail distributions and business-
  cycle models.” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 19, 465–476.

Atalay, Enghin (2014), “How important are sectoral shocks?” Working paper.

Atalay, Enghin and Thorsten Drautzburg (2015), “Accounting for the sources of macroeconomic tail
  risks.” Working paper.

Barro, Robert J. (2006), “Rare disasters and asset markets in the Twentieth century.” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121, 823–866.

Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1996), “The financial accelerator and the flight to
  quality.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 1–15.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., Thomas M. Eisenbach, and Yuliy Sannikov (2013), “Macroeconomics with
  financial frictions: A survey.” In Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Tenth World Congress of
  the Econometric Society, Vol. II: Applied Economics (Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano, and Eddie
  Dekel, eds.), 4–94, Cambridge University Press, New York.

Burlon, Lorenzo (2012), “How do aggregate fluctuations depend on the network structure of the
  economy?” Working paper E12/278, Department of Economic Theory, University of Barcelona.

Carvalho, Vasco M. (2010), “Aggregate fluctuations and the network structure of intersectoral trade.”
  Working paper.

Carvalho, Vasco M. (2014), “From micro to macro via production networks.” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 28, 23–48.

Carvalho, Vasco M. and Xavier Gabaix (2013), “The great diversification and its undoing.” American
  Economic Review, 103, 1697–1727.

                                                  43
Carvalho, Vasco M., Makoto Nirei, Yukiko Saito, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2015), “Supply chain
  disruptions: Evidence from the Great East Japan Earthquake.” Working paper.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2011), “When is the government
  spending multiplier large?” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 78–121.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt (2015), “Understanding the
  Great Recession.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 110–167.

Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent (2005), “Drifts and volatilities: Monetary policies and
  outcomes in the post WWII US.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 262–302.

Cole, Harold L. and Lee E. Ohanian (1999), “The Great Depression in the United States from a
  Neoclassical perspective.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 23, 2–24.

Cole, Harold L. and Lee E. Ohanian (2002), “The Great U.K. Depression: A puzzle and possible
  resolution.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 5, 19–44.

Cúrdia, Vasco, Marco Del Negro, and Daniel L. Greenwald (2014), “Rare shocks, great recessions.”
  Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29, 1031–1052.

di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Isabelle Méjean (2014), “Firms, destinations, and
  aggregate fluctuations.” Econometrica, 82, 1303–1340.

Domar, Evsey D. (1961), “On the measurement of technological change.” The Economic Journal, 71,
  709–729.

Dupor, Bill (1999), “Aggregation and irrelevance in multi-sector models.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 43, 391–409.

Durlauf, Steven N. (1993), “Nonergodic economic growth.” Review of Economic Studies, 60, 349–366.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Paul Krugman (2012), “Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap: A Fisher-
  Minsky-Koo approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1469–1513.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Neil R. Mehrotra (2014), “A model of secular stagnation.” NBER Working
  Paper No. 20574.

Elliott, Matthew, Benjamin Golub, and Matthew O. Jackson (2014), “Financial networks and
  contagion.” American Economic Review, 104, 3115–3153.

Engle, Robert F. (1982), “Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance
  of united kingdom inflation.” Econometrica, 50, 987–1007.




                                                 44
Fagiolo, Giorgio, Mauro Napoletano, and Andrea Roventini (2008), “Are output growth-rate
  distributions fat-tailed? Some evidence from OECD countries.” Journal of Applied Econometrics,
  23, 639–669.

Fama, Eugene F. (1963), “Mandelbrot and the stable Paretian hypothesis.” The Journal of Business, 36,
  420–429.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix (2015), “Rare disasters and exchange rates.” NBER Working
  Paper No. 13805.

Foerster, Andrew T., Pierre-Daniel G. Sarte, and Mark W. Watson (2011), “Sectoral versus aggregate
  shocks: A structural factor analysis of industrial production.” Journal of Political Economy, 119,
  1–38.

Foss, Sergey, Dmitry Korshunov, and Stan Zachary (2011), An Introduction to Heavy-Tailed and
  Subexponential Distributions. Springer Series in Operations Research and Financial Engineering,
  Springer, New York.

Gabaix, Xavier (2011), “The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations.” Econometrica, 79, 733–772.

Gabaix, Xavier (2012), “Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in macro-
  finance.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 645–700.

Gabaix, Xavier, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Vasiliki Plerou, and H. Eugene Stanley (2003), “A theory
  of power law distributions in financial market fluctuations.” Nature, 423, 267–230.

Gabaix, Xavier, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Vasiliki Plerou, and H. Eugene Stanley (2006),
  “Institutional investors and stock market volatility.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 461–
  504.

Gabaix, Xavier and Rustam Ibragimov (2011), “Rank–1/2: A simple way to improve the OLS
  estimation of tail exponents.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29, 24–39.

Gourio, François (2012), “Disaster risk and business cycles.” American Economic Review, 102, 2734–
  2766.

Grimmett, Geoffrey and David Stirzaker (2001), Probability and Random Processes, third edition.
  Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Horvath, Michael (1998), “Cyclicality and sectoral linkages: Aggregate fluctuations from sectoral
  shocks.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1, 781–808.

Horvath, Michael (2000), “Sectoral shocks and aggregate fluctuations.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 45, 69–106.

                                                 45
Hulten, Charles R. (1978), “Growth accounting with intermediate inputs.” The Review of Economic
  Studies, 45, 511–518.

Ibragimov, Rustam and Johan Walden (2007), “The limits of diversification when losses may be large.”
  Journal of Banking & Finance, 31, 2551–2569.

Jovanovic, Boyan (1987), “Micro shocks and aggregate risk.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102,
  395–409.

Kehoe, Timothy J. and Edward C. Prescott (2002), “Great Depressions of the 20th century.” Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 5, 1–18.

Kelly, Bryan and Hao Jiang (2015), “Tail risk and asset prices.” Review of Financial Studies.

Kindleberger, Charles P. (1978), Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. Basic
  Books, New York.

Kozeniauskas, Nicholas, Anna Orlik, and Laura Veldkamp (2014), “Black Swans and the many shades
  of uncertainty.” Working paper.

Long, John B. and Charles I. Plosser (1983), “Real business cycles.” Journal of Political Economy, 91,
  39–69.

Lucas, Robert E. (1977), “Understanding business cycles.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
  Public Policy, 5, 7 – 29.

Nadaraya, E. A. (1964), “On estimating regression.” Theory of Probability and its Applications, 9, 141–
  142.

Nagaev, Sergey V. (1979), “Large deviations of sums of independent random variables.” The Annals of
  Probability, 7, 745–789.

Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson, Robert Barro, and José Ursúa (2013), “Crises and recoveries in an
  empirical model of consumption disasters.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 35–
  74.

Petrov, Valentin V. (1975), Sums of independent random variables. Springer-Verlag, New York.

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth Rogoff (2009), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial
  Folly. Princeton University Press.

Rietz, Thomas A. (1988), “The equity risk premium: A solution.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 22,
  117–131.




                                                  46
Teicher, Henry (1984), “Exponential bounds for large deviations of sums of unbounded random
  variables.” Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series A, 46, 41–53.

Watson, Geoffrey S. (1964), “Smooth regression analysis.” Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics,
  Series A, 26, 359–372.




                                                   47
