NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM
Alejandro Justiniano
Giorgio E. Primiceri
Andrea Tambalotti
Working Paper 20874
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20874
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015

We thank Tobias Adrian, Larry Christiano, Simon Gilchrist, Cosmin Ilut, Igor Livshits, Ander Perez,
Monika Piazzesi, Vincenzo Quadrini, Giacomo Rondina, Martin Schneider, Amir Sufi as well as seminar
and conference participants for comments and suggestions. Giorgio Primiceri thanks Bocconi University
and EIEF for their hospitality while conducting part of this research. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago,
New York or the Federal Reserve System. Giorgio Primiceri is a consultant for the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago and a research visitor at the European Central Bank. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Supply and the Housing Boom
Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti
NBER Working Paper No. 20874
January 2015
JEL No. E32,E44
ABSTRACT
The housing boom that preceded the Great Recession was due to an increase in credit supply driven
by looser lending constraints in the mortgage market. This view on the fundamental drivers of the
boom is consistent with four empirical observations: the unprecedented rise in home prices and household
debt, the stability of debt relative to house values, and the fall in mortgage rates. These facts are difficult
to reconcile with the popular view that attributes the housing boom to looser borrowing constraints
associated with lower collateral requirements. In fact, a slackening of collateral constraints at the peak
of the lending cycle triggers a fall in home prices in our framework, providing a novel perspective
on the possible origins of the bust.
Alejandro Justiniano
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
ajustiniano@frbchi.org
Giorgio E. Primiceri
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
318 Andersen Hall
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
g-primiceri@northwestern.edu

Andrea Tambalotti
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Research and Statistics Group
33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor
New York, NY 10045
a.tambalotti@gmail.com

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM
ALEJANDRO JUSTINIANO, GIORGIO E. PRIMICERI, AND ANDREA TAMBALOTTI
Abstract. The housing boom that preceded the Great Recession was due to an increase
in credit supply driven by looser lending constraints in the mortgage market. This view
on the fundamental drivers of the boom is consistent with four empirical observations:
the unprecedented rise in home prices and household debt, the stability of debt relative to
house values, and the fall in mortgage rates. These facts are diﬃcult to reconcile with the
popular view that attributes the housing boom to looser borrowing constraints associated
with lower collateral requirements. In fact, a slackening of collateral constraints at the
peak of the lending cycle triggers a fall in home prices in our framework, providing a
novel perspective on the possible origins of the bust.

1. introduction
The U.S. economy recently experienced a severe financial crisis that precipitated the
worst recession since the Great Depression. Housing and mortgage markets were at the
center of these events. Four facts characterize the behavior of these markets in the period
leading up to the collapse in house prices and the ensuing financial turmoil.
Fact 1: House prices rose dramatically. Between 2000 and 2006 real home prices increased roughly between 40 and 70 percent, depending on measurement, as shown in Figure
1.1. This unprecedented boom was followed by an equally spectacular bust after 2006.
Fact 2: Households’ mortgage debt surged. This is illustrated in figure 1 for both
the aggregate household sector and for financially constrained households in the Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF)—the group that is most informative for the parametrization of
our model. Both measures of indebtedness were stable in the 1990s, but increased by about
Date: First version: March 2014. This version: January 2015.
We thank Tobias Adrian, Larry Christiano, Simon Gilchrist, Cosmin Ilut, Igor Livshits, Ander Perez,
Monika Piazzesi, Vincenzo Quadrini, Giacomo Rondina, Martin Schneider, Amir Sufi as well as seminar
and conference participants for comments and suggestions. Giorgio Primiceri thanks Bocconi University
and EIEF for their hospitality while conducting part of this research. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago,
New York or the Federal Reserve System.
1

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

180#
170#

FHFA#

2

CoreLogic#

160#
150#
140#
130#
120#
110#
100#
90#
80#

1985#

1990#

1995#

2000#

2005#

2010#

Figure 1.1. Real house prices. FHFA (formerly OFHEO) all-transactions house
price index for the United States and CoreLogic Home Price Index (HPI). Both
indexes are deflated by the consumer price index, and normalized to 100 in 2000:Q1.

30 and 60 percentage points between 2000 and 2007, before falling during the financial
crisis.
Fact 3: Mortgage debt and house prices increased in parallel. As a result, the ratio
of home mortgages to the value of residential real estate remained roughly unchanged into
2006. This often under-appreciated fact is documented in figure 1.3, which also shows that
this aggregate measure of household leverage spiked when home values collapsed before the
recession.
Fact 4: Real mortgage rates declined. Figure 1.4 plots the 30-year conventional mortgage rate minus various measures of inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters. It shows that real mortgage rates fluctuated around 5% during the 1990s, but
fell by 2 to 3 percentage points as the housing boom unfolded.
We argue that the key factor behind these four phenomena was a progressive relaxation
of lending constraints starting in the late 1990s, which led to a significant expansion in
the supply of mortgage credit. This account of the facts is in contrast with the more
conventional view that attributes the boom to looser borrowing limits.
To highlight this contrast, we develop a simple general equilibrium framework that draws
a particularly stark distinction between the supply and demand for credit. On the demand

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

3

(a):$Mortgages8to8GDP$ra<o$(Flow$of$Funds)$
0.80$
0.75$
0.70$
0.65$
0.60$
0.55$
0.50$
0.45$
0.40$
0.35$
0.30$
1990$

1995$

2000$

2005$

2010$

(b):$Mortgages8to8income$ra<o$(SCF)$$
1.6$
1.4$
1.2$
1$
0.8$
0.6$
1990$

1995$

2000$

2005$

2010$

Figure 1.2. (a): Mortgages-to-GDP ratio (Flow of Funds). Mortgages are home
mortgages from the balance sheet of households and nonprofit organizations in the
Flow of Funds. (b): Mortgages-to-income ratio (SCF). Ratio of mortgage debt
to income for the households with little liquid financial assets in the Survey of
Consumer Finances, as defined in section 4.1.

side, a collateral constraint limits households’ ability to borrow against the value of real
estate, as in the large literature spawned by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). On the credit
supply side, a lending constraint impedes the flow of savings to the mortgage market. A
slackening of this constraint increases the funding available to borrowers, leading to lower
mortgage rates and higher house prices, with no change in aggregate household leverage,
as in the four facts. On the contrary, an increase in the maximum loan-to-value (LTV)
ratio—or equivalently a fall in required down payments—slackens the borrowing constraint

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

4

(a):%Mortgages6to6real%estate%ra8o%(Flow%of%Funds)%
0.60%
0.55%
0.50%
0.45%
0.40%
0.35%
0.30%
0.25%
1990%

1995%

2000%

2005%

2010%

(b):%Mortgages6to6real%estate%ra8o%(SCF)%
0.6%

0.5%

0.4%

0.3%
1990%

1995%

2000%

2005%

2010%

Figure 1.3. (a): Mortgages-to-real estate ratio (Flow of Funds). Mortgages are
defined as in figure 1. Real estate is the market value of real estate from the
balance sheet of households and nonprofit organizations in the Flow of Funds. (b):
Mortgages-to-real estate ratio (SCF). Ratio of mortgage debt to the value of real
estate for the households with little financial assets in the Survey of Consumer
Finances, as defined in section 4.1.

and increases credit demand for given house prices, putting upward pressure on interest
rates and leading to higher aggregate leverage.
Lending constraints are the main novel feature of our framework. They are a simple
modeling device to capture a combination of technological, institutional, and behavioral
factors that restrain the flow of funds from savers to mortgage borrowers.1 Starting in the
1

For simplicity, we impose the lending constraint directly on savers, but we show that a leverage restriction—
or, equivalently, a capital requirement—imposed on financial intermediaries would produce identical results.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

5

8.00#

7.00#

6.00#

5.00#

4.00#

3.00#

2.00#

1.00#
Mortgage#rate#4#SPF#inf#(cpi10yr)#

Mortgage#rate#4#SPF#inf#(cpi1yr)#

Mortgage#rate#4#SPF#inf#(gdp1yr)#

0.00#

1990#

1995#

2000#

2005#

2010#

Figure 1.4. Real mortgage interest rates. 30-year conventional mortgage rate
minus three measures of expected inflation from the Survey of Professional Forecasters: 10-year-ahead CPI inflation forecast (blue solid), 1-year-ahead CPI inflation forecast (red dashed), and 1-year-ahead GDP deflator forecast (green long
dash).

late 1990s, the explosion of securitization and of market-based financial intermediation,
together with changes in the regulatory and economic environment, lowered many of these
barriers. We model this reduction in the frictions impeding the free flow of savings into
mortgage finance as a relaxation of lending constraints. Among the sources of looser lending
constraints, the pooling and tranching of mortgages into mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
plays a central role, through several channels.2 First, tranching creates highly rated assets
out of pools of risky mortgages. These assets can then be purchased by those institutional
investors that are restricted by regulation to only hold fixed-income securities with high
ratings. As a result, the boom in securitization contributed to channel into mortgages
a large pool of savings that had previously been directed towards other safe assets, such
as government bonds (Brunnermeier, 2009). Second, investing in those same senior MBS
tranches freed up intermediary capital, due to their lower regulatory charges. Combined
2

Securitization started in the late 1960s, when the Government Sponsored Enterprises created the first
mortgage-backed securities (e.g. Gerardi et al., 2010, Fostel and Geanakoplos, 2012). However, it did not
take oﬀ until the late 1990s and early 2000s, with the development of increasingly sophisticated structures
that enabled the expansion of private-label MBS beyond conforming mortgages and ultimately into subprime
products (Levitin and Wachter, 2012).

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

6

with the rise of oﬀ-balance-sheet vehicles, this form of “regulatory arbitrage” allowed banks
to increase leverage without raising new capital, expanding their ability to supply credit
to mortgage markets (Acharya and Richardson, 2009, Acharya et al., 2013, Nadauld and
Sherlund, 2009). Third, securitization allowed banks to convert illiquid loans into liquid
funds, reducing their funding costs and hence increasing their capacity to lend (Loutskina
and Strahan 2009, Loutskina, 2011).
More in general, the “Great Moderation” in macroeconomic volatility, together with the
backdrop of ever rising house prices, led financial intermediaries to an (ex-post) overoptimistic assessment of the risks faced by their portfolios. This overoptimism loosened the
leverage constraints dictated by their internal risk management practices, often based on
Value at Risk (VaR) models, generating higher leverage and more lending (e.g. Adrian and
Shin, 2014).
International factors also played an important role in increasing the supply of funds to
U.S. mortgage borrowers. Following the Asian crisis in the late 1990s, a “glut” of global
savings flowed towards U.S. safe assets, finding its way into the mortgage market through
the purchase of MBS, as documented by Bernanke et al. (2011). In our simple model, this
inflow of foreign funds into mortgage products can be modeled as a slackening of the lending
constraint, which shifts the overall amount of funds available to borrowers.3
We use our model to analyze the eﬀects of this relaxation of lending constraints on
the macroeconomy, both qualitatively and quantitatively. For the quantitative part of the
analysis, we calibrate the model to match some key properties of the balance sheet of the
U.S. household sector in the 1990s using the Survey of Consumer Finances.
An important assumption underlying this exercise is that the US economy in the 1990s
was constrained by a limited supply of funds to the mortgage market, rather than by a
scarcity of housing collateral. Starting from this situation, we show that a progressive
loosening of the lending constraint in the residential mortgage market increases household
debt in equilibrium (fact 2). If the resulting shift in the supply of funds is large enough,
the availability of collateral also becomes a binding constraint. Then, a further expansion
of the lending limit boosts the collateral value of houses, increasing their price (fact 1),
while the interest rate falls (fact 4). Moreover, higher real estate values endogenously
3

Justiniano et al., 2014b provide a quantitative analysis of the impact of the saving glut on the housing and
credit boom in the U.S.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

7

relax the borrowing constraint, leading to an increase in household debt at an unchanged
debt-to-collateral ratio (fact 3).
In contrast, the eﬀects of an exogenous loosening of the borrowing constraint through
lower required down payments are largely counterfactual. Interest rates do not fall, house
prices barely increase and aggregate household leverage rises, rather than remaining constant. Nevertheless, the collateral constraint is a crucial ingredient of the model, since
changes in house prices are due entirely to variation in their collateral value, which is
positive only when the borrowing constraint binds.
In fact, the interaction between the two constraints, which is the main source of the
model’s dynamics, generates another interesting phenomenon. When the lending constraint
is binding, lower down payments may lead to lower house prices, since in equilibrium
borrowing cannot exceed the limited amount of available funds. Therefore, collateral values
must fall when permissible leverage rises, so as to leave overall borrowing unchanged at
the level dictated by the lending constraint. This surprising result points to the welldocumented reduction in required down payments in the mature phase of the boom, when
the scope for further slackening of lending constraints was arguably limited, as a potential
trigger for the turnaround in house prices that unleashed the financial crisis.
Although our account of the boom focuses primarily on the role of lending constraints, it
does not rule out a contemporaneous loosening of collateral requirements for marginal borrowers of the kind documented by Duca et al. (2011), Favilukis et al. (2013) and Geanakoplos (2010) for instance. However, our results do imply that the aggregate impact of looser
collateral requirements during the boom was smaller than that of the expansion in credit
supply associated with the progressive erosion of the existing barriers to lending. If there
was an increase in the demand for funds, the shift in credit supply must have been larger,
or interest rates would have not fallen.
This paper’s reconstruction of the facts that characterize the credit and housing boom
is consistent with the microeconometric evidence of Mian and Sufi, 2009, 2011. They show
that an expansion in credit supply was the fundamental driver of the surge in household
debt, and that borrowing against the increased value of real estate by existing homeowners
accounts for a significant fraction of this build-up in debt. Our model, with its emphasis
on the role of lending as opposed to borrowing constraints, provides a clean theoretical
framework to interpret this evidence and to asses its macroeconomic implications. Such a

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

8

framework is particularly relevant because a large body of work has documented the far
reaching repercussions of the boom and subsequent bust in household debt and in real estate
values on other macroeconomic outcomes, such as defaults, consumption, employment, and
even education (Mian and Sufi, 2010, 2014a,b, Mian et al., 2013, Baker, 2014, Charles et al.,
2014a,b, Di Maggio et al., 2014, Palmer, 2014).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1 reviews the literature. Section 2
presents our simple model of lending and borrowing with houses as collateral and a lending
constraint. Section 3 analyzes the properties of this model and characterizes its equilibrium.
Section 4 illustrates a number of quantitative experiments that compare the macroeconomic
impact of looser lending and collateral constraints. Section 5 concludes.
1.1. Related Literature. This paper is related to the recent macroeconomic literature on
the causes and consequences of the financial crisis. As in Eggertsson and Krugman (2012),
Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2012), Hall (2012), Midrigan and Philippon (2011), Favilukis
et al. (2013), Boz and Mendoza (2014), Justiniano et al. (2014a,b), and Huo and Rios-Rull
(2014), we use a model of household borrowing to analyze the drivers of the boom and bust
in credit and house prices that precipitated the Great Recession.4
We follow these studies by limiting borrowing through a collateral constraint à la Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), which is backed by houses as in Iacoviello (2005) and Campbell
and Hercowitz (2009b). What is new in our framework is the introduction of the lending
constraint, as a device to model the expansion in credit supply first documented by Mian
and Sufi (2009). The interaction of this new constraint with the standard borrowing limit
generates rich patterns of debt and home values that significantly improve the model’s
ability to match the four fundamental facts about the boom highlighted above, even in an
extremely simple economy. Moreover, the interplay between the constraints provides an
interesting insight on how the boom might have turned into bust, with the deterioration in
credit standards at the peak of the cycle triggering a fall in house prices.
This interaction between constraints also sets our work apart from Kiyotaki et al., 2011,
Adam et al. (2012), Garriga et al. (2012) and Kermani (2012). They study the eﬀects of a
4

Our paper is also broadly related to the work of Gerali et al. (2010) and Iacoviello (2014), who estimate
large-scale dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models with several nominal and real frictions, including
collateral constraints for households and entrepreneurs, and leverage restrictions for financial intermediaries.
These papers, however, investigate the properties of business cycles, and do not focus on the recent boombust cycle.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

9

reduction in the world interest rate on a small open economy with borrowing constraints.
These eﬀects are qualitatively similar to those of looser lending constraints in our framework,
but they treat the decline in interest rates as exogenous. In our model, in contrast, lower
interest rates result from a slacker lending constraint when the borrowing limit is binding,
thus connecting the fall in mortgage rates to the financial liberalization and other well
documented domestic, rather than just international, developments.
Another novelty of our approach is that we model the financial liberalization of the early
2000s as a slackening of the lending constraint. This is in contrast with literature cited
above, which tends to capture variation in the availability of credit in both phases of the
cycle through changes in the tightness of the borrowing constraint.5
We deviate from this widespread practice and focus on looser lending constraints as the
driver of the credit boom for two reasons. First, the microeconometric evidence of Ambrose
and Thibodeau (2004), Mian and Sufi (2009), Favara and Imbs (2012) and Di Maggio and
Kermani (2014) clearly points to a shift in credit supply as a key factor behind the surge
in debt and house prices. A slackening of lending constraints captures this credit supply
shift cleanly and intuitively. Second, in models with a borrowing constraint à la Kiyotaki
and Moore (1997), looser collateral requirements increase the demand for credit, putting
upward pressure on interest rates, which is counterfactual.
The reference to looser collateral requirements as a credit demand shock might sound
surprising, since required down payments are set by financial intermediaries, and hence are
usually taken to reflect credit supply conditions. Therefore, it would seem plausible that
an increase in banks’ ability to lend prompted them to accept lower down payments. This
intuitive link between collateral requirements and lending limits is absent in the workhorse
model of collateralized borrowing of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), but it might play a role
in practice, connecting the movements in the demand and supply of credit as defined in
our framework. Even if this were the case, however, our results suggest that a satisfactory
account of the credit boom requires a larger shift in credit supply than in loan demand in
response to their common determinants.
Our study also builds on the vast literature that focuses on the microeconomic foundations of leverage restrictions on financial intermediaries, in environments with agency,
5

This modeling device is also the foundation of many recent normative studies on macroprudential regulation, such as Bianchi et al., 2012, Mendicino, 2012, Bianchi and Mendoza, 2012, 2013, Lambertini et al.,
2013 Farhi and Werning, 2013, Korinek and Simsek, 2014.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

10

informational or incomplete market frictions (e.g. Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997, Adrian and
Shin, 2008, Geanakoplos, 2010, Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2010, Gertler and Karadi, 2011, Christiano and Ikeda, 2013, Bigio, 2013, Simsek, 2013). As in Adrian and Shin (2010a), Gertler
et al. (2012), Adrian and Boyarchenko (2012, 2013), Dewachter and Wouters (2012), He
and Krishnamurthy (2013), and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), we take these leverage
restrictions as given. These papers focus on risk as the fundamental determinant of credit
supply through its eﬀects on asset prices and intermediaries’ leverage, on their fragility when
leverage rises in tranquil times, and on the consequences of this fragility when tranquility
gives way to turbulence. Instead, we abstract from risk entirely, to concentrate on the link
between the availability of credit, household debt and home prices. The result is a very
simple model of the causes of the credit and housing boom, and of a possible trigger of its
demise. Central to our findings is the interplay between lending and borrowing constraints,
which is absent in this literature.
The paper closest to ours is Landvoigt (2014), who also stresses the interaction between
supply and demand of mortgage debt. He proposes a rich model of borrowing and lending
with intermediation, mostly focused on the eﬀects of securitization on mortgage finance over
the past several decades. In his model, mortgages can default and securitization allows to
transfer this risk from leverage-constrained intermediaries to savers with low risk aversion.
The final section of his paper studies the boom and bust of the 2000s, as we do here. In this
experiment, the credit cycle is driven by a slackening of collateral requirements, along with
a perceived decline in the riskiness of mortgages, which turns out to be incorrect. This
combination of shocks generates a boom and bust in debt and real estate values that is
qualitatively plausible. However, the response of house prices is small, partly because the
yield on mortgage backed securities rises during the boom. This eﬀect on mortgage rates is
at odds with the data (fact 4), and it is presumably due to the slackening of the collateral
constraint, which puts upward pressure on interest rates, as suggested by our model.
Risk is also central to the analysis of Favilukis et al. (2013), who present a life cycle
model with idiosyncratic income fluctuations and incomplete markets. In their framework,
a loosening of borrowing constraints, together with lower transaction costs for housing,
increases home prices by compressing their risk premium, since it improves the ability of
households to insure against income risk. This eﬀect is large enough to account for most
of the rise in real estate prices during the boom, but it is accompanied by an increase in

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

11

interest rates, since better risk sharing opportunities decrease precautionary saving, thus
increasing the demand for funds. To reverse this counterfactual increase in interest rates,
the model also needs an infusion of foreign capital to shift the supply of credit.
2. The model
This section presents a simple model with heterogeneous households that borrow from
each other, using houses as collateral. We use the model to establish that the crucial factor
behind the boom in house prices and mortgage debt of the early 2000s was an outward shift
in the supply of funds to borrowers, rather than an increase in the their demand driven
by lower collateral requirements, as mostly assumed by the literature so far. We illustrate
this insight in a simple endowment economy, without the unnecessary complications arising
from production and capital accumulation.
2.1. Objectives and constraints. The economy is populated by two types of households,
with diﬀerent discount rates, as in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Iacoviello (2005), Campbell
and Hercowitz (2009b) and our own previous work (Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti,
2014b,a). Patient households are denoted by l, since in equilibrium they save and lend.
Their discount factor is

l

>

b,

where

b

is the discount factor of the impatient households,

who borrow in equilibrium.
Representative household j = {b, l} maximizes utility
E0

1
X

t
j

[u (cj,t ) + vj (hj,t )] ,

t=0

where cj,t denotes consumption of non-durable goods, and vj (hj,t ) is the utility of the
service flow derived from a stock of houses hj,t owned at the beginning of the period. The
function v (·) is indexed by j for reasons explained in section 2.3. Utility maximization is
subject to the flow budget constraint
cj,t + pt [hj,t+1

(1

) hj,t ] + Rt

1 Dj,t 1

 yj,t + Dj,t ,

where pt is the price of houses in terms of the consumption good,

is the depreciation rate

of the housing stock, and yj,t is an exogenous endowment of consumption goods and new
houses. Dj,t is the amount of one-period debt accumulated by the end of period t, and
carried into period t + 1, with gross interest rate Rt . In equilibrium, debt is positive for the

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

12

impatient borrowers and it is negative for the patient lenders, representing loans that the
latter extend to the former. Borrowers can use their endowment, together with loans, to
buy non-durable consumption goods and new houses, and to repay old loans with interest.
Households’ decisions are subject to two more constraints. First, on the liability side of
their balance sheet, a collateral constraint limits debt to a fraction ✓ of the value of the
borrowers’ housing stock, along the lines of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). This constraint
takes the form
(2.1)

Dj,t  ✓pt hj,t+1,

where ✓ is the maximum allowed loan-to-value (LTV) ratio.6 Therefore, changes in ✓ aﬀect
households’ ability to borrow against a given value of their property. In practice, higher
values of ✓ capture looser collateral requirements, such as those associated with lower down
payments, multiple mortgages on the same property (so-called piggy back loans), and more
generous home equity lines of credit. A growing literature identifies changes in ✓, and in
the credit conditions that they represent, as an important driver of the credit cycle of the
2000s. Recent papers based on this hypothesis include Eggertsson and Krugman (2012),
Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2012), Hall (2012), Midrigan and Philippon (2011), Garriga et al.
(2012), Favilukis et al. (2013), and Boz and Mendoza (2014).
The second constraint on households’ decisions applies to the asset side of their balance
sheet, in the form of an upper bound on the total amount of mortgage lending that they
can extend
(2.2)

Dj,t  L̄.

This lending constraint is meant to capture a variety of implicit and explicit regulatory,
institutional and technological constraints on the economy’s ability to channel funds towards
the mortgage market.7

6This type of constraint is often stated as a requirement that contracted debt repayments (i.e. principal

plus interest) do not exceed the future expected value of the collateral. We focus on a contemporaneous
constraint for simplicity. This choice is inconsequential for the results, which mostly pertain to steady state
equilibria.
7In our stylized economy, this constraint also represents a limit on households’ overall ability to save. This
equivalence is an artifact of the assumption that mortgages are the only financial asset in the economy, but
it is not important for the results.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

13

For simplicity, we impose this constraint directly on the ultimate lenders. However,
appendix B shows that this formulation is equivalent to one in which financial intermediaries face a leverage (or capital) constraint and a cost of equity adjustment. When this
cost becomes very large, the leverage constraint on intermediaries boils down to a lending
constraint of the form (2.2), producing identical results to those in the baseline model.
This extreme formulation of the lending constraint is meant to create a stark contrast with
the more familiar collateral constraint imposed on the borrowers. From a macroeconomic
perspective, the lending limit produces an upward sloping supply of funds in the mortgage
market, which mirrors the downward sloping demand for credit generated by the borrowing
constraint. We illustrate this point in the next section, which characterizes the equilibrium
of the model. In section 4, we will use the implications of this equilibrium to argue that the
boom in credit and house prices of the early 2000s is best understood as the consequence
of looser constraints on lending, rather than on borrowing: an increase in L̄, rather than in
✓.

2.2. Equilibrium conditions. Given their lower propensity to save, impatient households
borrow from the patient in equilibrium. Therefore, the lending constraint (2.2) does not
influence their decisions, which obey the following optimality conditions
(2.3)
(2.4)
(2.5)
(2.6)

(1

(1

µt ) u0 (cb,t ) =

µt ✓) u0 (cb,t ) pt =

cb,t + pt [hb,t+1

µt (Db,t

b R t Et u

0
b vb (hb,t+1 )

(1

+

b (1

) hb,t ] + Rt

✓pt hb,t+1 ) = 0,

µt

0

(cb,t+1 )
⇥
⇤
) Et u0 (cb,t+1 ) pt+1

1 Db,t 1

0,

= yb,t + Db,t

Db,t  ✓pt hb,t+1 ,

where u0 (cb,t ) · µt is the Lagrange multiplier on the collateral constraint.

Equation (2.3) is a standard Euler equation weighting the marginal benefit of higher

consumption today against the marginal cost of lower consumption tomorrow. Relative
to the case of an unconstrained consumer, the cost of a tighter borrowing constraint, as
measured by the multiplier µt , reduces the benefit of higher current consumption, leading
the impatient to consume less than they otherwise would. Equation (2.4) characterizes

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

14

housing demand by the borrowers. It equates the cost of the consumption foregone to
purchase an additional unit of housing, with the benefit of enjoying this house tomorrow,
and then selling it (after depreciation) in exchange for goods. The term (1

µt ✓) on the

left-hand side of (2.4) reduces the cost of foregone consumption, as the collateral value
of the newly purchased unit of housing slackens the borrowing constraint. Equation (2.4)
shows that the value of a house to a borrower is increasing in the tightness of the borrowing
constraint (µt ) and the maximum admissible loan-to-value-ratio (✓). Finally, equation
(2.5) is the flow budget constraint of the borrower, while the expressions in (2.6) are the
complementary slackness conditions for the collateral constraint.
Since patient households lend in equilibrium, their decisions are influenced by the lending
constraint. Their equilibrium conditions are
(1 + ⇠t ) u0 (cl,t ) =

(2.7)
(2.8)

u0 (cl,t ) pt =

0
l vl (hlt+1 )

(2.9)

cl,t + pt [hl,t+1

(2.10)

⇠t

Dl,t

(1

+

l R t Et u

l

⇠t

(cl,t+1 )

⇥
⇤
) Et u0 (cl,t+1 ) pt+1

(1

) hl,t ] + Rt

L̄ = 0,

0

1 Dl,t 1

0,

= yl,t + Dl,t

Dl,t  L̄,

where u0 (cl,t ) · ⇠t is the Lagrange multiplier on the lending constraint. When this constraint

is binding, the lenders would like to save more at the prevailing interest rate, but they
cannot. The multiplier ⇠t then boosts the marginal benefit of current consumption in
their Euler equation (2.7), making it optimal to consume what they would rather save.
Equivalently, when the lending constraint binds, ⇠t reduces the lenders’ perceived rate of
return from postponing consumption, enticing them to tilt their consumption profile towards
the present. This eﬀect is in contrast with what happens to the borrowers, who must be
dissuaded from consuming more today so as not to violate their borrowing constraint.
Unlike the collateral constraint, though, the lending constraint does not aﬀect the demand
for houses, since the lending limit does not depend on their value. Otherwise, equations
(2.7)-(2.10) have similar interpretations to (2.3)-(2.6).

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

15

The model is closed by imposing that borrowing is equal to lending
(2.11)

Db,t + Dl,t = 0,

and that the housing market clears
hb,t + hl,t = h̄,
where h̄ is a fixed supply of houses.

2.3. Functional forms. To characterize the equilibrium of the model, we make two convenient functional form assumptions. First, we assume that the lenders’ utility function
implies a rigid demand for houses at the level h̄l .8 Consequently, we replace equation (2.8)
with
hl,t = h̄l .
In this equilibrium, houses are priced by the borrowers, who are leveraged and face a fixed
supply equal to h̄b ⌘ h̄

h̄l . This assumption and its implications for the equilibrium are

appealing for two reasons. First, housing markets are highly segmented (e.g. Landvoigt
et al., 2013), so that in practice there is little trading of houses between rich and poor
agents, lenders and borrowers. Assuming a rigid demand by the lenders shuts down all
trading between the two groups, thus approximating reality. Second, this simple modeling
device captures the idea that houses are priced by the most leveraged individuals, as in
Geanakoplos (2010), amplifying the potential eﬀects of borrowing constraints on house
prices.9
The second simplifying assumption is that utility is linear in non-durable consumption.

As a result, the marginal rate of substitution between houses and non-durables does not
depend on the latter. Furthermore, the level and distribution of income do not matter for
the equilibrium in the housing and debt markets, which makes the determination of house

8This is the reason why the utility from housing services v is indexed by j.
9Alternatively, one could assume that borrowers and lenders enjoy two diﬀerent kinds of houses, which are

traded in two separate markets. In this environment, shifts in either the lending or the borrowing limit
would only aﬀect the price of the borrowers’ houses, through their impact on the multiplier. This result
is consistent with the evidence in Landvoigt et al. (2013), according to which cheaper houses (presumably
those owned by borrowers) appreciated more than more expensive ones.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

16

prices simple and transparent. Re-arranging equation (2.4), we now have
(2.12)
where mrs = v 0 h̄

pt =

b

(1

µt ✓)

[mrs + (1

) Et pt+1 ] ,

h̄l , and the constant marginal utility of consumption was normalized

to one.
According to this expression, house prices are the discounted sum of two components:
first, the marginal rate of substitution between houses and consumption, which represents
the “dividend” from living in the house, and is also equal to their shadow rent; second,
the expected selling price of the undepreciated portion of the house. The discount factor,
in turn, depends on the maximum LTV ratio, ✓, and on the multiplier of the collateral
constraint, µt . Therefore, house prices are increasing in the fraction of the house that can
be used as collateral and in the tightness of the borrowing constraint.
Although it is extreme, the assumption of linear utility simplifies the mathematical structure of the model significantly, making its economics particularly transparent, especially in
terms of the determinants of house prices. With a constant shadow rent (mrs), house
prices can only vary due to fluctuations in the discount factor. This feature of the model
is consistent with the fact that house prices are significantly more volatile than measured
fundamentals, resulting in large fluctuations of price-rent ratios, as stressed for instance by
Favilukis et al. (2013).
Unlike in Favilukis et al. (2013), though, the discount factor in (2.12) does not depend on
risk, but on the tightness of the borrowing constraint, both through the multiplier µt and
the LTV ratio ✓. In our quantitative experiments, movements in µt associated with shifts
in the lending limit L̄ account for a large portion of the surge in house prices between 2000
and 2006, even if we abstract from risk entirely. This result, of course, does not rule out
an important role for risk in the pricing of houses over regular business cycles, nor over the
housing boom more specifically. However, it does suggest that a relaxation of lending limits
is a more promising approach to modeling the type of credit liberalization experienced by
the US economy since the late 1990s, than an increase in LTVs. Exploring the eﬀects of
looser lending constraints in a model with risk along the lines of Favilukis et al. (2013)
would be an interesting avenue for future research.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

17

3. Characterization of the Equilibrium
The model of the previous section features two balance sheet constraints, both limiting
the equilibrium level of debt in the economy. The collateral constraint on the liability side
of households’ balance sheets limits the amount of borrowing to a fraction of the value of
their houses (Db,t  ✓pt h̄b ). This is a standard tool used in the literature to introduce

financial frictions. The lending constraint, instead, puts an upper bound on the ability of

savers to extend mortgage credit. But in our closed economy, where borrowing must be
equal to lending in equilibrium, the lending limit also turns into a constraint on borrowing
(Db,t  L̄).10 Which of the two constraints binds at any given point in time depends on

the parameters ✓ and L̄, but also on house prices, which are endogenous. Moreover, both
constraints bind when ✓pt h̄b = L̄, a restriction that turns out to be far from knife-edge, due
to the endogeneity of pt .
To illustrate the interaction between the two balance sheet constraints, we start from

the standard case with only a borrowing limit, which is depicted in figure 3.1. The supply
of funds is perfectly elastic at the interest rate represented by the (inverse of the) lenders’
discount factor. The demand for funds is also flat, at a higher interest rate determined by
the borrowers’ discount factor. At the borrowing limit, however, credit demand becomes
vertical. Therefore, the equilibrium is at the (gross) interest rate 1/ l , where demand
meets supply and the borrowing constraint is binding, implying a positive multiplier on
the collateral constraint (µt > 0). In this equilibrium, the price of houses is determined by
equation (2.12), pinning down the location of the kink in the demand for funds.
Figure 3.2 extends the analysis to a model with a lending constraint. Now the supply of
funds also has a kink, at the value L̄. Whether this constraint binds in equilibrium depends
on the relative magnitude of L̄ and ✓pt h̄b . In figure 3.2, L̄ > ✓pt h̄b , so that the lending
constraint does not bind and the equilibrium is the same as in figure 3.1.11
If instead L̄ < ✓pt h̄b , the lending limit is binding, as shown in figure 3.3. The interest
rate now settles at 1/ b , higher than before. At this rate of return, savers would be happy
to expand their mortgage lending, but they cannot. At the same time, borrowers are
not limited in their ability to bring consumption forward by the value of their collateral,
10In an open economy model with borrowing from abroad, such as Justiniano et al. (2014b), this constraint

would become Db,t  L̄ + Lf,t , where Lf,t denotes the amount of foreign borrowing. Therefore, in such a
model, Lf,t plays a similar role to L̄ in relaxing or tightening the constraint.
11For this to be an equilibrium, the resulting house price must of course satisfy L̄ > ✓p h̄ .
t b

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

18

R

1/βb

1/βl

Demand of funds

Supply of funds

θ  p  hb

Db

Figure 3.1. Demand and supply of funds in a model with collateral constraints.

R

1/βb

1/βl

Demand of funds

Supply of funds

θ  p  hb

L

Db

Figure 3.2. Demand and supply of funds in a model with collateral and lending
constraints. The lending constraint is not binding.

€

but by the scarcity of funds that the savers can channel towards the mortgage market.
Equation (2.12) again determines the price of houses. However, this price is below that
in the scenarios illustrated in figures 3.1 and 3.2, since now the borrowing constraint does
not bind (i.e. µt = 0). In this equilibrium, house prices are low because real estate is not
valuable as collateral at the margin. An extra unit of housing does not allow any extra
borrowing, since the binding constraint is on the supply side of the financial market.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

19

R
Demand of funds

1/βb

1/βl

Supply of funds

L

θ  p  hb

Db

Figure 3.3. Demand and supply of funds in a model with collateral and lending
constraints. The lending constraint is binding.

€

Qualitatively, the transition from a steady state with a low L̄, as in figure 3.3, to one
with a higher L̄, as in figure 3.2, causes interest rates to fall while household debt and house
prices increase. This matches well the U.S. experience in the first half of the 2000s. Section
4 shows that this match also works quantitatively, and that a slackening of the constraint
on mortgage lending is also consistent with other patterns in the data.
In contrast, a slackening of the borrowing constraint through an increase in the LTV
parameter ✓ may result in higher interest rates and lower house prices, making it an unlikely
source of the U.S. housing boom in the 2000s. To see this, assume that the borrowing
constraint binds initially, as in figure 3.2. A suﬃciently large increase in ✓ pushes interest
rates up from 1/

l

to 1/ b , as the vertical “arm” of the demand for funds crosses over the

lending limit L̄, causing that constraint to bind. With the borrowing constraint no longer
binding, the multiplier µt falls to zero, putting downward pressure on house prices.12
Intuitively, an increase in ✓ expands the demand for credit, driving its price, the interest
rate, higher. And with higher interest rates, house prices fall. On the contrary, an increase
in the lending limit L̄ expands the supply of funds from lenders, pushing interest rates
down, and debt and house prices up, leaving the debt-to-collateral ratio approximately
unchanged.
12Starting instead from a situation in which the lending constraint is binding, as in figure 3.3, an increase

in ✓ would leave the equilibrium unchanged.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

20

Before moving on, it is useful to consider the case in which L̄ = ✓pt h̄b , when the vertical
arms of the supply and demand for funds exactly overlap. This is not an unimportant
knife-edge case, as the equality might suggest, due to the endogeneity of home prices. In
fact, there is a large and interesting region of the parameter space in which both constraints
bind, so that pt =

L̄
.
✓ h̄b

Given pt , equation (2.12) pins down the value of the multiplier µt ,

which, in turn, determines a unique interest rate
Rt =

1

µt
b

via equation (2.3). This is an equilibrium as long as the implied value of µt is positive, and
the interest rate lies in the interval [1/ l , 1/ b ].
We formalize these intuitive arguments through the following proposition.
Proposition 1. There exist two threshold house prices, p ⌘

1

b

mrs
b (1

)

such that:
(i) if

and

Db,t = L̄

Rt =

1

;

b

L̄ > ✓p̄ (✓) h̄b , the borrowing constraint is binding and
pt = p̄ (✓) ,

(iii) if

˜(✓) mrs
,
1 ˜(✓)(1 )

L̄ < ✓ph̄b , the lending constraint is binding and
pt = p,

(ii) if

and p̄ (✓) ⌘

Db,t = ✓p̄ (✓) h̄b

and

Rt =

1

;

l

✓ph̄b  L̄  ✓p̄ (✓) h̄b , both constraints are binding and

L̄
,
pt =
✓h̄b

Db,t = L̄

where mrs ⌘ v 0 h̄
Proof. See appendix A.

and

h̄l , ˜ (✓) ⌘

Rt =
✓

1
b

b l
b +(1 ✓) l



1

1

and p̄ (✓)

b (1

)
✓

mrs ·

p for every ✓

b ✓ h̄b /L̄

;

0.
⇤

As a further illustration of Proposition 1, figure 3.4 plots the equilibrium value of house
prices, debt and interest rates, as a function of the lending limit L̄, for a constant LTV
ratio ✓. The equilibrium behavior of these variables features three regions. Starting from
the left in the figure, the lending limit is binding while the borrowing limit is not (case
i). With a tight lending constraint, interest rates are high, while house prices and debt
are low. As L̄ rises past ✓ph̄b and lending constraints become looser, both constraints

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

21

p
p(θ )

€€
p

θ p(θ )h b

θ ph b

€

Db

€

€

L

€

θ p(θ )h b

€
€

θ p(θ )h b

θ ph b

R

€

€

L

€

1
βb

€
€

1
βl

θ ph b

θ p(θ )h b

L

€

Figure 3.4. Real house
price, debt and interest
rates as a function of L̄, given ✓.
€
€
€

start binding (case iii). In this middle region, interest rates fall and the collateral value of
houses rises, boosting their price and hence households’ ability to borrow. However, the
relationship between lending limits and house prices is not strictly monotonic. With further
increases in L̄, eventually only the borrowing constraint binds (case ii). In this region, the
model becomes a standard one with only collateral constraints, in which lending limits are
irrelevant for the equilibrium.
The qualitative implications of the transition towards looser lending constraints illustrated in figure 3.4 square well with the four stylized facts outlined in the introduction:
higher house prices and debt, a stable debt-to-collateral ratio and lower interest rates. The
next section calibrates the model to analyze its quantitative performance.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM
b

l

✓

22

⇢

0.003 0.9879 0.9938 0.80 0.0056
Table 1. Model calibration.
4. Quantitative analysis
This section provides a quantitative perspective on the simple model introduced above.
The model is parametrized so that its steady state matches key statistics for the 1990s, a
period of relative stability for the quantities we are interested in. We associate this steady
state with a tight lending constraint, as in figure 3.3. This assumption seems appropriate
for a period in which mortgage finance was still relatively unsophisticated, securitization
was still developing, and as a result savers faced relatively high barriers to investing in
mortgage-backed finance.
Starting from this steady state, we analyze the extent to which a lowering of these
barriers, in the form of a progressive increase in the lending limit L̄, generates the stylized
facts of the housing and debt boom between 2000 and 2006. The main conclusion we
draw from this experiment is that looser lending constraints are a crucial ingredient in the
dynamics of debt, house prices and interest rates in the period leading up to the financial
crisis. In contrast, a slackening of borrowing limits through higher loan-to-value ratios has
implications largely at odds with those same stylized facts. In fact, in our framework, a
relaxation of collateral requirements at the peak of the boom triggers a fall in house prices.

4.1. Parameter values. Table 1 summarizes the model’s calibration, which is based on
U.S. macro and micro targets.
Time is in quarters. We set the depreciation rate of houses ( ) equal to 0.003, based on
the NIPA Fixed Asset Tables. Real mortgage rates are computed as the diﬀerence between
the 30-year nominal conventional mortgage rate, published by the Federal Reserve Board,
and 10-year-ahead inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. The
resulting series is plotted in figure 1.4. The average real rate in the 1990s is slightly less
than 5% (4.63%) and falls by about 2.5% between 2000 and 2005. Accordingly, we set
the discount factor of the borrowers to match a 5% real rate in the initial steady state,
implying

b

equal to 0.9879. Given this value, we calibrate the lenders’ discount factor

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

23

to generate a fall in interest rates of 2.5 percentage points following the relaxation of the
lending constraint, yielding

l

= 0.9938. The resulting gap in discount factors between

patient and impatient households is in line with that chosen by Krusell and Smith (1998)
or Carroll et al. (2013) to match the wealth distribution in the US.
For the calibration of the remaining parameter—the maximum allowed LTV ratio (✓)—
we face two main challenges, due to some aspects of the theoretical model that are stark
simplifications of reality. First, the model assumes a collateral constraint with a constant
loan-to-value ratio. This simple specification, which is the most popular in the literature,
works well to provide intuition about the workings of the model, as in section 2. However,
calibrating ✓ to the initial loan-to-value ratio of the typical mortgage, say around 0.8, would
overstate the aggregate debt-to-real estate ratio in the economy because, in reality, mortgage
contracts require a gradual repayment of the principal over time. Consequently, average
loan-to-value ratios in the data are lower than those observed at origination, since they
reflect both new mortgages with relatively high LTVs and old mortgages whose principal
has been largely paid down.13
To capture this feature of reality in our quantitative exercises, we follow Campbell and
Hercowitz (2009b) and generalize the model by replacing the collateral constraint (2.1) with
(4.1)

Db,t  ✓pt Hb,t+1

(4.2)

Hb,t+1 =

1
X

(1

⇢)j [ht+1

j

(1

) ht

j] ,

j=0

where the last expression can be written recursively as
(4.3)

Hb,t+1 = (1

⇢) Hb,t + [hb,t+1

(1

) hb,t ] .

The variable Hb,t+1 denotes the amount of housing stock that can be used as collateral at
any point in time, which does not necessarily coincide with the physical stock of houses,

Hb,t+1 . Equation (4.2) describes the evolution and composition of Hb,t+1 . The houses built

today (ht+1

(1

) ht ) can all be pledged as collateral. Hence, they can “sustain” an

amount of borrowing equal to a fraction ✓ of their market value. Over time, though, these
houses loose their collateral “power” at a rate ⇢. Only a fraction (1

⇢)j of the houses

13If we ignored this fact and calibrated ✓ as we do below, the eﬀects of looser lending constraints would be

even larger than in the baseline calibration.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

purchased in t

24

j can be collateralized, with the remaining share representing amortization

of the loan and the associated accumulation of home equity. If ⇢ = , amortization and
depreciation coincide, so that the entire housing stock can always be pledged. In this case
Hb,t+1 is equal to Hb,t+1 and the collateral constraint is identical to (2.1). If ⇢ > , however,
contractual amortization is faster than depreciation, leading to accumulation of equity, as

in reality. This forced equity accumulation reduces the borrowing potential of the housing
stock and the average debt-to-real estate ratio in the economy, for any given value of the
initial LTV ✓. Appendix C characterizes the solution of the model with this generalized
version of the collateral constraint.
The borrowing constraint with amortization that we just described features two parameters, ✓ and ⇢, which allow the model to match information on maximum LTVs at origination,
as well as on the average ratio of mortgages to the value of real estate among borrowers.
To measure these objects, we first need to identify households in the data that resemble
the borrowers in the model.
One straightforward option would be to call borrowers all households with mortgage
debt, since only borrowers are indebted in the model. The problem with this strategy is
that in the real world many mortgage borrowers also own a substantial amount of financial
assets, which arguably makes them less severely constrained than the impatient borrowers
in the model, who only own the equity in their house. In some cases, however, the assets
held by these rich borrowers are illiquid, or otherwise unavailable to smooth consumption,
which makes them behave as “hand-to-mouth” consumers, as discussed by Kaplan et al.
(2014), Kaplan and Violante (2014),Campbell and Hercowitz (2009a), and Iacoviello and
Pavan (2013).
In light of this evidence, we follow the more conservative strategy of calling “borrowers”
the mortgage holders with limited liquid assets. We carry out this exercise in the Survey
of Consumer Finances (SCF), which is a triennial survey of the assets and liabilities of
U.S. households. Following Iacoviello and Pavan (2013) and Hall (2011), we set the limit
on liquid assets at two months of total income, where liquid assets are the sum of money
market, checking, savings and call accounts, directly held mutual funds, stocks, bonds, and
T-Bills, net of credit card debt, as in Kaplan and Violante (2014).
Given this definition of borrowers, we calibrate the initial loan-to-value ratio, ✓, as the
average LTV on “new” mortgages, which are those taken out by the borrowers in the year

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

25

immediately preceding each survey. These new mortgages include both purchases and
refinancings, but only if the amount borrowed is at least half the value of the house, since
mortgages with lower initial LTVs are unlikely to be informative on the credit conditions
experienced by marginal buyers (Campbell and Hercowitz, 2009b). A time-series average
of these ratios computed over the three surveys of 1992, 1995 and 1998 yields a value for ✓
of 0.8. This is a pretty standard initial LTV for typical mortgages and also broadly in line
with the cumulative loan-to-value ratio of first-time home buyers estimated by Duca et al.
(2011) for the 1990s.
For ⇢, the parameter that governs the amortization speed on loans, we pick a value of
0.0056 to match the average ratio of debt to real estate for the borrowers in the three SCFs
from the 1990s, which is equal to 0.43. Finally, the lending limit L̄ is chosen in the context
of the experiments described in the next subsection.
4.2. An expansion in credit supply. This subsection studies the quantitative eﬀects of
a progressive relaxation of the lending constraint. As we discussed in the introduction, this
relaxation captures in reduced form the many developments that made it easier for savings
to flow towards the mortgage market, such as the large inflow of foreign funds, and the
explosion of securitization and shadow banking. This so-called credit liberalization started
well before the year 2000, but it accelerated significantly around the turn of the millennium.
The premise for this exercise is that at the end of the 1990s the U.S. economy was
constrained by a limited supply of credit, as in figure 3.3 above. Starting in 2000, the
lending constraint is gradually lifted, following the linear path depicted in figure 4.1. Each
movement in L̄ is unanticipated by the agents and the experiment is timed so that the
lending constraint no longer binds in 2006. This timing is illustrated by the dotted part
of the line in figure 4.1, which corresponds to periods in which the lending constraint is
irrelevant for the equilibrium.
In the bare bones model presented above, an increase in L̄ aﬀects house prices and interest
rates only in the region in which both the lending and borrowing constraints are binding,
as demonstrated in proposition 1. Therefore, the movements in L̄ are calibrated to make
this region coincide with the period between 2000 and 2006, when the four developments
highlighted in the introduction were most evident. This modeling choice does not rule out
the possibility that the relaxation of lending constraints started before 2000. Securitization,
for instance, emerged in the late 1960s, although it did not become common place until the

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

26

1.3

1.2

1.1

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Figure 4.1. Credit supply expansion. Evolution of the lending limit relative to GDP.
1990s. In this regard, the model suggests that this process of credit liberalization would
have had relatively modest eﬀects as long as the lending limit was far enough below the
borrowing limit. This is why we ignore this earlier period in the simulations.
Figure 4.2 plots the response of the key variables in the model to the loosening of L̄
described above. The expansion in credit supply lowers mortgage rates by 2.5 percentage
points. This decline reflects the gradual transition from a credit-supply-constrained economy, where the interest rate equals

1
b

, to an economy that is constrained on the demand

side of credit, with a lower interest rate

1
l

. This permanent fall in mortgage rates is a

distinctive feature of our environment with lending constraints that cannot be replicated in
standard models with only a borrowing limit, since their steady state interest rate is always
pinned down by the discount factor of the lenders. Moreover, the magnitude of the decline
is in line with the evidence presented in the introduction, but this is just a function of our
calibration of the discount factors of the two sets of households.
As lending constraints become looser and mortgage rates fall below

1
b

, impatient house-

holds increase their demand for credit up to the limit allowed by the collateral constraint,
which becomes binding. The lower the interest rate, the more desirable is borrowing and
increasing today’s consumption, and the higher becomes the shadow value µt of relaxing

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

Annualized mortgage rate

27

House prices

6
150
5
140
4
130
3
120
2
110
1
100
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

1990

Debt−to−GDP ratio

1995

2000

2005

Debt−to−real estate ratio
0.55

1.2
0.5
1

0.45
0.4

0.8
0.35
0.6
1990

1995

2000

2005

0.3
1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 4.2. Credit supply expansion. Response of macro variables to the change
in the lending limit depicted in figure 4.1.

the collateral constraint. According to equation (2.12), a rise in µt increases the value of
houses to the borrowers, who are the agents pricing them, because their collateral services
become more valuable.
In our calibration, house prices increase by almost 40 percent in real terms following the
shift in credit supply, close to the U.S. experience depicted in figure 1.1. This substantial
increase in house prices relaxes the collateral constraint in equilibrium, allowing households
to borrow more against the higher value of their homes. In the model, mortgage debt
rises by approximately 30 percentage points of GDP. However, the debt-to-real estate ratio
remains unchanged, since debt and home values increase in parallel, as they did in the data
shown in figure 1.3.
In summary, a progressive loosening of the lending constraint that generates an increase
in household debt of 30 percentage points of GDP is associated with a large increase in
house prices, a stable debt-to-collateral ratio, and a fall in mortgage rates, as in the four
stylized facts of the boom.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

(a): Maximum LTV

−3

x 10

28

(b): Speed of repayment

7
6.5
1.1
6
1
5.5
0.9

5
4.5

0.8
4
0.7
3.5
0.6
1990

1995

2000

2005

3
1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 4.3. Looser collateral requirements. Evolution of the maximum LTV (✓)
and of the speed of repayment (⇢).
4.3. Looser collateral requirements. This section helps to put the success of the experiment we just presented in the right perspective by comparing its results to the implications
of a loosening of borrowing limits. This comparison is especially important because much
of the literature that studies the eﬀect of credit liberalization on debt and house prices
models this phenomenon as a loosening of collateral constraints.
To facilitate the comparison, we start the analysis in an economy without lending limits,
which is parametrized to match the same targets as in section 4.1. This calibration produces
the same values for most parameters, except for
is pinned down at

1
l

, so we set

rate in the 1990s. For

b

l

l

and

b.

In this model, the interest rate

at 0.9879 to match the 5 percent average real mortgage

we choose the value 0.9820 to maintain the same gap from the

discount factor of the lenders as in the previous experiment.
Given this parametrization, we study the eﬀects of a gradual increase in the maximum
LTV from 0.8, the baseline value of ✓, to 1.02, as shown in panel a of figure 4.3. This change
in ✓ is chosen to generate exactly the same increase in household debt as in the previous
experiment, making the two simulations easily comparable.
The dashed lines in figure 4.4 illustrate the behavior of debt, interest rates and house
prices in response to this change in ✓. The solid line replicates the paths from figure 4.2,
where the dynamics were driven by the relaxation of the lending constraint L̄. The contrast
between the solid and dashed responses highlights the remarkable ability of looser lending
limits to generate the stylized facts of the boom, even in this extremely simple model.
In comparison, the variables of interest respond little to the ✓ increase, or in ways that
are at odds with the data. First, interest rates are unchanged in this experiment, since

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

Annualized mortgage rate

29

House prices

6
150
5
140
4
130
3
120
2
1

Lending constraints
Collateral constraints:θ
Collateral constraints:ρ

0
1990

1995

2000

110
100
2005

1990

Debt−to−GDP ratio

1995

2000

2005

Debt−to−real estate ratio
0.55

1.2
0.5
0.45

1

0.4
0.8
0.35
0.6
1990

1995

2000

2005

0.3
1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 4.4. Response of macro variables to the change in collateral requirements
depicted in figure 4.3, compared to the responses to the change in the lending limit.

lenders are unconstrained and their discount factor pins down the interest rate. In a model
with short-run dynamics, for instance if agents were not risk neutral, interest rates would
actually increase in the short-run to convince savers to lend additional funds to the now
less constrained borrowers (e.g. Justiniano et al., 2014a). Second, house prices move little
in response to an increase in the maximum LTV, which is consistent with the results of
Iacoviello and Neri (2010), Kiyotaki et al. (2011) and Justiniano et al., 2014a. Consequently,
the increase in household debt arises from a combination of slightly higher house prices and
a rising debt-to-real estate ratio, as shown in the lower-right panel. The increase in the
latter is counterfactual, as we have already stressed.
Results are very similar if the same increase in household debt is driven by a reduction
in the speed of amortization ⇢, rather than by a rise in ✓. This experiment delivers a looser
borrowing constraint by increasing exogenously the stock of housing that can be pledged
as collateral (equation 4.2). In this scenario, the change in ⇢ is calibrated to generate the
same evolution of household debt as in the other two experiments. This requires gradually

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

30

decreasing ⇢ from its initial value of 0.0056 to a value of 0.0041, as shown in panel b of
figure 4.3. The resulting dynamics, given by the dashed-dotted lines in figure 4.4, are very
similar to those generated by the change in ✓ and equally at odds with some of the facts.
We conclude that the four phenomena discussed in the introduction are unlikely to have
been generated by looser borrowing constraints and that an increase in credit supply associated with lower barriers to mortgage lending is a much more plausible driver of the
housing and credit boom.
4.4. Why house prices started to fall: a potential trigger for the bust. The experiments presented in section 4.3 analyze the consequences of looser collateral constraints in
an economy without lending limits, or in which those limits are high enough to be irrelevant
for the equilibrium. This subsection shows that the same relaxation of collateral constraints
has substantially diﬀerent eﬀects if lending constraints are in fact present, and eventually
become binding. In this scenario, an increase in ✓ not only lifts interest rates and the debtto-collateral ratio, but it also depresses house prices. These outcomes are consistent with
observations between 2006 and 2008, when the mature phase of the housing boom gave
way to the bust. This novel account of the turnaround in the cycle is appealing because it
does not rely on a reversal of the forces behind the boom, unlike most of the literature.14
However, given its simplicity, the model has no ambition to capture the intricate dynamics
of the financial and economic crisis that followed the fall in house prices.
To illustrate the mechanics of a fall in house prices, we modify the experiment of section
4.2 so that the surge in L̄ between 2000 and the end of 2005 is followed by an increase in ✓
from 0.8 in 2006 to 1.02 at the end of 2008. Figure 4.5 shows the results of this combined
experiment. These simulations are identical to those in figure 4.2 through the end of 2005.
At that date the lending constraint is no longer binding, due to the expansion in L̄, and the
equilibrium is determined by the collateral constraint, as in figure 3.2. However, starting
in 2006 the increase in ✓ relaxes the collateral constraint, shifting the kink in the demand
for funds to the right, so that the collateral and lending constraint are once again both
binding.
When both constraints bind, a marginal loosening of the borrowing constraint (i.e. a
higher ✓) reduces house prices, as in case (iii) of Proposition 1, since L̄ = ✓pt h̄b . According
14For an exception, see Burnside et al. (2013). They present a model model with houses, but no credit, in

which the boom sows the seeds of the bust.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

Annualized mortgage rate

31

House prices

6
150
5
140
4
130
3
120
2
110
1
100
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1990

Debt−to−GDP ratio

1995

2000

2005

2010

Debt−to−real estate ratio
0.55

1.2
0.5
0.45

1

0.4
0.8
0.35
0.6
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

0.3
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Figure 4.5. The response to a loosening of lending constraints (an increase in
the lending limit L̄) followed by a relaxation of collateral constraints (an increase
in the maximum loan-to-value ratio ✓).

to this restriction, equilibrium borrowing cannot exceed the limited amount of available
funds. Therefore collateral values must fall when leverage is allowed to rise, so as to leave
overall borrowing unchanged at the level dictated by the lending constraint. In other words,
a slackening of the borrowing constraint reduces its shadow value (µt ) by more when the
amount of borrowing is constrained by the supply of funds rather than by their demand,
and when credit supply is not very interest-rate elastic. As house prices fall, mortgage
rates increase, debt is stable and the debt-to-collateral ratio rises, as shown in figure 4.5.
All these outcomes are broadly consistent with the evolution of these variables in the early
phase of the housing and credit bust.
In the experiment of this subsection, we increased L̄ and ✓ sequentially to isolate their
relative role in the boom and bust episode. In reality, the relaxation of lending and borrowing constraints is more likely to have proceeded in parallel, since both margins are a
manifestation of a broader process of financial liberalization. However, the model’s simple
insight is that an increase in ✓ will trigger a fall in house prices, even in environments

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

32

in which the two constraints are connected, as long as the expansion in credit demand
eventually outpaces that in supply.
5. Concluding Remarks
An unprecedented boom and bust in house prices and household debt have been among
the defining features of the U.S. macroeconomic landscape since the turn of the millennium.
Common accounts of this credit cycle, in the economics literature and beyond, have pointed
to changes in the tightness of borrowing constraints, and to the consequent shifts in credit
demand, as its key driver. In this paper, we argued that the focus of this discussion should
shift from constraints on borrowing to obstacles to lending, when it comes to understanding
the boom phase of the cycle.
Using a stylized model of borrowing and lending between patient and impatient households, we showed that the progressive erosion of these barriers is consistent with four key
empirical facts characterizing the boom: the large increase in house prices and mortgage
debt, a stable ratio between mortgages and the value of the real estate that collateralizes
them, and the fall in mortgage interest rates. The model’s ability to reproduce these facts
depends on the interaction between borrowing and lending constraints, and it cannot be
reproduced with either of the two constraints in isolation. In fact, the interplay of the two
constraints produces rich dynamics of interest rates, debt and house prices, which even hint
at a possible trigger of the fall in house prices.
To maximize our model’s tractability, and the transparency of its insights, we abstracted
from risk entirely. According to Favilukis et al. (2013), this is an important ingredient to
understand the evolution of house prices in response to a credit liberalization. Enriching
our framework along these lines represents an interesting, if challenging, avenue for future
research.
Appendix A. Proof of proposition 1
To prove part (i) of the proposition, consider first the case in which the lending constraint
is binding, but the collateral constraint is not, so that Db,t = L̄ < ✓pt h̄b , ⇠t > 0 and µt = 0.
With linear utility in consumption, Rt = 1/
(2.4) implies pt =

1

b

mrs
b (1

)

b

follows from equation (2.3), and equation

⌘ p. For this to be an equilibrium, we must verify that the

collateral constraint is not binding, as assumed initially. This requires L̄ < ✓ph̄b .

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

33

To prove part (ii) of the proposition, consider the opposite case in which the collateral
constraint is binding, but the lending constraint is not. It follows that Db,t = ✓pt h̄b < L̄,
⇠t = 0 and µt > 0. We can now derive Rt = 1/
(2.3) implies µt =
pt =

˜(✓) mrs
1 ˜(✓)(1 )

L̄ > ✓p̄ (✓) h̄b .

b/ l

l

from equation (2.7), while equation

1. Substituting the expression for µt into equation (2.4) yields

⌘ p̄ (✓), where ˜ (✓) ⌘

✓

b l
b +(1 ✓) l

. This is an equilibrium, provided that

To prove part (iii) of the proposition, we must find the equilibrium in the region of
the parameter space in which ✓ph̄b  L̄  ✓p̄ (✓) h̄b . Equations (2.3) and (2.7) together
imply that at least one of the two constraints must be binding in this region, but parts
(i) and (ii) of the proposition imply that it cannot be that only one of them binds in this
region. It follows that both constraints must be binding , implying Db,t = L̄ = ✓pt h̄b
and pt =
µt =

1

L̄
. Substituting the expression
✓ h̄b
) mrs· b ✓ h̄b /L̄
b (1
and, using (2.3),
✓

µt satisfies µt

for pt into equation (2.4), we can compute
h
i
Rt = 1b 1 1 b (1 ) ✓mrs· b ✓h̄b /L̄ . Finally,

0 as long as ✓ph̄b  L̄  ✓p̄ (✓) h̄b , which concludes the proof.

Appendix B. A Simple Model with Financial Intermediaries and Capital
Requirements
This appendix shows that our simple baseline model with a parametric lending limit L̄
is equivalent to the limiting case of a more realistic model with financial intermediation. In
this model, intermediaries face a capital requirement that their equity be above a certain
fraction of their assets, as in He and Krishnamurthy (2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov
(2014). Intermediaries finance mortgages by collecting savings from the patient households
in the form of either debt (i.e. deposits) or equity, where the latter can only be adjusted
by paying a convex cost, similar to Jermann and Quadrini (2012). In the limit in which
the marginal cost of adjustment tends to infinity, so that equity is fixed in equilibrium,
the capital requirement becomes a hard constraint on the funds supplied to the borrowers,
exactly as in the baseline model.
Although this case with infinite adjustment costs is extreme, it is qualitatively consistent
with the evidence on the stickiness of intermediaries’ equity first uncovered by Adrian
and Shin (2010b). If the marginal cost of adjusting the intermediaries’ capital were not
prohibitively large, as assumed here, the resulting supply of funds would be diﬀerentiable,

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

34

rather than having a kink, but it would still be upward sloping. This property of the supply
of mortgage finance is the key driver of our results.
In the model with intermediaries, competitive “banks” finance mortgages with a mix
of equity and deposits collected from the savers. Although the borrowers receive funds
from the intermediaries, rather than directly from the savers, their optimization problem
is identical to the one in section 2. The lenders, in contrast, maximize the same utility
function as in section 2, but subject to the flow budget constraint
cl,t + pt [hl,t+1
where

(1

) hl,t ]

Dl,t + Et  yl,t

RtD 1 Dl,t

1

+ RtE 1 Et

1,

Dl,t represents “deposits”, which pay a gross interest rate RtD , and Et represents

equity capital, with rate of return RtE . These interest rates can diﬀer from the borrowing
rate Rt .
With linear utility in consumption, the first order conditions of the problem of the lenders
become
RtD = RtE =

(B.1)

1

,

l

together with the condition hl,t = h̄l following from the maintained assumption that the
lenders’ demand for houses is rigid.
The competitive financial intermediaries maximize profits
(B.2)

Rt Db,t + RtD Dl,t

RtE [1 + f (Et )] Et

subject to the constraint that assets must equal liabilities,
(B.3)

Db,t + Dl,t = Et ,

and to a “capital requirement” that limits lending to a multiple of equity,
(B.4)

Db,t  Et .

The function f (Et ) represents a convex cost of issuing equity. As in Jermann and
Quadrini (2012), this cost is positive, creating a pecking order of liabilities whereby debt is
preferred to equity. We parametrize it as
✓ ◆
✓ ◆
Et
Et
=⌧
f
Ē
Ē

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

35

so that the bank’s first order conditions become
(B.5)

Rt
RtE

(B.6)
where

t



1 + ⌧ (1 + )

RtD =
✓

Et
Ē

t

◆

RtD =

t,

is the Lagrange multiplier on the capital requirement.

Combining these two conditions with the fact that RtD = RtE , we find that the interest
rate on loans is a weighted average of the cost of funding these loans with equity and
deposits
(B.7)

Rt =

In this expression, 1/

1


✓ ◆
Et
RtD 1 + ⌧ (1 + )
Ē

+

1

RtD .

is the share of bank liabilities held as equity when the capital

requirement is binding. Its cost is a markup over the interest rate on deposits RtD , which
reflects the marginal cost of issuing equity.
Since this marginal cost is everywhere positive, debt is always preferable to equity, making
the capital requirement constraint always binding for the financial intermediary. Therefore,
we can turn equation (B.7) into the supply of funds by substituting Et = Db,t / to obtain
◆
✓

⌧ (1 + ) Db,t
1
1+
.
Rt =
Ē
l
This supply function is increasing and convex for
exhibits a kink at Db,t =

> 1. When

! 1, the function

Ē, thus establishing the equivalence between this model with

intermediation and the simple model with a lending constraint, if we set L̄ =

Ē. This

equivalence furthermore provides an interpretation for changes in the lending limit L̄, as
stemming from changes in the leverage ratio of intermediaries , or in their cost of issuing
equity.

Appendix C. Solution of the model with home equity accumulation
The model used in section 4 to generate the quantitative results diﬀers from that illustrated in section 2 because the collateral constraint includes amortization of the principal.
This generalization involves replacing expression (2.1) with (4.1) and (4.3). The optimality

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

36

conditions of the problem of the borrowers therefore become
(C.1)
(C.2)

(1

(1

⇣t ) u0 (cb,t ) pt =

b R t Et u

0
b vb (hb,t+1 )

b (1

✓µt ) u0 (cb,t ) pt =

(C.3)

(⇣t

(C.4)

cb,t + pt [hb,t+1

(C.5)

µt (Db,t

(C.6)

µt ) u0 (cb,t ) =

(1

b Et

⇥

(cb,t+1 )

⇥
) Et (1

⇣t+1 ) u0 (cb,t+1 ) pt+1

⇢) ⇣t+1 u0 (cb,t+1 ) pt+1

(1

) hb,t ] + Rt

✓pt Hb,t+1 ) = 0,

Hb,t+1 = (1

+

0

µt

1 Db,t 1

0,

⇢) Hb,t + [hb,t+1

⇤

⇤

= yb,t + Db,t

Db,t  ✓pt Hb,t+1 ,
(1

) hb,t ]

where u0 (cb,t ) · µt and u0 (cb,t ) · pt · ⇣t are the Lagrange multipliers on the constraint Db,t 

✓pt Hb,t+1 and on the evolution of Hb,t+1 respectively. The optimality conditions of the
problem of the lenders and the market clearing conditions are the same as in the baseline.
To solve this model, first note that
Hb,t+1 =

⇢

h̄b .

Suppose now that the lending constraint is binding and the collateral constraint is not, so
that Db,t = L̄ < ✓pt ⇢ h̄b , ⇠t > 0 and µt = 0. With linear utility in consumption, Rt = 1/
follows from equation (C.1), and equations (C.2) and (C.3) imply pt =

1

b

mrs
)
b (1

b

⌘ p. For

this to be an equilibrium, the collateral constraint must actually not be binding, as assumed
above. This requires L̄ < ✓p ⇢ h̄b .
Suppose now to be in the opposite situation in which the collateral constraint is binding,

while the lending constraint is not. It follows that Db,t = ✓pt ⇢ h̄b < L̄, ⇠t = 0 and µt > 0. We
can now derive Rt = 1/

l

from equation (2.7), while equation (C.1) implies µt =

b/ l

1.

Substituting the expression for µt into equation (C.3) and combining it with (C.2) yields
pt =

b

1

mrs
·
) 1
b (1

1
b (1

b (1

⇢)

⇢)
✓ (1

This is an equilibrium, provided that L̄ > ✓p̄ (✓) ⇢ h̄b .

b/ l)

⌘ p̄ (✓, ⇢) > p.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

37

Finally, we must find the equilibrium of the model in the region of the parameter
space in which ✓p ⇢ h̄b  L̄  ✓p̄ (✓) ⇢ h̄b . Combining equations (C.1) and (2.7) implies
that at least one of the two constraints must be binding, and the results above show

that the value of the parameters in this region is inconsistent with only one of them
being binding. It follows that both constraints must bind at the same time, implying
Db,t = L̄ = ✓pt ⇢ h̄b and pt =

⇢ L̄
.
✓ h̄b

Substituting the expression for pt into equations (C.2)
1 b (1 ) mrs· b ✓h̄b /(⇢L̄) 1 b (1 ⇢)
and (C.3), we can compute the equilibrium value of µt =
· 1 b (1 ) ,
✓
and verify that it is positive if ✓p ⇢ h̄b  L̄  ✓p̄ (✓) ⇢ h̄b . We can then obtain Rt =

1 b (1 ) mrs· b ✓h̄b /(⇢L̄) 1 b (1 ⇢)
1
1
· 1 b (1 ) using (C.1).
✓
b
These results can be summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 2. In the model of section 4 there exist two threshold house prices, p ⌘
1

b ·mrs
b (1

)

(i) if

and p̄ (✓, ⇢) ⌘

b ·mrs
b (1

1

)

·

b (1 ⇢)
⇢) ✓(1

b/ l)

, such that:

Db,t = L̄

and

Rt =

1

;

b

L̄ > ✓p̄ (✓, ⇢) ⇢ h̄b , the borrowing constraint is binding and
pt = p̄ (✓, ⇢) ,

(iii) if

b (1

L̄ < ✓p ⇢ h̄b , the lending constraint is binding and
pt = p,

(ii) if

1

1

Db,t = ✓p̄ (✓, ⇢) h̄b
⇢

and

Rt =

1

;

l

✓p ⇢ h̄b  L̄  ✓p̄ (✓, ⇢) ⇢ h̄b , both constraints are binding and
pt =

Rt =

1
b

"

1

where mrs ⌘ v 0 h̄

1

⇢ L̄
,
✓h̄b

b (1

h̄l and p̄ (✓)

Db,t = L̄

)

mrs ·
✓

b

and

✓h̄b / ⇢L̄

1
·
1

b (1
b (1

#
⇢)
;
)

p for every 0  ✓  1.

References
Acharya, V. V. and M. P. Richardson (2009): “Causes of the Financial Crisis,” Critical
Review, 21, 195–210.
Acharya, V. V., P. Schnabl, and G. Suarez (2013): “Securitization without risk
transfer,” Journal of Financial Economics, 107, 515–536.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

38

Adam, K., P. Kuang, and A. Marcet (2012): “House Price Booms and the Current
Account,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 26, 77 – 122.
Adrian, T. and N. Boyarchenko (2012): “Intermediary leverage cycles and financial
stability,” Staﬀ Reports 567, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
——— (2013): “Intermediary balance sheets,” Staﬀ Reports 651, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2008): “Financial intermediary leverage and value at risk,”
Staﬀ Reports 338, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
——— (2010a): “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 3 of Handbook
of Monetary Economics, chap. 12, 601–650.
——— (2010b): “Liquidity and leverage,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 19, 418–437.
——— (2014): “Procyclical Leverage and Value-at-Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, 27,
373–403.
Ambrose, B. W. and T. G. Thibodeau (2004): “Have the GSE aﬀordable housing goals
increased the supply of mortgage credit?” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 34,
263 – 273.
Baker, S. R. (2014): “Debt and the Consumption Response to Household Income Shocks,”
Mimeo, Stanford University.
Bernanke, B. S., C. Bertaut, L. P. DeMarco, and S. Kamin (2011): “International
capital flows and the returns to safe assets in the United States, 2003-2007,” International
Finance Discussion Papers 1014, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(U.S.).
Bianchi, J., E. Boz, and E. G. Mendoza (2012): “Macroprudential Policy in a Fisherian
Model of Financial Innovation,” IMF Economic Review, 60, 223–269.
Bianchi, J. and E. G. Mendoza (2012): “Overborrowing, Financial Crises and ’Macroprudential’ Policy,” Mimeo, University of Wisconsin.
——— (2013): “Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential Policy,” NBER Working Papers
19704, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Bigio, S. (2013): “Financial Risk Capacity,” Mimeo, Columbia University.
Boz, E. and E. G. Mendoza (2014): “Financial Innovation, the Discovery of Risk, and
the U.S. Credit Crisis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 69, 1–22, forthcoming.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

39

Brunnermeier, M. K. (2009): “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23, 77–100.
Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Sannikov (2014): “A Macroeconomic Model with a
Financial Sector,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2013): “Understanding Booms and
Busts in Housing Markets,” Mimeo, Northwestern University.
Campbell, J. R. and Z. Hercowitz (2009a): “Liquidity constraints of the middle class,”
Working Paper Series WP-09-20, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
——— (2009b): “Welfare implications of the transition to high household debt,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 56, 1–16.
Carroll, C. D., J. Slacalek, and K. Tokuoka (2013): “The Distribution of Wealth
and the Marginal Propensity to Consume,” Johns Hopkins University, mimeo.
Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2014a): “Housing Booms, Labor
Market Outcomes, and Educational Attainment,” .
——— (2014b): “Masking and Aggregate Employment Changes: Housing Booms and Manufacturing Declines During the 2000s,” .
Christiano, L. J. and D. Ikeda (2013): “Leverage Restrictions in a Business Cycle
Model,” NBER Working Papers 18688, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Dewachter, H. and R. Wouters (2012): “Endogenous risk in a DSGE model with
capital-constrained financial intermediaries,” Working Paper Research 235, National
Bank of Belgium.
Di Maggio, M. and A. Kermani (2014): “Credit-Induced Boom and Bust,” Mimeo,
Columbia University.
Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and R. Ramcharan (2014): “Monetary Policy PassThrough: Household Consumption and Voluntary Deleveraging,” Mimeo, Columbia Business School.
Duca, J. V., J. Muellbauer, and A. Murphy (2011): “House Prices and Credit
Constraints: Making Sense of the US Experience,” Economic Journal, 121, 533–551.
Eggertsson, G. B. and P. Krugman (2012): “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity
Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1469–
1513.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

40

Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2013): “A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Presence
of Nominal Rigidities,” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Favara, G. and J. Imbs (2012): “Credit Supply and the Price of Housing,” Mimeo, Boad
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. V. Nieuwerburgh (2013): “The Macroecononomic Eﬀects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk Sharing in
General Equilibrium,” New York University, mimeo.
Fostel, A. and J. Geanakoplos (2012): “Tranching, CDS, and Asset Prices: How
Financial Innovation Can Cause Bubbles and Crashes,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 4, 190–225.
Garriga, C., R. E. Manuelli, and A. Peralta-Alva (2012): “A model of price swings
in the housing market,” Working Papers 2012-022, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Geanakoplos, J. (2010): “The Leverage Cycle,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 24, pp.
1–66.
Gerali, A., S. Neri, L. Sessa, and F. M. Signoretti (2010): “Credit and Banking in
a DSGE Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42, 107–141.
Gerardi, K. S., H. S. Rosen, and P. S. Willen (2010): “The Impact of Deregulation
and Financial Innovation on Consumers: The Case of the Mortgage Market,” Journal of
Finance, 65, 333–360.
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2011): “A model of unconventional monetary policy,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 58, 17–34.
Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
Business Cycle Analysis,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman
and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics, chap. 11, 547–
599.
Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Queralto (2012): “Financial crises, bank risk
exposure and government financial policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, S17–
S34.
Guerrieri, V. and G. Lorenzoni (2012): “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and
the Liquidity Trap,” University of Chicago, mimeo.
Hall, R. E. (2011): “The Long Slump,” American Economic Review, 101, 431–69.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

41

——— (2012): “Quantifying the Forces Leading to the Collapse of GDP after the Financial
Crisis,” Mimeo, Stanford University.
He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy (2013): “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” American Economic Review, 103, 732–770.
Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole (1997): “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and
the Real Sector,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 663–91.
Huo, Z. and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2014): “Financial Frictions, Asset Prices, and the Great
Recession,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Iacoviello, M. (2005): “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in
the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 95, 739–764.
——— (2014): “Financial Business Cycles,” Mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.
Iacoviello, M. and S. Neri (2010): “Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an
Estimated DSGE Model,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 125–64.
Iacoviello, M. and M. Pavan (2013): “Housing and debt over the life cycle and over
the business cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60, 221–238.
Jermann, U. and V. Quadrini (2012): “Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Financial Shocks,”
American Economic Review, 102, 238–71.
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2014a): “Household Leveraging
and Deleveraging,” Northwestern University, mimeo.
——— (2014b): “The Eﬀects of the Saving and Banking Glut on the U.S. Economy,”
Journal of International Economics, 92, Supplement 1, S52–S67.
Kaplan, G. and G. Violante (2014): “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica.
Kaplan, G., G. Violante, and J. Weidner (2014): “The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Kermani, A. (2012): “Cheap Credit, Collateral and the Boom-Bust Cycle,” Mimeo, University of California.
Kiyotaki, N., A. Michaelides, and K. Nikolov (2011): “Winners and Losers in
Housing Markets,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43, 255–296.
Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105,
211–48.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

42

Korinek, A. and A. Simsek (2014): “Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage,” Johns
Hopkins University, mimeo.
Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith (1998): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 867–896.
Lambertini, L., C. Mendicino, and M. T. Punzi (2013): “Leaning against boomÐbust
cycles in credit and housing prices,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 37,
1500–1522.
Landvoigt, T. (2014): “Aggregate Consequences of the Rise in Securitized Mortgage
Debt,” .
Landvoigt, T., M. Piazzesi, and M. Schneider (2013): “The Housing Market(s) of
San Diego,” Stanford University, mimeo.
Levitin, A. and S. Wachter (2012): “Explaining the Housing Bubble,” The Georgetown
Law Journal, 100, 1177–1258.
Loutskina, E. (2011): “The role of securitization in bank liquidity and funding management,” Journal of Financial Economics, 100, 663–684.
Loutskina, E. and P. E. Strahan (2009): “Securitization and the Declining Impact of
Bank Finance on Loan Supply: Evidence from Mortgage Acceptance Rates,” Journal of
Finance, 64, 861–889.
Mendicino, C. (2012): “Collateral Requirements: Macroeconomic Fluctuations and
Macro-Prudential Policy,” Working Papers w201211, Banco de Portugal, Economics and
Research Department.
Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2013): “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and
the Economic Slump,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1687–1726.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2009): “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124,
1449–1496.
——— (2010): “Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007Ð09,” IMF Economic Review,
58, 74–117.
——— (2011): “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the US Household Leverage Crisis,” American Economic Review, 101, 2132–56.
——— (2014a): “House Price Gains and U.S. Household Spending from 2002 to 2006,”
Mimeo, Princeton University.

CREDIT SUPPLY AND THE HOUSING BOOM

43

——— (2014b): “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?” Mimeo, Princeton
University.
Midrigan, V. and T. Philippon (2011): “Household Leverage and the Recession,” New
York University, mimeo.
Nadauld, T. and S. Sherlund (2009): “The Role of the Securitization Process in the
Expansion of Subprime Credit,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Working
Paper 2009-28.
Palmer, C. (2014): “Why Did So Many Subprime Borrowers Default During the Crisis:
Loose Credit or Plummeting Prices?” Mimeo, MIT.
Simsek, A. (2013): “Belief Disagreements and Collateral Constraints,” Econometrica, 81,
1–53.
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
E-mail address: ajustiniano@frbchi.org
Northwestern University, CEPR, and NBER
E-mail address: g-primiceri@northwestern.edu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
E-mail address: a.tambalotti@gmail.com

