                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         WAGE INEQUALITY AND FIRM GROWTH

                                        Holger M. Mueller
                                         Paige P. Ouimet
                                          Elena Simintzi

                                       Working Paper 20876
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20876


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2015




We thank Xavier Giroud and Johannes Stroebel for valuable comments and Raymond Story at Income
Data Services (IDS) for help with the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Holger M. Mueller, Paige P. Ouimet, and Elena Simintzi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Wage Inequality and Firm Growth
Holger M. Mueller, Paige P. Ouimet, and Elena Simintzi
NBER Working Paper No. 20876
January 2015
JEL No. J24,J31

                                                ABSTRACT

We examine how within-firm skill premia–wage differentials associated with jobs involving different
skill requirements–vary both across firms and over time. Our firm-level results mirror patterns found
in aggregate wage trends, except that we find them with regard to increases in firm size. In particular,
we find that wage differentials between high- and either medium- or low-skill jobs increase with firm
 size, while those between medium- and low-skill jobs are either invariant to firm size or, if anything,
slightly decreasing. We find the same pattern within firms over time, suggesting that rising wage inequality–even
nuanced patterns, such as divergent trends in upper- and lower-tail inequality–may be related to firm
growth. We explore two possible channels: i) wages associated with “routine” job tasks are relatively
lower in larger firms due to a higher degree of automation in these firms, and ii) larger firms pay relatively
lower entry-level managerial wages in return for providing better career opportunities. Lastly, we document
a strong and positive relation between within-country variation in firm growth and rising wage inequality
for a broad set of developed countries. In fact, our results suggest that part of what may be perceived
as a global trend toward more wage inequality may be driven by an increase in employment by the
largest firms in the economy.


Holger M. Mueller                                       Elena Simintzi
Stern School of Business                                University of British Columbia
New York University                                     Sauder School of Business
44 West Fourth Street                                   2053 Main Mall
Suite 9-190                                             Vancouver
New York, NY 10012-1126                                 V6T 1Z2
and NBER                                                Canada
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu                                  elena.simintzi@sauder.ubc.ca

Paige P. Ouimet
Kenan-Flagler Business School
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Paige_Ouimet@kenan-flagler.unc.edu
1       Introduction
A simple model of skill premia based on shifts in skill supply in conjunction with a steady
increase in skill demand, goes a long way toward explaining the rise in wage inequality
over the past decades.1 Much less is known about how skill premia–wage diﬀerentials
associated with jobs involving diﬀerent skill requirements–are determined inside the firm.
For instance, within a given firm, how much does a high-skill job, such as Human Resources
Director, pay relative to a lower-skill job, such as Human Resources/Personnel Assistant?
And does this wage diﬀerential vary across firms and over time? Understanding the
determinants of skill premia is important, as it might help us better understand their
variation and thus shed additional light on the causes of rising wage inequality.2
    A challenge in analyzing skill premia lies in their measurement. Conventional skill
measures, such as education or experience, are adequate if there is a one-to-one mapping
between workers’ skills and job tasks. In practice, however, workers with the same skill
endowment (e.g., college education) may perform a variety of diﬀerent job tasks, all with
diﬀerent skill requirements. Conversely, a given job task may be performed by workers
with vastly diﬀerent skill endowments. Drawing on this distinction between workers’ skills
and job tasks, Acemoglu and Autor (2011) argue that a richer, “task-based” framework
in which skills are endogenously assigned to job tasks is needed to understand recent
labor market developments, including the role of technological change and oﬀshoring for
employment and wages.3
    An alternative approach involves using occupations to measure skill premia. What is
appealing about occupations is that they are conceptually closer to job tasks. And yet,


    1
    See Katz and Murphy (1992), Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998), Card and Lemieux (2001), Acemoglu
(2002), Goldin and Katz (2007), Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008), and Acemoglu and Autor (2011). The
model is attributed to Tinbergen’s (1974, 1975) pioneering work on the race between education (skill
supply) and technology (skill demand).
    2
     In a similar vein, Autor (2014a, p. 843) speaks of the “centrality of the rising skill premium to the
overall growth of earnings inequality.”
    3
      Acemoglu and Autor (2011), building on earlier models by Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001), Autor,
Levy, and Murnane (2003), and Costinot and Vogel (2010), develop a task-based model in which workers’
skills, technology, and trade/oﬀshoring are competing inputs for performing various tasks. As in Ricardian
trade models, the equilibrium assignment of inputs to tasks depends on comparative advantage.

                                                    2
issues similar to those discussed above also arise here. That is, workers within a given
occupation may perform a variety of diﬀerent job tasks, all with diﬀerent skill require-
ments. Conversely, jobs with similar skill requirements may be performed by workers with
vastly diﬀerent occupational backgrounds. Indeed, we find both statements to be true in
our data, that is, there is no simple one-to-one mapping between occupations and skill
requirements.
   This paper uses a proprietary data set of UK firms in which wages are observed at the
job title-firm-year level. Important for our purposes, job titles are grouped into broader
“job level” categories–groups of jobs with similar skill requirements. Thus, our data
allow us to observe how much a given firm pays for jobs with particular skill requirements
in a given year. For example, job level 1, our lowest skill category, includes work that
“requires basic literacy and numeracy skills and the ability to perform a few straight-
forward and short-term tasks to instructions under immediate supervision.” Typical job
titles are cleaner, labourer, and unskilled worker. The second lowest skill category, job
level 2, includes work that “requires specific administrative, practical, craft or technical
skills gained by previous experience and qualifications to carry out a range of less rou-
tine work and to provide specialist support, and could include closer contact with the
public/customers.” Typical job titles are administrative assistant, driver, and operator.
And job level 3, the third lowest skill category, includes work that “requires broad and
deep administrative, technical or craft skills and experience to carry out a wider range of
activities including staﬀ supervision, undertaking specialist routines and procedures and
providing some advice.” Typical job titles are technician, craftsman, and skilled worker.
Altogether, there are nine distinct job levels representing diﬀerent levels of a firm’s hier-
archy. Not surprisingly, wages are increasing with job levels, suggesting that firms pay
more for jobs with higher skill requirements.
   Our main results examine how within-firm skill premia–wage diﬀerentials associated
with jobs involving diﬀerent skill requirements–vary both across firms and over time.
We compute skill premia as ratios of wages associated with diﬀerent job levels, and thus
diﬀerent skill requirements, within a given firm and year. Thus, a firm-year observation of,
say, “wage ratio 12” is the wage associated with job level 2 divided by the wage associated

                                             3
with job level 1 within the same firm and year.
    Popular measures of (overall) wage inequality, such as the 90/10 log wage diﬀerential,
compare wages from the top and bottom of the aggregate wage distribution. In our case,
wage ratios such as 18, 28, 19, or 29 also compare top and bottom earners. However, this
comparison is made within firms, meaning it is unaﬀected by firm composition eﬀects.
Perhaps more important, our wage ratios can be directly interpreted as skill premia, as
they are constructed from diﬀerent skill categories.
    When examining “top-bottom” (e.g., 18, 28, 19, or 29) wage ratios, we find that they
all increase with firm size. This is true regardless of whether we measure firm size by the
number of employees (our base specification) or firms’ sales. It is also true if we focus
exclusively on within-industry variation. The eﬀect is economically large. For example,
moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the firm-size distribution raises the wage
associated with job level 9 by 280.1% relative to the wage associated with job level 1.
Observe that this eﬀect is diﬀerent from the well-documented employer size-wage eﬀect
(e.g., Brown and Medoﬀ (1989), Oi and Idson (1999)). The latter shows that wages are
increasing with firm size. By contrast, our results show that wage diﬀerentials–in fact,
within-firm skill premia–are increasing with firm size.
    As several studies have noted, the rise in wage inequality–both in the UK and the
US–has not been uniform. While overall (e.g., 90/10) and “upper-tail” (e.g., 90/50)
inequality have risen steadily, “lower-tail” (e.g., 50/10) inequality has remained flat or, if
anything, contracted slightly.4 We find the exact same pattern in our data, except that
we find it with regard to increases in firm size. We already mentioned that “top-bottom”
wage ratios increase with firm size. Similarly, we also find that “top-middle” (e.g., 48, 49,
58, or 59) wage ratios increase with firm size. In contrast, “middle-bottom” (e.g., 14, 15,
24, 25) wage ratios do not increase with firm size. They either remain flat or, if anything,
decrease slightly. Overall, our results suggest that rising wage inequality–even nuanced
patterns, such as divergent trends in upper- and lower-tail inequality–may be related to
firm growth.

   4
     In the US, upper- and lower-tail wage inequality begin to diverge in the late 1980s. In the UK, they
begin to diverge a decade later. See Section 5.1 for details.

                                                   4
   To explore what is driving these results, we revisit the employer size-wage eﬀect. That
is, we analyze wage levels instead of wage ratios. We find that wages in high-skill job
categories (job levels 6 to 9) all increase with firm size. Moreover, the rate of increase
is greater for higher skill categories. In contrast, wages in low- and medium-skill job
categories (job levels 1 to 5) do not increase with firm size; they are either invariant
to firm size or, if anything, slightly decreasing. This suggests two things. First, while
the employer size-wage eﬀect also “holds” in our data–wages increase with firm size on
average–it is entirely driven by the upper tail of the skill distribution. Second, and more
important, the invariance of middle-bottom wage ratios to firm size is not driven by wages
in medium- and low-skill job categories both increasing at a similar rate. Rather, wages
in both skill categories are individually invariant to firm size.
   Why do wages in high-skill job categories increase with firm size but not wages in
low- and medium-skill job categories? One possible explanation is that there exist coun-
tervailing mechanisms putting downward pressure on wages in low- and medium-skill job
categories at larger firms, oﬀsetting the general tendency of wages to increase with firm
size. We focus on two such mechanisms. The first, building on seminal work by Autor,
Levy, and Murnane (2003), posits that wages associated with “routine” job tasks are rela-
tively lower in larger firms due to a higher degree of automation in these firms. Consistent
with this hypothesis, we find that wages associated with routine jobs decline relative to
those associated with non-routine jobs as firms become larger, especially in medium-skill
job categories. The second mechanism posits that larger firms pay relatively lower entry-
level managerial wages in return for providing better career opportunities. Consistent with
this hypothesis, we find that managerial wages in low- to medium-skill job categories are
relatively lower in larger firms, while those in high-skill job categories are relatively higher
in larger firms.
   In the final part of our firm-level analysis, we examine within-firm changes in skill
premia. In line with our previous results, we find that within-firm wage diﬀerentials
between high- and either medium- or low-skill job categories rise as firms grow larger,
while those between medium- and low-skill job categories remain unaﬀected.
   We lastly explore whether wage inequality and firm growth are related at the country

                                               5
level. In this regard, the question is: growth of what firms? As we argue in the paper,
when thinking about the relation between wage inequality and firm growth, one should
not be thinking about the median firm in the economy. The median firm in the US had
0-4 employees in 1992 and still has 0-4 employees today. Rather, the relation between
wage inequality and firm growth is likely driven by larger firms. To this end, we focus on
the 50 or 100 largest firms per country using a broad sample of developed countries that
includes the UK and US. We find evidence of strong firm growth among larger firms in
practically all of these countries. Most important, we find that within-country variation
in firm growth is positively and significantly related to rising wage inequality, even after
accounting for common time trends. In fact, our results suggest that part of what may
be perceived as a global trend toward more wage inequality may be driven by an increase
in employment by the largest firms in the economy.
   Altogether, our results suggest that firm growth, especially of larger firms, may con-
tribute to rising wage inequality in two ways. First, it may act as a catalyst for already
existing explanations that, as such, are not necessarily linked to firm growth. For instance,
explanations for the divergent trends in upper- and lower-tail wage inequality based on
the automation of routine job tasks (e.g., Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2006), Acemoglu
and Autor (2011)) do not require firm growth. However, if larger firms are more likely to
automate routine job tasks, then firm growth may act as a catalyst for task-replacing tech-
nological change. Second, firm growth may contribute to rising wage inequality through
channels that are inherently linked to firm size. For instance, if larger firms exhibit wider
spreads between top- and entry-level wages, then firm growth may directly contribute to
rising wage inequality through this channel.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data and summary
statistics. Section 3 examines how within-firm skill premia and wages per skill category
vary with firm size. Section 4 considers the role of automation of routine job tasks and
managerial career opportunities for skill premia. Section 5 explores within-firm changes
in skill premia and examines the relation between wage inequality and firm growth for a
broad set of developed countries. Section 6 concludes.



                                             6
2       Data and Summary Statistics

2.1     Pay-Level Data

We have comprehensive firm-level data on employee pay for a broad cross-section of UK
firms for the years 2004 to 2013. The data are provided by Income Data Services (IDS),
an independent research and publishing company specializing in the field of employment.
IDS was established in 1966 and acquired by Thomson Reuters (Professional) UK Limited
in 2005. It is the leading organization carrying out detailed monitoring of firm-level pay
trends in the UK, providing its data to various public entities, such as the UK Oﬃce for
National Statistics (ONS) and the European Union.
    IDS gathers information on employee pay associated with various job titles within a
firm. Firms are typically sampled multiple times. Sampled job titles may diﬀer across
firms. Important for our purposes, employers are asked to group job titles into broader
“job level” categories based on the skills required for the job. Thus, job levels are cat-
egories of jobs with similar skill requirements. By implication, given job titles may be
assigned to diﬀerent job levels if they involve jobs with diﬀerent skill requirements. This
is especially relevant across diﬀerent employers, where given job titles may have diﬀerent
meanings. IDS provides ten job levels in total, which can be broadly viewed as repre-
senting diﬀerent levels of a firm’s hierarchy. To increase the sample size in some of our
regressions, we combine the lowest two job levels into a single job level, implying that we
have nine job levels altogether.5
    Table 1 provides descriptions of all nine job levels along with examples of typical job
titles. For instance, job level 1, our lowest skill category, includes work that “requires basic
literacy and numeracy skills and the ability to perform a few straightforward and short-
term tasks to instructions under immediate supervision.” Typical job titles are cleaner,
labourer, and unskilled worker. The second lowest skill category, job level 2, includes
work that “requires specific administrative, practical, craft or technical skills gained by

    5
     The results with the original ten job levels are provided in Appendix Table A1. As can be seen,
except for the small sample size in some of the regressions involving the original job levels 1 and 2, all
results are qualitatively similar.

                                                    7
previous experience and qualifications to carry out a range of less routine work and to
provide specialist support, and could include closer contact with the public/customers.”
Typical job titles are administrative assistant, driver, and operator. And job level 3, the
third lowest skill category, includes work that “requires broad and deep administrative,
technical or craft skills and experience to carry out a wider range of activities includ-
ing staﬀ supervision, undertaking specialist routines and procedures and providing some
advice.” Typical job titles are technician, craftsman, and skilled worker.


2.2     Firm Size

To obtain measures of firm size, we match the IDS firm names to Bureau van Dijk’s
Amadeus database. Amadeus provides financial information about public and private
firms in the UK and other European countries. That Amadeus includes private firms
is especially important for us, because 40% of the firms in our sample are private. All
matches have been checked by IDS employees who are familiar with the sample firms.
Our matching success rate is 90%, providing us with a sample of 880 firms.
    Our main measure of firm size is the number of employees. However, our results are
similar if we measure firm size using firms’ sales (see Appendix Table A2). As is typical of
samples that include private and public firms, the firm-size distribution is heavily right-
skewed due to the presence of some very large, public firms. To avoid that outliers drive
our results, we winsorize firm size at the 5% level. Our results are similar if we winsorize
firm size at the 1% level (see Appendix Table A3).6
    The average firm in our sample is 32 years old, has 10,014 employees, book assets of
1,890 million GBP, and sales of 1,610 million GBP. There is considerable variation in firm
size. For example, moving from the 25th percentile (381 employees) to the median (1,705
employees) of the firm-size distribution involves an increase in firm size of 348%, and mov-
ing from the median to the 75th percentile (6,345 employees) involves a further increase

   6
    The non-winsorized firm-size distribution has a median of 1,705 employees, mean of 12,606 employees,
maximum of 508,714 employees, and skewness of 7.19. With 1% winsorizing, the distribution remains
heavily right-skewed: mean of 11,844 employees, maximum of 273,024 employees, and skewness of 5.21.
The 5% winsorized distribution has a mean of 10,014 employees, maximum of 97,300 employees, and
skewness of 3.03.

                                                   8
of 272%. Firms are also widely dispersed across industries. The five largest industry cat-
egories in our sample are manufacturing (SIC 20-39, 29.8% of firms), services (SIC 70-89,
23.1% of firms), transportation, communication, electric, gas, and sanitary services (SIC
40-49, 16.6% of firms), finance, insurance, and real estate (SIC 60-67, 14.9% of firms),
and wholesale and retail trade (SIC 50-59, 12.2% of firms). None of our results are driven
by industry composition eﬀects. Indeed, all our results hold if we focus exclusively on
within-industry variation (see Appendix Table A4).


2.3    Descriptive Statistics

Table 2 shows the distribution of wages for each job level, or skill category, based on all
firm-year observations. Wages are deflated using the consumer price index (CPI) provided
by the UK Oﬃce for National Statistics (ONS) and winsorized at the 1% level. As can
be seen, wages are increasing with job levels, suggesting that firms pay more for jobs
with higher skill requirements. For instance, the average wage in job level 1, our lowest
skill category, is 13,778 GBP, the average wage in job level 5 is 29,352 GBP, and the
average wage in job level 9, our highest skill category, is 110,693 GBP. Moving up one
level raises the average wage per job level by 29.8% on average, albeit the magnitude of
this diﬀerential varies. In particular, at lower job levels (1 to 3), moving up one level
involves a smaller increase (16.3% to 20.8%) than does moving up at medium or higher
job levels (4 to 8)(28.7% to 60.5%). Thus, wages are increasing with job levels, but the
rate of increase is larger at medium and higher levels.
   Our main focus is on skill premia–within-firm wage diﬀerentials associated with dif-
ferent job levels. Specifically, we compute for all (9 × 8)2 = 36 job-level pairs the
corresponding ratio of wages within a given firm and year. Thus, a firm-year observation
implies that we observe wages for both job levels in that particular firm and year. For
ease of comparison, we always divide wages associated with higher job levels by wages
associated with lower job levels, e.g., “wage ratio 12” means that we divide the wage
associated with job level 2 by the wage associated with job level 1.
   Table 3 shows the distribution of skill premia for all 36 job-level pairs. For instance,


                                            9
an average wage ratio of 8.286 associated with job-level pair 19 implies that the wage
associated with job level 9 is on average 8.286 times the wage associated with job level
1 when both wages are observed in the same firm and year. This is similar to the ratio
of average wages (as opposed to the average wage ratio) from Table 2, where the average
wage across all firms and years associated with job level 9 is 110 69313 778 = 8034
times the average wage associated with job level 1.
    As one might expect, average wage ratios are increasing with the distance between job
levels. For instance, wage ratio 12 is lower than wage ratio 13, which is lower than wage
ratio 14. Likewise, wage ratio 34 is lower than wage ratio 24, which is lower than wage
ratio 14. Finally, holding the distance between job levels fixed, average wage ratios are
higher when both job levels increase. For instance, wage ratio 13 is lower than wage ratio
24, which is lower than wage ratio 35.
    Table 3 also shows the percentage of firm-year observations for which a given wage
ratio exceeds one. This percentage is always close or equal to 100%, suggesting that
higher skill requirements are reflected in higher pay within a given firm and year. Indeed,
only 2.2% of firm-year observations have wage ratios of less than one. Dropping these
observations does not aﬀect our results.7
    When collecting wage data, IDS may not sample all job levels within a given firm
in the same year. In particular, low (1,2,3) and high (8,9) job levels are often sampled
in diﬀerent years, with the implication that job-level pairs involving both levels, such as
19, 29, or 39, may have relatively fewer observations. This raises two potential issues: i)
lack of statistical power, and ii) insuﬃcient variation. As we will see below, neither is a
serious concern. In fact, to the extent that we obtain insignificant results, this is always
in conjunction with regressions that have suﬃciently many observations.




   7
     That some firm-year observations have wage ratios of less than one suggests that skill requirements
are an important, but not the only, determinant of employee pay.

                                                  10
3       Skill Premia and Firm Size

3.1     Main Results

Table 4 contains our main results. For each job-level pair, we regress the corresponding
wage ratio, or skill premium, on firm size (both in logs). That is, we run 36 separate
regressions. As it turns out, there is a clear pattern in the data.
    Panel A includes all job-level pairs in which job level 1 is compared to higher job
levels. Moving from left to right, the distance between job levels (i.e., the wage ratio)
increases. As can be seen, the coeﬃcient on firm size is initially insignificant (wage ratios
12, 13, 14, and 15). Beginning with wage ratio 16, the coeﬃcient is positive and significant
(wage ratios 16, 17, 18, and 19). Moreover, when the coeﬃcient is significant, it is also
monotonically increasing in the wage ratio. For example, a one percent increase in firm
size implies that the wage associated with job level 6 increases by 0.0375% relative to
the wage associated with job level 1. By contrast, for the same increase in firm size, the
wage associated with job level 7 increases by 0.0883%, the wage associated with job level
8 increases by 0.162%, and the wage associated with job level 9 increases by 0.179%–all
relative to the wage associated with job level 1. Thus, a one percent increase in firm size
has a roughly five times bigger eﬀect on wage ratio 19 than on wage ratio 16.
    Panels B to D include all job-level pairs in which job levels 2, 3, or 4 are compared to
higher job levels. The pattern is similar to Panel A. Precisely, the coeﬃcient on firm size
is initially insignificant (or, in one case (wage ratio 23), negative and significant) and then
always positive and significant. Moreover, when the coeﬃcient is significant, it is also
monotonically increasing in the wage ratio.8 Finally, Panels E to H include all job-level
pairs in which job levels 5, 6, 7, or 8 are compared to higher job levels. The pattern is
again similar, except that there is no initial region in which the coeﬃcient on firm size is
insignificant. That is, the coeﬃcient on firm size is always positive and significant, and it
is always monotonically increasing in the wage ratio.
    In sum, even though we run 36 separate regressions, there is a clear pattern in the

    8
    There is one minor exception: in Panel D, the coeﬃcient on firm size decreases slightly between
wage ratios 48 and 49 (from 1.05 to 1.02).

                                                11
data. When low job levels (1 to 5) are compared to one another, an increase in firm
size has no eﬀect on within-firm skill premia. In contrast, when high job levels (6 to 9)
are compared to either one another or low job levels, an increase in firm size widens the
wage gap between higher and lower skill categories. This eﬀect is stronger the greater
is the distance between skill categories. For instance, moving from the 25th to the 75th
percentile of the firm-size distribution–an increase in firm size of 1,565%–raises the wage
associated with job level 9 by 280.1% relative to the wage associated with job level 1. By
contrast, for the same increase in firm size, the wage associated with job level 6 increases
only by 59.7% relative to the wage associated with job level 1.
   Our results are not driven by industry composition eﬀects. In fact, as we show in
Appendix Table A4, all our results hold if we focus exclusively on within-industry vari-
ation. If anything, the only noteworthy diﬀerence is that in two cases (wage ratios 24
and 25) the coeﬃcient on firm size is negative and significant while it was previously
negative and insignificant. As is shown in Appendix Table A2, our results are also similar
if we measure firm size using firms’ sales in lieu of the number of employees. Sales are
measured in logs and deflated using the consumer price index (CPI) provided by the UK
Oﬃce for National Statistics (ONS). Again, the only noteworthy diﬀerence is that in two
cases (wage ratios 24 and 25) the coeﬃcient on firm size is negative and significant while
it was previously negative and insignificant. Finally, our results are also not driven by
our choice of combining the lowest two IDS job levels into a single job level (see Appendix
Table A1) or winsorizing (see Appendix Table A3).
   As we already mentioned in the Introduction, there is a strong resemblance between
our results and patterns found in aggregate wage data. Specifically, both in the UK and
the US, there has been a “polarization” of wage trends: while overall (e.g., 90/10) and
“upper-tail” (e.g., 90/50) wage inequality have risen steadily, “lower-tail” (e.g., 50/10)
wage inequality has remained flat or, if anything, contracted slightly (see Section 5.1).
We find the exact same pattern in our data, except that we find it with regard to increases
in firm size. That is, “top-bottom” (e.g., 18, 28, 19, or 29) and “top-middle” (e.g., 48, 49,
58, or 59) wage ratios both increase with firm size, while “middle-bottom” (e.g., 14, 15,
24, 25) wage ratios remain flat or, in some cases, decrease slightly. Overall, this suggests

                                             12
that rising wage inequality–even nuanced patterns, such as divergent trends in upper-
and lower-tail inequality–may be related to firm growth. We explore this hypothesis in
more detail below.


3.2    The Employer Size-Wage Eﬀect Revisited

The invariance of middle-bottom wage ratios with regard to firm size raises questions.
Are wages in medium- and low-skill job categories both invariant to firm size? Or do
they merely increase (or decrease) at a similar rate? To address these questions, we next
revisit the employer size-wage eﬀect. That is, we analyze wage levels (in logs) instead of
wage ratios.
   Table 5 presents the results. The first column, which combines all job levels, includes
job-level fixed eﬀects. Thus, the comparison is between small and large firms within
a given job level, or skill category. As can be seen, the employer size-wage eﬀect also
“holds” in our data. Across all job levels, a one percent increase in firm size implies
an average wage increase of 0.0126%. This magnitude is very similar to the company
size-wage eﬀect in Brown and Medoﬀ (1989, Table 1, 1b), who report a wage-firm size
elasticity of 0.013% using May CPS wage data. However, not all wages increase with
firm size. Indeed, as the remaining columns show, wages in low- and medium-skill job
categories (job levels 1 to 5) do not increase with firm size–they are either invariant to
firm size or, if anything, slightly decreasing. In contrast, wages in high-skill job categories
(job levels 6 to 9) increase with firm size. For these wages, the rate of increase is larger
for higher job levels, which explains why “top-top” wage ratios, such as 78, 79, or 89, all
increase with firm size.
   Altogether, our results suggest two things. First, while the employer size-wage eﬀect
also holds in our data–wages increase with firm size on average–it is entirely driven by
the upper tail of the skill distribution. Second, and more important, the invariance of
middle-bottom wage ratios to firm size is not driven by wages in medium- and low-skill
job categories both increasing (or decreasing) at the same rate. Rather, wages in both
skill categories are individually invariant to firm size.


                                              13
4       Routine and Managerial Job Tasks
Why do wages in high-skill job categories increase with firm size but not wages in low- and
medium-skill job categories? One possible explanation is that there exist countervailing
mechanisms putting downward pressure on wages in low- and medium-skill job categories
at larger firms, oﬀsetting the general tendency of wages to increase with firm size.9 Below
we focus on two such mechanisms. The first posits that wages associated with “routine”
job tasks are relatively lower in larger firms due to a higher degree of automation in these
firms. The second mechanism posits that larger firms pay relatively lower entry-level
managerial wages in return for providing better career opportunities.


4.1     Routine versus Non-Routine Jobs

In a seminal paper, Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003, ALM) posit that computer capital
substitutes for human skills in carrying out a limited and well-defined set of cognitive
and manual activities that can be accomplished by following explicit rules and procedures
(“routine tasks”). Such activities are readily automated, because they can be codified in
computer sofware and thus performed by machines. On the other hand, computer capi-
tal complements “abstract” creative, problem-solving, and coordination activities (“non-
routine tasks”). Drawing on this distinction between routine and non-routine tasks, ALM
argue that computerization lowers the wages associated with routine tasks relative to
those associated with non-routine tasks.
    In a similar vein, Acemoglu and Autor (2011, p. 1138) note that “the set of tasks most
subject to machine displacement in the current era are those that are routine or codifiable.
Such tasks are primarily, though not exclusively, performed by medium skill (semi-skilled)
workers.” The authors argue that, under plausible assumptions, the automation of routine
job tasks raises the wages of high-skill workers relative to those of medium- and low-skill
workers. Importantly, however, the wages of medium-skill workers decline relative to



    9
    For arguments why wages may increase with firm size, including empirical tests, see, e.g., Brown
and Medoﬀ (1989), Oi and Idson (1999), and Troske (1999).

                                                14
those of low-skill workers.10
    Automation, whether in manufacturing or services, involves substantial fixed costs.
Hence, for CNC machine tools, CAD/CAM systems, robots, or logistics support tools to
pay their way, a firm’s scale of operations must be suﬃciently large. In view of the above
discussion, we may therefore hypothesize that wages associated with routine job tasks are
relatively lower in larger firms, especially for medium-skill workers.11 To investigate this
hypothesis, we divide job titles into two groups, routine and non-routine, based on their
SOC codes and the classification in ALM.12
    Specifically, we classify a job title as routine if the ALM routine task intensity measure
is above the sample median and the ALM non-routine task intensity measure is below the
sample median. Conversely, we classify a job title as non-routine if the ALM routine task
intensity measure is below the sample median and the ALM non-routine task intensity
measure is above the sample median. Job titles for which this assignment is ambiguous–
i.e., both task intensity measures are either above or below the sample median–are
dropped from the analysis.
    Panel A of Table 6 shows the distribution of routine and non-routine jobs for each
job level, or skill category. The last column reports their ratio. As can be seen, this
ratio follows a hump-shaped pattern, similar to what Autor and Dorn (2013, Figure 4)
find. Specifically, it peaks at job level 2, the second lowest skill category, and declines
(almost) monotonically thereafter. Indeed, routine jobs are virtually non-existent among
higher job levels (7 to 9), which is why these job levels are excluded from our subsequent

   10
    Empirical support for the ALM routinization hypothesis is provided by Autor, Katz, and Kearney
(2006, 2008), Goos and Manning (2007), Autor and Dorn (2013), Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2013),
Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenen (2014), and Goos, Manning, and Salomons (2014).
   11
      In general, the idea is that larger firms can better amortize the fixed costs associated with technology
adoption. If human skills and new technologies are complements, this implies that larger firms should pay
relatively higher wages (e.g., Hamermesh (1980), Dunne and Schmitz (1995)). By contrast, in the case
of routine job tasks, the presumption is that computer-controlled machinery may substitute for human
skills, implying relatively lower wages at larger firms.
   12
     The UK Oﬃce for National Statistics (ONS) and the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) provide
crosswalks between UK SOC codes, ISCO codes, and US SOC codes. Note that SOC codes do not
provide the same information as job levels, or skill categories. For example, UK SOC code 3562, defined
as “Human Resources and Industrial Relations Oﬃcers,” comprises job titles from various skill categories,
including Assistant HR/Personnel Oﬃcer, HR Junior Manager, Recruitment Oﬃcer, Senior Learning and
Development Oﬃcer, and Recruitment Manager.

                                                     15
regression analysis.
    Panel B examines whether wages associated with routine and non-routine jobs vary
diﬀerently with firm size. All regressions include job-level fixed eﬀects. Thus, the com-
parison is between routine and non-routine jobs within a given job level, or skill category.
Column (1) shows the average eﬀect across all job levels. As can be seen, on average,
wages associated with routine jobs decline relative to those associated with non-routine
jobs as firm size increases. Column (2) shows that this result is largely driven by jobs in
medium-skill categories. Precisely, while the coeﬃcient on the interaction term between
firm size and routine jobs is negative for all skill categories, it is strongest–both in mag-
nitude and statistical significance–for job levels 4 and 5. Thus, we may conclude that
wages associated with routine jobs are relatively lower in larger firms, especially for jobs
in medium-skill categories.


4.2     Managerial versus Non-Managerial Jobs

Larger firms provide more opportunities for promotion and career advancement, higher
managerial pay at the top (Rosen (1982)), and larger managerial internal labor markets.
We may therefore hypothesize that–in return for providing better career opportunities–
larger firms pay relatively lower entry-level managerial wages.13 To investigate this hy-
pothesis, we divide job titles into two groups, managerial and non-managerial, based on
their SOC codes and the NS-SEC classification provided by the UK Oﬃce for National
Statistics (ONS).14
    Panel A of Table 7 displays the distribution of managerial and non-managerial jobs


  13
     Tournament models (e.g., Lazear and Rosen (1981)) make similar predictions. In these models,
managerial incentives are provided through wage diﬀerentials (“prizes”) between lower- and higher-level
managerial jobs. Larger firms have more contestants and thus require greater wage diﬀerentials–i.e.,
lower entry-level managerial wages and higher top-level managerial wages (McLaughlin (1988)). Similarly,
deferred compensation models (e.g., Lazear (1979, 1981)) predict that larger firms pay lower entry-level
managerial wages as these firms can more credibly promise to make future wage payments due to their
lower bankruptcy risk.
  14
     The NS-SEC is an occupation-based classification scheme that is meant to identify the
socio-economic position of an employee, with explicit reference to managerial and supervi-
sory occupations.       See http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/classifications/current-standard-
classifications/soc2010/soc2010-volume-3-ns-sec—rebased-on-soc2010—user-manual/index.html#15.

                                                  16
for each job level, or skill category. The last column shows their ratio. As can be seen,
this ratio is lowest in job level 1 and increases (almost) monotonically thereafter. Indeed,
managerial jobs are virtually non-existent in job levels 1 and 2, while non-managerial jobs
are non-existent in job level 9. For these reasons, we exclude these job levels from our
subsequent regression analysis.
    Panel B examines whether wages associated with managerial and non-managerial jobs
vary diﬀerently with firm size. All regressions include job-level fixed eﬀects. Thus, the
comparison is between managerial and non-managerial jobs within a given job level, or
skill category. Column (1) shows the average eﬀect across all job levels. As can be seen,
managerial and non-managerial wages do not vary diﬀerently with firm size on average.
Column (2), which oﬀers a breakdown by skill category, shows that this is due to two
opposing eﬀects that oﬀset each other. Precisely, while the coeﬃcient on the interaction
term between firm size and managerial jobs is negative for low- to medium-skill categories
(job levels 3 to 5), it is positive for higher-skill categories (job levels 6 to 8). Thus, larger
firms pay relatively lower entry-level managerial wages but relatively higher top-level
managerial wages.



5     Wage Inequality and Firm Growth

5.1    Within-Firm Changes in Skill Premia

In this final part of our firm-level analysis, we explore how skill premia vary within
firms over time. As mentioned previously, IDS samples firms multiple times. The average
sampling rate is 3.6 times, and the median is 3 times. Therefore, we may focus exclusively
on within-firm variation. Table 8 presents the results. To facilitate comparison with
trends in aggregate wage data, we group skill premia into three categories: top-bottom
wage ratios (18, 28, 19, or 29; “overall wage inequality”), top-middle wage ratios (48, 49,
58, or 59; “upper-tail wage inequality”), and middle-bottom wage ratios (14, 15, 24, 25,
“lower-tail wage inequality”). All regressions include firm, year, and job-level pair fixed
eﬀects. As can be seen, firm growth has a positive eﬀect on top-bottom and top-middle


                                               17
wage ratios but no significant eﬀect on middle-bottom wage ratios. Thus, as firms grow
larger during the sample period, within-firm wage diﬀerentials between high- and either
medium- or low-skill jobs increase, while those between medium- and low-skill jobs remain
largely unaﬀected.
   Changes in within-firm wage diﬀerentials do not necessarily imply changes in aggregate
wage diﬀerentials. Whether they do depends fundamentally on which firms are driving
aggregate wage trends, an issue we revisit below. For now, let us merely say that our
results appear to line up well with aggregate wage trends in the UK during the sample
period. As Figure 1 shows, upper- and lower-tail wage inequality move in tandem until
the late 1990s, when they begin to diverge. Precisely, while upper-tail wage inequality
continues to rise, lower-tail wage inequality remains relatively flat.15 The US has witnessed
a similar polarization of wages, except that it begins a decade earlier (Figure 2).16 Our
results suggest that both patterns, for the UK and the US, may be related to firm growth.
The question, however, is: growth of what firms?


5.2       Growth of What Firms?

In the US, as in most countries around the world, the median firm is extremely small.
According to the 2011 U.S. Census Bureau’s Statistics of U.S. Businesses, the median
firm among all (payroll) firms has 0-4 employees.17 In fact, 62.1% of all firms have 0-
4 employees. At the same time, firms with 0-4 employees account for only 5.2% of all
employment. On the other hand, firms with 500+ employees, while constituting only 0.3%
of all firms, account for 51.5% of all employment. Most of this employment comes from
the very largest of firms: those with 10,000+ employees, while constituting only 0.016%
of all firms, account for 27.8% of all employment.
   The above statistics suggest that, when thinking about the relation between wage


  15
       Figure 1 is from Machin (2010, Figure 11.2). See also Machin and van Reenen (2007).
  16
    Figure 2 is from Goldin and Katz (2007, Figure 3). See also Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2006, 2008)
and Lemieux (2006, 2008).
  17
     If non-payroll firms–“self-employed persons operating unincorporated businesses”–are included,
the picture looks even more dramatic. Accordingly, 79.8% of all firms in 2011 are non-payroll firms.

                                                   18
inequality and firm growth, one should not be thinking about the median firm. The
median firm in the US had 0-4 employees in 1992 and still has 0-4 employees today.
Moreover, all of the theoretical arguments discussed in Section 4 apply to larger firms.
Indeed, the average firm in our sample of UK firms has 10,014 employees. Thus, our
results do not apply to small firms with only a few employees.
   Among larger firms, there has been substantial growth. Between 1980 and 2011, the
average firm size (in market values) among the largest 500 firms in the US has grown
by 425% (Gabaix, Landier, and Sauvagnat (2014)). Perhaps more informative for our
purposes are changes in employment. According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s Statistics
of U.S. Businesses, firms with 500+ employees account for 45.5% of all employment in
1988. By 2011, this number has risen to 51.5%, an increase of 13.2% in 23 years. Thus,
the median employee in the US today works for a firm with 500+ employees.
   A similar picture emerges when looking at the average employment (instead of the
employment share) of large firms. As is shown in Table 9 below, between 1986 and
2010, average employment by the 50 (100) largest firms in the US has risen by 55.8%
(53.0%). The numbers are similar for the UK, where average employment by the 50 (100)
largest firms has risen by 51.3% (43.5%). More generally, the table shows that over the
past decades, average employment by large firms has risen for a broad set of developed
countries. As we show next, for these countries, firm growth is positively related to rising
wage inequality–even after accounting for common time trends.


5.3     Wage Inequality and Firm Growth in Developed Countries

Besides the UK and the US, few other developed countries exhibit wage polarization
(Naticchioni, Ragusa, and Massari (2014)). This is somewhat puzzling, as most of these
countries exhibit employment polarization, which is essentially the “quantity counterpart”
to wage polarization.1819 Naturally, we would not expect our “more granular” results,
  18
    Autor (2014b) provides arguments for why employment polarization may not necessarily result in
wage polarization.
  19
    Empirical evidence of employment polarization is provided by Goos and Manning (2007, UK), Autor,
Katz, and Kearney (2006, 2008, US), Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenen (2014, 11 developed countries),
and Goos, Manning, and Salomons (2009, 2014, 16 European countries).

                                                19
especially those distinguishing between upper- and lower-tail wage inequality, to hold in
countries where wage polarization does not exist in the first place. However, on a less
granular level, our firm-level results suggest a relation between firm growth and overall
wage inequality, where the latter has risen in many, if not most, developed countries
(e.g., Machin and van Reenen (2007, Table 2), Machin (2010, Table 11.2), OECD (2011,
Table A1.1)). Thus, we may examine whether firm growth and overall wage inequality
are related at the country level.
   Our wage data are from LIS, formerly known as The Luxembourg Income Study.
LIS is a non-profit organization dedicated to collecting and distributing data for research
purposes and advertises as having the largest collection of harmonized micro data for a
broad set of countries and years. LIS data are particularly well suited for our purposes,
as they use oﬃcial data collected from individual countries’ statistical oﬃces.20 The data
include labor income for a broad cross-section of employees in a given country and year.
We limit our sample to full-time employees by excluding employees identified as part-time
and those that report working less than 35 hours per week. Using the sample of all full-
time employees in a given country and year, we estimate the 10th and 90th percentiles of
the respective wage distribution. Our measure of overall wage inequality is the log 90/10
wage diﬀerential. LIS data are not available for every year and, for most countries, there
is a gap of several years between surveys. On average, we have wage distribution data for
six diﬀerent years for the countries in our sample.
   We source firm size data from Thomson Reuters Worldscope. Worldscope provides
data on firm fundamentals for publicly listed firms in a broad set of countries. As discussed
in Section 5.2, the relationship between wage inequality and firm growth is likely driven
by larger firms. Accordingly, we calculate the average number of employees for either the
50 or 100 largest firms in a given country and year. (If there are fewer than 100 firms with
available employment data in a given country and year, that country-year observation is
dropped from the top 100 sample.) As is shown in Appendix Table A5, all results are


  20
     LIS data have been previously used in cross-country studies of wage inequality by Gottschalk and
Smeeding (1997) and Acemoglu (2003), among others. To further verifiy that LIS data are suitable for
our purposes, we have recreated Figures 1 (UK) and 2 (US) and obtained similar results.

                                                 20
similar if we use the median number of employees of the 50 (100) largest firms in lieu of
the average number of employees.
    Our final sample consists of all countries for which we have both wage data and firm-
size data: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States. The
earliest year in our sample is 1981, and the latest year is 2010. Table 9 shows for each
country the first and last year in the sample, number of country-year observations, and
change in average employment among the 50 (100) largest firms in the country between
the first and last sample year. As can be seen, firm growth is pervasive during the sample
period. With the exception of Denmark, the change in average employment among the
top 50 (100) firms is positive in all countries. Also, as mentioned before, large firms have
similar growth rates in the UK and the US.
    Table 10 examines the relation between wage inequality, expressed through the log
90/10 wage diﬀerential, and the average number of employees (in logs) of the 50 (100)
largest firms in a given country and year. The regressions in columns (1) and (4) include
both country and year fixed eﬀects. Those in columns (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) include country
fixed eﬀects but no year fixed eﬀects. Instead, they include a linear time trend defined
as the given year minus 1999. Two results stand out. First, and importantly, there is a
positive and significant relation between rising wage inequality and employment growth
by the largest firms in the economy. Second, adding firm size to the regression reduces the
magnitude of the coeﬃcient on the common time trend by 36.1% and 39.8%, respectively.
Thus, part of what may be perceived as a global trend toward more wage inequality may
be actually coming from an increase in employment by the largest firms in the economy.



6     Conclusion
We examine how within-firm skill premia–wage diﬀerentials associated with jobs involv-
ing diﬀerent skill requirements–vary both across firms and over time. Our results mirror
patterns found in aggregate wage trends, except that we find them with regard to in-
creases in firm size. In particular, we find that wage diﬀerentials between high- and either

                                            21
medium- or low-skill jobs increase with firm size, while those between medium- and low-
skill jobs are largely invariant to firm size. We find the same pattern within firms over
time, suggesting that rising wage inequality–even nuanced patterns, such as divergent
trends in upper- and lower-tail inequality–may be related to firm growth. To explore this
hypothesis more generally, we consider a broad set of developed countries focusing on the
50 or 100 largest firms per country. We find evidence of strong firm growth among large
firms in practically all of these countries. More importantly, we find that within-country
variation in firm growth is positively and significantly related to rising wage inequality,
even after accounting for common time trends.
    Altogether, our results suggest that firm growth, especially of large firms, may con-
tribute to rising wage inequality in two ways. First, it may act as a catalyst for already
existing explanations that, as such, are not necessarily linked to firm growth. For instance,
explanations for the divergent trends in upper- and lower-tail wage inequality based on
the automation of routine job tasks (e.g., Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2006), Acemoglu
and Autor (2011)) do not require firm growth. However, if larger firms are more likely
to automate routine job tasks, then firm growth may act as a catalyst for task-replacing
technological change (Section 4.1). Second, firm growth may contribute to rising wage
inequality through channels that are inherently linked to firm size. For instance, if larger
firms exhibit wider spreads between top- and entry-level wages, then firm growth may
directly contribute to rising wage inequality through this channel (Section 4.2). Clearly,
these are only two of several possible mechanisms through which firm growth may af-
fect wage inequality. Exploring these and other mechanisms in more detail constitutes a
fruitful area for future research.



7     References
 Acemoglu, Daron, 2002, Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market, Journal
      of Economic Literature 40, 7-72.

 Acemoglu, Daron, 2003, Cross-Country Inequality Trends, Economic Journal 113, F121-


                                             22
    F149.

Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor, 2011, Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implica-
    tions for Employment and Earnings, in: Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume
    4, Chapter 12, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.), 1043-1171, Amsterdam:
    North-Holland.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2001, Productivity Diﬀerences, Quarterly Jour-
    nal of Economics 116, 563-606.

Autor, David, 2014a, Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality Among the
    “Other 99 Percent,” Science 344, 843-851.

Autor, David, 2014b, Polanyi’s Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth, mimeo,
    MIT.

Autor, David, and David Dorn, 2013, The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the
    Polarization of the US Labor Market, American Economic Review 103, 1553-1597.

Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney, 2006, The Polarization of the U.S.
    Labor Market, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96, 189-194.

Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney, 2008, Trends in U.S. Wage Inequal-
    ity: Revising the Revisionists, Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 300-323.

Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Alan Krueger, 1998, Computing Inequality: Have
    Computers Changed the Labor Market? Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1169-
    1213.

Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane, 2003, The Skill Content of Recent
    Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration, Quarterly Journal of Economics
    118, 1279-1333.

Brown, Charles, and James Medoﬀ, 1989, The Employer Size-Wage Eﬀect, Journal of
    Political Economy 97, 1027-1059.


                                         23
Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux, 2001, Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Re-
    turn to College for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis, Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 116, 705-746.

Costinot, Arnaud, and Jonathan Vogel, 2010, Matching and Inequality in a World Econ-
    omy, Journal of Political Economy 118, 747-786.

Dunne, Timothy, and James Schmitz, Jr.,1995, Wages, Employment Structure and Em-
    ployer Size-Wage Premia: Their Relationship to Advanced-Technology Usage at US
    Manufacturing Establishments, Economica 62, 89-107.

Firpo, Sergio, Nicole Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, 2013, Occupational Tasks and Changes
    in the Wage Structure, mimeo, University of British Columbia.

Gabaix, Xavier, Augustin Landier, and Julien Sauvagnat, 2014, CEO Pay and Firm Size:
    An Update After the Crisis, Economic Journal 124, F40-F59.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence Katz, 2007, Long-Run Changes in the Wage Structure:
    Narrowing, Widening, Polarizing, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 135-165.

Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning, 2007, Lousy and Lovely Jobs: the Rising Polarization
    of Work in Britain, The Review of Economics and Statistics 89, 118-133.

Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons, 2009, Job Polarization in Europe,
    American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99, 58-63.

Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons, 2014, Explaining Job Polarization:
    Routine-Biased Technological Change and Oﬀshoring, American Economic Review
    104, 2509-2526.

Gottschalk, Peter, and Timothy Smeeding, 1997, Cross-National Comparisons of Earn-
    ings and Income Inequality, Journal of Economic Literature 35, 633-687.

Hamermesh, Daniel, 1993, Labor Demand, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                        24
Katz, Lawrence, and Kevin Murphy, 1992, Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Sup-
    ply and Demand Factors, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 35-78.

Lazear, Edward, 1979, Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?, Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 87, 1261-1284.

Lazear, Edward, 1981, Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions,
    American Economic Review 71, 606-620.

Lazear, Edward, and Sherwin Rosen, 1981, Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor
    Contracts, Journal of Political Economy 89, 841-864.

Lemieux, Thomas, 2006, Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Eﬀects,
    Noisy Data, or Rising Demand for Skill? American Economic Review 96, 461-498.

Lemieux, Thomas, 2008, The Changing Nature of Wage Inequality, Journal of Population
    Economics 21, 21-48.

Luxembourg Income Study Database (LIS), www.lisdatacenter.org (multiple countries;
    {2014}). Luxembourg: LIS.

Machin, Stephen, 2010, Changes in UK Wage Inequality Over the Last Forty Years,
    in: The Labour Market in Winter: The State of Working Britain, Paul Gregg and
    Jonathan Wadsworth (eds.), 155-169, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Machin, Stephen, and John Van Reenen, 2007, Changes in Wage Inequality, Special
    Paper No.18, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.

McLaughlin, Kenneth, 1988, Aspects of Tournament Models: A Survey, in: Research
    in Labor Economics, Volume 9, Ronald Ehrenberg (ed.), 225-256, Greenwich, CT:
    JAI.

Michaels, Guy, Ashwini Natraj, and John Van Reenen, 2014, Has ICT Polarized Skill
    Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries over 25 years, The Review of Economics
    and Statistics 96, 60-77.


                                         25
Naticchioni, Paolo, Giuseppe Ragusa, and Riccardo Massari, 2014, Unconditional and
    Conditional Wage Polarization in Europe, IZA DP No. 8465.

Oi, Walter, and Todd Idson, 1999, Firm Size and Wages, in: Handbook of Labor Eco-
    nomics, Volume 3, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.), 2165—2214, Amster-
    dam: North-Holland.

OECD, 2011, Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising, OECD Publishing.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1982, Authority, Control and the Distribution of Earnings, Bell Journal
    of Economics 13, 311-323.

Tinbergen, Jan, 1974, Substitution of Graduate by Other Labor, Kyklos 27, 217-226.

Tinbergen, Jan, 1975, Income Diﬀerences: Recent Research, Amsterdam: North Holland.

Troske, Kenneth, 1999, Evidence on the Employer-Size Wage Premium from Worker-
    Establishment Matched Data, Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 15-26.




                                         26
                                                          Table 1
                                                Job Levels / Skill Categories

Job Level   Examples of Job Titles                  IDS Description


                                                    Work requires basic literacy and numeracy skills and the ability to perform a
                                                    few straightforward and short-term tasks to instructions under immediate
                                                    supervision. Previous experience is not necessary (IDS Job Level 1). Work
 1          Cleaner, Labourer, Unskilled Worker     requires developed literacy and numeracy skills and the ability to perform some
                                                    routine tasks within procedures that may include keyboard and practical skills
                                                    and initial contact with customers. Some previous experience is required (IDS
                                                    Job Level 2).

                                                    Work requires specific administrative, practical, craft or technical skills gained
            Administrative Assistant, Driver,       by previous experience and qualifications to carry out a range of less routine
 2
            Operator                                work and to provide specialist support, and could include closer contact with
                                                    the public/customers (IDS Job Level 3).

                                                    Work requires broad and deep administrative, technical or craft skills and
            Technician, Craftsman, Skilled          experience to carry out a wider range of activities including staff supervision,
 3
            Worker                                  undertaking specialist routines and procedures and providing some advice (IDS
                                                    Job Level 4).

                                                    Work requires detailed experience and possibly some level of vocational
            Craftsman - Multiskilled,
                                                    qualification to be able to oversee the operation of an important procedure or to
 4          HR/Personnel Officer, Retail
                                                    provide specialist advice and services, involving applied knowledge of internal
            Manager
                                                    systems and procedures (IDS Job Level 5).

                                                    Work requires a vocational qualification and sufficient relevant specialist
            Engineer, Marketing Junior Manager,
 5                                                  experience to be able to manage a section or operate with self-contained
            Warehouse Supervisor
                                                    expertise in a specialist discipline or activity (IDS Job Level 6).

                                                    Work is concerned with the provision of professional services and requires an
            Area Sales/Account Manager,             experienced and qualified professional to provide expertise and advice and
 6
            Engineer - Senior, Manager - Middle     operate independently. Also includes operational managers responsible for
                                                    service delivery (IDS Job Level 7).

                                                    Work requires deep professional experience and qualifications in a specific
                                                    discipline to be able to carry out a range of specialist technical or scientific
            Engineering Manager, Lawyer -
 7                                                  activities, which may include the management of a team or services. May also
            Senior, Operations Manager
                                                    include specialist management roles responsible for delivery of a major service
                                                    (IDS Job Level 8).

                                                    Senior managerial roles involved in managing an important activity or
            Finance Function Head, IT Function
 8                                                  providing authoritative expertise, also contributing to the organisation as a
            Head, Sales Function Head
                                                    whole through significant experience (IDS Job Level 9).

                                                    Very senior executive roles with substantial experience in, and leadership of, a
            Finance Director, HR Director,
 9                                                  specialist function, including some input to the organisation’s overall strategy
            Lawyer - Head of Legal
                                                    (IDS Job Level 10).
                                                   Table 2
                                              Wages per Job Level

This table shows the distribution of wages for each job level, or skill category, across all firm-year observations.
Wages are in GBP. Job levels are described in Table 1. The sample period is from 2004 to 2013.



            Job Level          Obs.         Avg. Wage          25%             50%              75%

                1              696            13,778           11,090          13,413          16,001

                2              890            16,248           13,122          16,354          18,731

                3              852            19,621           16,471          19,715          22,371

                4              1,034          22,815           19,662          22,562          25,344

                5              955            29,352           24,783          28,496          32,901

                6              868            38,878           31,961          36,806          43,330

                7              696            52,977           40,632          48,793          60,587

                8              461            85,014           57,967          74,236          100,813

                9              240            110,693          77,844         101,494          131,004
                                                    Table 3
                                            Wage Ratios / Skill Premia

This table shows the distribution of wage ratios, or skill premia, for all 36 job-level pairs. Wage ratios are computed by
dividing the wage associated with the higher job level by the wage associated with the lower job level when both wages
are observed in the same firm and year. Job levels are described in Table 1. Ratio > 1 (%) denotes the percentage of
firm-year observations for which the wage ratio exceeds one. The sample period is from 2004 to 2013.



 Job-Level Pair         Obs.       Avg. Wage Ratio        25%              50%              75%          Ratio > 1 (% )

        12              559              1.171             1.083           1.154            1.234              96
        13              474              1.364             1.217           1.332            1.474              98
        14              449              1.635             1.371           1.579            1.791             100
        15              383              1.959             1.620           1.875            2.204             100
        16              295              2.517             1.964           2.342            2.928             100
        17              193              3.376             2.500           3.084            3.954             100
        18               74              5.920             3.616           4.742            6.817             100
        19               23              8.286             4.798           7.429            9.820             100


        23              660              1.208             1.108           1.173            1.281              95
        24              597              1.417             1.222           1.365            1.548              97
        25              511              1.728             1.430           1.652            1.907              99
        26              415              2.225             1.814           2.122            2.506             100
        27              251              2.899             2.208           2.683            3.364             100
        28               99              4.981             2.986           3.962            6.006             100
        29               36              7.301             5.064           6.379            9.383             100


        34              631              1.208             1.083           1.177            1.292              90
        35              542              1.496             1.264           1.428            1.634              98
        36              436              1.928             1.582           1.853            2.190             100
        37              275              2.507             1.909           2.260            2.904             100
        38              109              4.384             2.600           3.472            5.310             100
        39               46              6.515             4.212           5.735            8.670             100


        45              648              1.295             1.129           1.249            1.406              94
        46              542              1.655             1.383           1.575            1.846              99
        47              399              2.230             1.755           2.090            2.551             100
        48              202              3.547             2.493           3.237            4.157             100
        49              112              5.442             3.979           4.970            6.398             100
                                     Table 3 (continued)


Job-Level Pair   Obs.   Avg. Wage Ratio     25%            50%     75%     Ratio > 1 (% )

      56         693         1.315          1.161          1.278   1.429        94
      57         557         1.770          1.497          1.702   1.975        99
      58         346         2.720          2.059          2.463   3.055        100
      59         193         3.826          2.837          3.641   4.534        100


      67         576         1.362          1.220          1.338   1.468        96
      68         391         2.013          1.598          1.875   2.209        100
      69         214         2.806          2.088          2.685   3.296        100


      78         397         1.480          1.240          1.391   1.601        98
      79         213         2.121          1.700          1.981   2.391        100


      89         201         1.529          1.294          1.464   1.682        98
                                                       Table 4
                                             Skill Premia and Firm Size

The dependent variable is the skill premium, or wage ratio (in logs), associated with a given job-level pair. Firm size is
measured as the number of employees (in logs). All regressions include year fixed effects. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 2004 to 2013. *, **, and *** denotes significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


Panel (A):
Job-Level Pair      12           13          14           15           16           17           18            19

lg_empl          -0.00117      -0.00462    0.00791      0.00896     0.0375***    0.0883***     0.162***     0.179***
                 (0.00345)    (0.00506)   (0.00656)    (0.00926)     (0.0115)     (0.0152)     (0.0259)     (0.0392)

Constant         0.171***     0.373***    0.462***     0.626***     0.568***      0.445**      -0.232         0.372
                 (0.0296)     (0.0489)    (0.0664)     (0.0932)      (0.133)      (0.213)      (0.195)       (0.252)

Observations        559          474         449          383          295          193           74           23
R-squared          0.024        0.040       0.070        0.050        0.147        0.377        0.505        0.740


Panel (B):

Job-Level Pair      23           24          25           26           27           28           29

lg_empl          -0.0109***    -0.00493    -0.00905     0.00584     0.0605***    0.133***      0.152***
                  (0.00370)   (0.00545)   (0.00659)    (0.00883)     (0.0115)    (0.0256)      (0.0382)

Constant         0.268***     0.391***    0.632***     0.662***     0.482***       0.198       0.714**
                 (0.0337)     (0.0511)    (0.0675)     (0.0826)      (0.123)      (0.196)      (0.326)

Observations        660          597         511          415          251          99            36
R-squared          0.037        0.029       0.061        0.027        0.209        0.398        0.361


Panel (C):

Job-Level Pair      34           35          36           37           38           39

lg_empl           0.00412      0.00712    0.0187*      0.0717***    0.147***     0.159***
                 (0.00534)    (0.00750)   (0.0103)      (0.0152)    (0.0292)     (0.0370)

Constant         0.147***     0.320***    0.396***       0.246      0.476***       0.247
                 (0.0445)     (0.0671)    (0.0850)      (0.154)      (0.166)      (0.284)

Observations        631          542         436          275          109           46
R-squared          0.024        0.027       0.044        0.239        0.347        0.407


Panel (D):

Job-Level Pair      45           46          47           48           49

lg_empl          -0.000639    0.0205***   0.0566***    0.105***     0.102***
                 (0.00429)    (0.00660)   (0.00791)    (0.0126)     (0.0188)

Constant         0.207***     0.271***      0.147      0.330***     0.888***
                 (0.0423)     (0.0569)    (0.0940)     (0.0718)      (0.257)

Observations        648          542         399          202          112
R-squared          0.023        0.061       0.195        0.323        0.266
                                                 Table 4 (continued)


Panel (E):

Job-Level Pair      56          57          58            59

lg_empl          0.0201***   0.0413***   0.0887***     0.0914***
                 (0.00450)   (0.00617)    (0.0111)      (0.0132)

Constant         0.0874*      0.0916     0.276***      0.742***
                 (0.0472)    (0.0702)    (0.0630)       (0.143)

Observations        693         557         346           193
R-squared          0.071       0.160       0.272         0.221


Panel (F):

Job-Level Pair      67          68          69

lg_empl          0.0176***   0.0559***   0.0618***
                 (0.00426)   (0.00928)    (0.0124)

Constant          0.0493     0.119**     0.602***
                 (0.0405)    (0.0529)     (0.137)

Observations        576         391         214
R-squared          0.059       0.166       0.131


Panel (G):

Job-Level Pair      78          79

lg_empl          0.0326***   0.0457***
                 (0.00822)    (0.0103)

Constant          0.0310     0.361***
                 (0.0468)    (0.0790)

Observations        397         213
R-squared          0.101       0.106


Panel (H):

Job-Level Pair      89

lg_empl          0.0244***
                 (0.00875)

Constant         0.272***
                 (0.0923)

Observations        201
R-squared          0.050
                                                   Table 5
                                    The Employer Size-Wage Effect Revisited

The dependent variable is the wage (in logs) associated with a given job level, or skill category. Firm size is measured
as the number of employees (in logs). All regressions include year fixed effects. The regression in column “All”
additionally includes job-level fixed effects. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. The sample
period is from 2004 to 2013. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




          Job Level               All               1                2                3                4

          lg_empl             0.0126***        -0.0208***        -0.00631          -0.0110          0.00115
                               (0.00460)        (0.00614)        (0.00704)        (0.00698)        (0.00505)

          Constant             4.789***         5.020***         5.123***         5.361***         5.470***
                                (0.0364)         (0.0525)         (0.0560)         (0.0545)         (0.0431)

          Observations           6,692             696              890              852             1034
          R-squared              0.825            0.079            0.013            0.036            0.027



          Job Level                5                6                7                8                9

          lg_empl              0.000350        0.0262***        0.0535***        0.0884***         0.104***
                               (0.00628)        (0.00559)        (0.00714)         (0.0132)         (0.0143)

          Constant             5.631***         5.656***         5.701***         6.001***         6.089***
                                (0.0493)         (0.0498)         (0.0889)         (0.0750)         (0.110)

          Observations            955              868              696              461              240
          R-squared              0.041            0.061            0.151            0.223            0.227
                                                       Table 6
                                           Routine versus Non-Routine Jobs

Panel (A) shows the distribution of routine and non-routine jobs for each job level, or skill category. In Panel (B), the
dependent variable is the wage (in logs) associated with a given job level/routine (job level/non-routine) pair. Firm size
is measured as the number of employees (in logs). Routine is a dummy variable that equals one when a job title is
classified as routine as described in Section 4.1. The sample in Panel (B) is comprised of job levels 1 to 6. All
regressions include year and job-level fixed effects. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. The
sample period is from 2004 to 2013. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


  Panel (A):                                                       Panel (B):

                                             Routine/ Non-
     Job Level   Non-Routine     Routine                                                        (1)            (2)
                                               Routine

         1            35            193          5.514             lg_empl                   0.0127**       0.0126**
         2            32            379         11.844                                       (0.00588)      (0.00575)
                                                                   lg_empl × routine         -0.0176**
         3            74            290          3.919
                                                                                             (0.00856)
         4            213           177          0.831
                                                                   routine                    0.0984
         5            416           61           0.147                                        (0.0665)
         6            363           81           0.223             lg_empl × routine_lev1                    -0.0211*
                                                                                                             (0.0124)
         7            414           19           0.046
                                                                   lg_empl × routine_lev2                    -0.0150
         8            204            0           0.000                                                       (0.0106)
         9            163            0           0.000             lg_empl × routine_lev3                    -0.00855
                                                                                                             (0.0105)
                                                                   lg_empl × routine_lev4                  -0.0348***
                                                                                                             (0.0114)
                                                                   lg_empl × routine_lev5                   -0.0381**
                                                                                                             (0.0174)
                                                                   lg_empl × routine_lev6                    -0.0166
                                                                                                             (0.0131)
                                                                   routine_lev1                              0.184*
                                                                                                             (0.102)
                                                                   routine_lev2                              0.194**
                                                                                                             (0.0928)
                                                                   routine_lev3                               0.0394
                                                                                                             (0.0833)
                                                                   routine_lev4                              0.194**
                                                                                                             (0.0942)
                                                                   routine_lev5                              0.287**
                                                                                                             (0.134)
                                                                   routine_lev6                               0.0305
                                                                                                             (0.0962)
                                                                   Constant                  4.848***       4.802***
                                                                                              (0.0535)       (0.0666)

                                                                   Observations                2,314          2,314
                                                                   R-squared                   0.718          0.722
                                                   Table 7
                                    Managerial versus Non-Managerial Jobs

Panel (A) shows the distribution of managerial and non-managerial jobs for each job level, or skill category. In Panel
(B), the dependent variable is the wage (in logs) associated with a given job level/managerial (job level/non-
managerial) pair. Firm size is measured as the number of employees (in logs). Managerial is a dummy variable that
equals one when a job title is classified as managerial as described in Section 4.2. All regressions include year and job-
level fixed effects. The sample in Panel (B) is comprised of job levels 3 to 8. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 2004 to 2013. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.


 Panel (A):                                                           Panel (B):

                                                Managerial/
    Job Level   Non-Managerial    Managerial                                                        (1)          (2)
                                               Non-Managerial

        1             398             3             0.0075            lg_empl                     0.00819*     0.00802
        2             565             19            0.0336                                        (0.00497)    (0.00498)
                                                                      lg_empl × managerial        0.00877
        3             456             70            0.1535
                                                                                                  (0.00813)
        4             429             71            0.1655            managerial                   -0.0525
        5             515            228            0.4427                                        (0.0606)
                                                                      lg_empl × managerial_lev3                -0.00556
        6             345            354            1.0261
                                                                                                               (0.0287)
        7             217            393            1.8111            lg_empl × managerial_lev4                -0.0637*
        8              50            202            4.0400                                                     (0.0357)
                                                                      lg_empl × managerial_lev5               -0.0465***
        9              0             168             ND
                                                                                                               (0.0176)
                                                                      lg_empl × managerial_lev6                0.00562
                                                                                                               (0.00950)
                                                                      lg_empl × managerial_lev7               0.0382***
                                                                                                               (0.00744)
                                                                      lg_empl × managerial_lev8               0.0837***
                                                                                                               (0.0129)
                                                                      managerial_lev3                           -0.150
                                                                                                                (0.250)
                                                                      managerial_lev4                           0.545*
                                                                                                                (0.318)
                                                                      managerial_lev5                         0.403***
                                                                                                                (0.125)
                                                                      managerial_lev6                          0.00793
                                                                                                               (0.0676)
                                                                      managerial_lev7                         -0.287***
                                                                                                               (0.0603)
                                                                      managerial_lev8                         -0.431***
                                                                                                                (0.113)
                                                                      Constant                    5.175***    5.205***
                                                                                                  (0.0412)     (0.0415)

                                                                      Observations                 3,330        3,330
                                                                      R-squared                    0.691        0.711
                                                   Table 8
                                      Within-Firm Changes in Skill Premia

The dependent variable is the skill premium, or wage ratio (in logs), associated with a given job-level pair. The sample
in the column “Middle-Bottom” is comprised of job-level pairs 14, 15, 24, and 25 (“overall wage inequality”), that in
the column “Top-Middle” is comprised of job-level pairs 48, 49, 58, and 59 (“upper-tail wage inequality”), and that in
the column “Top-Bottom” is comprised of job-level pairs 18, 19, 28, and 29 (“lower-tail wage inequality”). Firm size is
measured as the number of employees (in logs). All regressions include firm, year, and job-level pair fixed effects.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 2004 to 2013. *, **, and ***
denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                       Job-Level Pairs      Middle-Bottom       Top-Middle        Top-Bottom

                       lg_empl                   0.0130           0.108**          0.777***
                                                (0.0211)          (0.0421)          (0.275)

                       Constant                0.466***            0.113            -4.213*
                                                (0.162)           (0.321)           (2.232)

                       Observations              1,940              853               232
                       R-squared                 0.716             0.811             0.880
                                                   Table 9
                                      Firm Growth in Developed Countries

This table shows for each country the first and last year in the sample, number of country-year observations, and change
in average employment (“change in firm size”) among the 50 (100) largest firms in the country between the first and
last sample year. The sample is the merged LIS-Worldscope sample described in Section 5.3. The sample period is from
1981 to 2010.



                                       Top 50 Firms                                     Top 100 Firms

                           First                         Change in          First                         Change in
 Country                           Last Year    Obs.                                 Last Year   Obs.
                           Year                          Firm Size          Year                          Firm Size

 Australia                 1985       2001        4        37.1%            1995       2001        2        16.2%
 Austria                   1994       2004        4        82.8%            1997       2000        2        18.3%
 Belgium                   1988       2000        5       112.2%            1992       2000        4        35.4%
 Canada                    1981       2010       10        73.1%            1981       2010        10       80.7%
 Denmark                   1995       2010        5        -2.1%            1995       2010        5         -4.3%
 Finland                   1987       2010        7        58.6%            1991       2010        5        46.7%
 France                    1994       2005        3        48.3%            1994       2005        3        40.3%
 Germany                   1984       2010        7        91.0%            1984       2010        7        87.3%
 Greece                    1995       2010        5       192.6%            1995       2010        5        201.7%
 Italy                     1987       2010       10        31.5%            1987       2010        10       30.3%
 Netherlands               1983       2010        8       107.9%            1987       2010        7        87.1%
 Spain                     1995       2010        5       200.3%            1995       2010        5        185.9%
 Sweden                    1987       1995        3        13.6%            1987       1995        3        15.5%
 United Kingdom            1986       2010        8        51.3%            1986       2010        8        43.5%
 United States             1986       2010        8        55.8%            1986       2010        8        53.0%
                                                  Table 10
                                       Wage Inequality and Firm Growth

The dependent variable is the log 90/10 wage differential. Firm size is measured as the average number of employees of
the 50 (100) largest firms in a given country and year (in logs). The sample is the merged LIS-Worldscope sample
described in Section 5.3. All regressions include country fixed effects. Those in columns (1) and (4) additionally
include year fixed effects, while those in columns (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) include a linear time trend instead. Time trend is
defined as the given year minus 1999. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The sample period is from 1981 to
2010. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                   Top 50 Firms                                     Top 100 Firms

                       (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)

lg_avg_empl         0.211***                           0.145**         0.206***                         0.183***
                     (0.0739)                          (0.0671)        (0.0609)                          (0.0562)

time_trend                          0.0104***        0.00656***                        0.0111***       0.00668***
                                     (0.00139)        (0.00193)                         (0.00127)       (0.00172)

Constant             -1.227*         1.170***          -0.270           -1.021*        1.170***           -0.527
                      (0.714)         (0.0114)         (0.665)          (0.539)         (0.00170)        (0.522)

Observations            92              92               92               84               84               84
R-squared             0.892            0.857            0.863            0.944           0.914            0.923
                              Figure 1
      Upper- and Lower-Tail Wage Inequality in the UK (1970-2009)




Source: Machin (2010, Figure 11.2).
                                Figure 2
        Upper- and Lower-Tail Wage Inequality in the US (1974-2005)




Source: Goldin and Katz (2007, Figure 3).
Appendix
                                                      Appendix Table A1
                                                  Original Ten IDS Job Levels

This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 4 in which the original ten IDS job levels are used. All
regressions include year fixed effects. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. The sample period
is from 2004 to 2013. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


Panel (A):

Job-Level Pair       12          13          14            15          16          17         18         19         110

lg_empl           0.00212     -0.00255     -0.0108      -0.00407     0.0326      0.0835*    0.169***   0.192***   0.471***
                  (0.00993)   (0.0126)    (0.0177)      (0.0253)     (0.0306)    (0.0441)   (0.0455)   (0.0562)    (0.0259)

Constant           0.147      0.329***    0.580***      0.742**       0.487       -0.215     -0.199     0.0827    -2.970***
                  (0.0945)     (0.105)     (0.148)       (0.291)     (0.352)     (0.463)     (0.349)    (0.610)    (0.293)

Observations        101          95          86            66          49          30          22         13          7
R-squared          0.056       0.055       0.063         0.095        0.222       0.290      0.527      0.608       0.993



Panel (B):

Job-Level Pair       23          24          25            26          27          28         29         210

lg_empl           -0.00204    -0.00671    0.00522       0.00735     0.0359***   0.0861***   0.160***   0.176***
                  (0.00308)   (0.00482)   (0.00642)     (0.00937)    (0.0115)    (0.0153)   (0.0257)   (0.0374)

Constant         0.177***     0.387***    0.482***      0.637***    0.582***     0.467**     0.216      0.395
                  (0.0272)    (0.0485)    (0.0651)      (0.0938)     (0.133)     (0.214)     (0.179)    (0.241)

Observations        553         467         447           378          292         191         73         22
R-squared          0.028       0.047       0.064         0.047        0.147       0.376      0.506      0.742



Panel (C):

Job-Level Pair       34          35          36            37          38          39         310

lg_empl          -0.0109***   -0.00493    -0.00905      0.00584     0.0605***   0.133***    0.152***
                  (0.00370)   (0.00545)   (0.00659)     (0.00883)    (0.0115)    (0.0256)   (0.0382)

Constant         0.268***     0.391***    0.632***      0.662***    0.482***      0.198     0.714**
                  (0.0337)    (0.0511)    (0.0675)      (0.0826)     (0.123)     (0.196)     (0.326)

Observations        660         597         511           415          251         99          36
R-squared          0.037       0.029       0.061         0.027        0.209       0.398      0.361



Panel (D):

Job-Level Pair       45          46          47            48          49         410

lg_empl           0.00412     0.00712     0.0187*      0.0717***    0.147***    0.159***
                  (0.00534)   (0.00750)   (0.0103)      (0.0152)     (0.0292)    (0.0370)

Constant         0.147***     0.320***    0.396***       0.246      0.476***      0.247
                  (0.0445)    (0.0671)    (0.0850)       (0.154)     (0.166)     (0.284)

Observations        631         542         436           275          109         46
R-squared          0.024       0.027       0.044         0.239        0.347       0.407
                                                  Appendix Table A1 (continued)


Panel (E):

Job-Level Pair      56          57          58            59         510

lg_empl          -0.000639   0.0205***   0.0566***     0.105***    0.102***
                 (0.00429)   (0.00660)   (0.00791)      (0.0126)   (0.0188)

Constant         0.207***    0.271***      0.147       0.330***    0.888***
                  (0.0423)    (0.0569)    (0.0940)      (0.0718)    (0.257)

Observations        648         542         399           202        112
R-squared          0.023       0.061       0.195         0.323      0.266



Panel (F):

Job-Level Pair      67          68          69           610

lg_empl          0.0201***   0.0413***   0.0887***     0.0914***
                 (0.00450)   (0.00617)    (0.0111)      (0.0132)

Constant          0.0874*     0.0916     0.276***      0.742***
                  (0.0472)    (0.0702)    (0.0630)      (0.143)

Observations        693         557         346           193
R-squared          0.071       0.160       0.272         0.221



Panel (G):

Job-Level Pair      78          79         710

lg_empl          0.0176***   0.0559***   0.0618***
                 (0.00426)   (0.00928)    (0.0124)

Constant          0.0493      0.119**    0.602***
                  (0.0405)    (0.0529)    (0.137)

Observations        576         391         214
R-squared          0.059       0.166       0.131



Panel (H):

Job-Level Pair      89         810

lg_empl          0.0326***   0.0457***
                 (0.00822)    (0.0103)

Constant          0.0310     0.361***
                  (0.0468)    (0.0790)

Observations        397         213
R-squared          0.101       0.106



Panel (I):

Job-Level Pair     910

lg_empl          0.0244***
                 (0.00875)

Constant         0.272***
                  (0.0923)

Observations        201
R-squared          0.050
                                                   Appendix Table A2
                                          Measuring Firm Size Using Firms’ Sales

This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 4 in which firm size is measured using firms’ sales (in logs). All
regressions include year fixed effects. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. The sample period
is from 2004 to 2013. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


Panel (A):

Job-Level Pair       12          13               14          15          16          17            18           19

lg_sales         -0.000724     -0.00665        0.00221      0.00122    0.0246**    0.0765***     0.133***     0.150***
                  (0.00283)   (0.00431)        (0.00582)   (0.00842)    (0.0102)    (0.0151)      (0.0279)     (0.0354)

Constant         0.166***     0.435***        0.484***     0.668***    0.503***     -0.00329      -0.330        -0.729
                  (0.0432)     (0.0699)        (0.0943)     (0.134)     (0.183)      (0.298)      (0.379)       (0.575)

Observations        580          490             462          394         302         198           78            26
R-squared          0.024        0.050           0.072        0.042       0.109       0.312         0.417        0.618



Panel (B):

Job-Level Pair       23          24               25          26          27          28            29

lg_sales         -0.0143***   -0.0119**       -0.0162**     -0.00548   0.0472***    0.110***     0.110***
                  (0.00297)   (0.00476)        (0.00655)   (0.00757)    (0.0102)    (0.0235)      (0.0371)

Constant         0.405***     0.537***        0.812***     0.780***      0.242       -0.527        0.245
                  (0.0474)     (0.0770)         (0.106)     (0.127)     (0.173)      (0.372)      (0.572)

Observations        686          618             532          432         261         104           40
R-squared          0.066        0.049           0.078        0.024       0.156       0.369         0.249



Panel (C):

Job-Level Pair       34          35               36          37          38          39

lg_sales          -0.00229     -0.00288        0.00875     0.0591***   0.111***     0.137***
                  (0.00465)   (0.00680)        (0.00877)    (0.0141)    (0.0293)    (0.0339)

Constant         0.214***     0.424***        0.402***      -0.0900     -0.0991     -1.101*
                  (0.0726)     (0.108)          (0.140)     (0.239)     (0.373)      (0.551)

Observations        648          557             445          280         112          48
R-squared          0.021        0.022           0.026        0.193       0.287       0.368



Panel (D):

Job-Level Pair       45          46               47          48          49

lg_sales          -0.00500    0.0171***       0.0499***    0.0956***   0.101***
                  (0.00441)   (0.00619)        (0.00756)    (0.0138)    (0.0186)

Constant         0.279***      0.170*           -0.203     -0.530**      0.147
                  (0.0720)     (0.0970)         (0.135)     (0.266)     (0.331)

Observations        666          557             412          209         115
R-squared          0.032        0.053           0.183        0.308       0.275
                                         Appendix Table A2 (continued)


Panel (E):

Job-Level Pair      56          57          58          59

lg_sales         0.0134***   0.0362***   0.0684***   0.0785***
                 (0.00388)   (0.00539)    (0.0108)    (0.0130)

Constant          0.0384      -0.165*      -0.324      0.149
                  (0.0683)    (0.0989)     (0.230)    (0.206)

Observations        716         577         361         203
R-squared          0.051       0.150       0.212       0.204



Panel (F):

Job-Level Pair      67          68          69

lg_sales         0.0153***   0.0418***   0.0514***
                 (0.00352)   (0.00843)    (0.0111)

Constant          -0.0488     -0.0943      0.130
                  (0.0585)    (0.107)      (0.175)

Observations        598         407         225
R-squared          0.055       0.133       0.119



Panel (G):

Job-Level Pair      78          79

lg_sales         0.0301***   0.0382***
                 (0.00712)    (0.0104)

Constant           -0.154      0.109
                  (0.104)     (0.164)

Observations        415         224
R-squared          0.091       0.098



Panel (H):

Job-Level Pair      89

lg_sales         0.0262***
                 (0.00789)

Constant          0.0667
                  (0.126)

Observations        212
R-squared          0.068
                                                   Appendix Table A3
                                          Winsorizing Firm Size at the 1% Level

This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 4 in which firm size is winsorized at the 1% level. All
regressions include year fixed effects. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. The sample period
is from 2004 to 2013. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


Panel (A):

Job-Level Pair       12          13              14          15          16           17           18            19

lg_empl          -0.000850    -0.00470        0.00756      0.00877    0.0343***    0.0805***    0.157***      0.172***
                  (0.00323)   (0.00482)       (0.00617)   (0.00862)    (0.0109)     (0.0141)     (0.0258)     (0.0410)

Constant         0.169***     0.374***        0.465***    0.628***    0.597***      0.521**       -0.195        0.417
                  (0.0277)     (0.0473)       (0.0642)     (0.0889)    (0.129)      (0.207)       (0.196)      (0.264)

Observations        559          474            449          383         295          193           74           23
R-squared          0.024        0.041          0.070        0.050       0.143        0.366        0.503         0.725



Panel (B):

Job-Level Pair       23          24              25          26          27           28           29

lg_empl          -0.0106***   -0.00453        -0.00814     0.00588    0.0543***    0.132***     0.152***
                  (0.00348)   (0.00509)       (0.00630)   (0.00840)    (0.0110)     (0.0252)     (0.0382)

Constant         0.266***     0.388***        0.624***    0.662***    0.536***       0.209       0.715**
                  (0.0321)     (0.0483)       (0.0656)     (0.0800)    (0.122)      (0.193)       (0.326)

Observations        660          597            511          415         251          99            36
R-squared          0.038        0.029          0.060        0.027       0.196        0.399        0.361



Panel (C):

Job-Level Pair       34          35              36          37          38           39

lg_empl           0.00449      0.00782        0.0184*     0.0660***   0.142***     0.156***
                  (0.00506)   (0.00706)       (0.00977)    (0.0144)    (0.0284)     (0.0376)

Constant         0.145***     0.314***        0.399***     0.293**    0.504***       0.272
                  (0.0423)     (0.0639)       (0.0817)     (0.148)     (0.162)      (0.288)

Observations        631          542            436          275         109          46
R-squared          0.024        0.028          0.045        0.229       0.345        0.402



Panel (D):

Job-Level Pair       45          46              47          48          49

lg_empl          -0.000185    0.0193***      0.0510***    0.0985***   0.0901***
                  (0.00401)   (0.00612)       (0.00765)    (0.0136)    (0.0195)

Constant         0.203***     0.280***        0.189**     0.365***    0.996***
                  (0.0403)     (0.0545)       (0.0919)     (0.0774)    (0.266)

Observations        648          542            399          202         112
R-squared          0.023        0.060          0.186        0.311       0.243
                                         Appendix Table A3 (continued)


Panel (E):

Job-Level Pair      56          57          58          59

lg_empl          0.0186***   0.0368***   0.0823***   0.0823***
                 (0.00434)   (0.00602)    (0.0104)    (0.0124)

Constant         0.0993**     0.127*     0.312***    0.808***
                  (0.0466)    (0.0688)    (0.0593)    (0.141)

Observations        693         557         346         193
R-squared          0.070       0.149       0.265       0.209



Panel (F):

Job-Level Pair      67          68          69

lg_empl          0.0155***   0.0506***   0.0576***
                 (0.00433)   (0.00933)    (0.0116)

Constant          0.0644     0.149***    0.634***
                  (0.0404)    (0.0532)    (0.136)

Observations        576         391         214
R-squared          0.055       0.156       0.128



Panel (G):

Job-Level Pair      78          79

lg_empl          0.0312***   0.0429***
                 (0.00769)   (0.00946)

Constant          0.0390     0.383***
                  (0.0438)    (0.0725)

Observations        397         213
R-squared          0.102       0.105



Panel (H):

Job-Level Pair      89

lg_empl          0.0226***
                 (0.00790)

Constant         0.287***
                  (0.0883)

Observations        201
R-squared          0.048
                                                Appendix Table A4
                                              Within-Industry Analysis

This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 4 which include both year and 2-digit SIC industry fixed effects.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. The sample period is from 2004 to 2013. *, **, and ***
denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


Panel (A):

Job-Level Pair       12           13          14           15           16           17            18           19

lg_empl           -0.00313     -0.00906     -0.0131      -0.0123       0.0175     0.0491***      0.107**       0.185*
                  (0.00435)    (0.00813)    (0.0101)    (0.00907)     (0.0127)     (0.0159)      (0.0414)     (0.0991)

Constant         0.280***       0.125*     0.515***     0.860***     0.951***      0.736***      0.592**       -0.104
                  (0.0337)     (0.0647)     (0.0845)     (0.0948)      (0.113)      (0.235)      (0.289)       (1.217)

Observations        552          468          442          377          291          190           73            22
R-squared          0.155        0.178        0.287        0.336        0.380        0.588         0.680        0.949



Panel (B):

Job-Level Pair       23           24          25           26           27           28            29

lg_empl          -0.0154***   -0.0207***   -0.0173**     -0.0101      0.0313**     0.0817**      0.224**
                  (0.00455)    (0.00619)   (0.00672)    (0.00878)     (0.0128)     (0.0324)      (0.104)

Constant         0.577***     0.739***     0.953***     0.581***     0.402***       -0.462       -0.648
                  (0.0314)     (0.0775)     (0.0590)     (0.0704)      (0.134)      (0.511)      (1.225)

Observations        652          589          506          412          249           99           36
R-squared          0.194        0.289        0.347        0.351        0.443        0.607         0.859



Panel (C):

Job-Level Pair       34           35          36           37           38           39

lg_empl           -0.00296     0.000319     0.00739     0.0417***    0.110***       0.0949
                  (0.00477)    (0.00611)   (0.00864)     (0.0123)     (0.0289)     (0.0571)

Constant         0.385***     0.700***     0.394***     0.514***      -0.0876       0.212
                  (0.0384)     (0.0475)     (0.0619)     (0.195)       (0.401)      (0.703)

Observations        622          537          434          274          109           46
R-squared          0.265        0.283        0.319        0.432        0.596        0.790



Panel (D):

Job-Level Pair       45           46          47           48           49

lg_empl           0.00647     0.0231***    0.0516***    0.0912***    0.111***
                  (0.00540)    (0.00732)    (0.0101)     (0.0174)     (0.0293)

Constant         0.323***      0.188**      -0.0307       0.248        0.402*
                  (0.0434)     (0.0945)     (0.138)      (0.246)       (0.232)

Observations        642          539          397          201          111
R-squared          0.150        0.227        0.335        0.510        0.565
                                         Appendix Table A4 (continued)


Panel (E):

Job-Level Pair      56          57          58          59

lg_empl          0.0161***   0.0348***   0.0786***   0.0889***
                 (0.00518)   (0.00626)    (0.0141)    (0.0189)

Constant          0.0477      0.114*       0.342     0.954***
                  (0.0386)    (0.0598)    (0.323)     (0.209)

Observations        689         554         344         192
R-squared          0.212       0.309       0.430       0.493



Panel (F):

Job-Level Pair      67          68          69

lg_empl          0.0144**    0.0488***   0.0434**
                 (0.00574)    (0.0125)    (0.0185)

Constant         0.129***      -0.171    1.205***
                  (0.0430)    (0.200)     (0.228)

Observations        572         388         213
R-squared          0.161       0.290       0.364



Panel (G):

Job-Level Pair      78          79

lg_empl          0.0306***   0.0465***
                 (0.00931)    (0.0137)

Constant           -0.159      0.191
                  (0.153)     (0.150)

Observations        395         212
R-squared          0.298       0.370



Panel (H):

Job-Level Pair      89

lg_empl           0.0150
                  (0.0123)

Constant         0.724***
                  (0.163)

Observations        200
R-squared          0.288
                                              Appendix Table A5
                                 Median Employment of the 50 (100) Largest Firms

This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 10 in which firm size is measured as the median number of
employees of the 50 (100) largest firms in a given country and year (in logs). The sample is the merged LIS-
Worldscope sample described in Section 5.3. All regressions include country fixed effects. Those in columns (1) and
(4) additionally include year fixed effects, while those in columns (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) include a linear time trend instead.
Time trend is defined as the given year minus 1999. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The sample period is
from 1981 to 2010. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                     Top 50 Firms                                        Top 100 Firms

                         (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)

lg_med_empl          0.158***                            0.120**          0.154***                             0.108*
                      (0.0588)                           (0.0522)          (0.0609)                           (0.0523)

time_trend                            0.0104***        0.00740***                          0.0111***        0.00859***
                                       (0.00139)         (0.00170)                          (0.00127)         (0.00146)

Constant               -0.612          1.170***           0.0655            -0.301          1.170***            0.298
                       (0.512)          (0.0114)          (0.478)           (0.461)         (0.00170)          (0.423)

Country FE              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes
Year FE                 Yes               No                No               Yes               No                No

Observations             92               92                92                84               84                84
R-squared              0.893             0.857             0.863            0.942             0.914             0.919
