NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES THE ESTATE TAX RAISE REVENUE?

B. Douglas Bernheim

Working Paper No. 2087

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1986

This paper was presented at the NBER's conference, "Tax Policy and
the Economy," held on November 17, 1986, in Washington, DC, and was
supported in part by the National Science Foundation, through Grant
No. SES860763O. I am indebted to Lawrence Sumers for helpful
comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #2087
December 1986

Does the Estate Tax Raise Revenue?

ABSTRACT

Proponents

of transfer taxation argue that

levies on gifts and

estates

serve the dual

private

wealth, while raising significant revenues.

purposes

of breaking up large concentrations of
A number of

commentators have recently questioned the first of these purported
advantages, on the grounds that a variety of available estate planning

techniques allow wealthy individuals to pass on vast resources
essentially tax free.

Most techniques entail the use of intra vivos

transfers, and are particularly effective when these transfers are made

as early in life as possible. In this paper, I argue that
these same estate

planning

the

use of

techniques also largely neutralize the second

objective of transfer taxation by depressing income tax revenues. This

effect is reinforced by the tendency for estate taxation to encourage
charitable bequests. Although it is difficult to quantify the indirect
revenue effects with a high degree of precision, I find that, prior to
the Tax Reform Act of 1986, these effects could easily have offset all

revenues collected through the estate tax. The recent Tax Reform Act
only partially vitiates this conclusions.

B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics
Stanford University
404 Encina Hall
Stanford,

CA 94305

(415) 723—9678

I.

Introduction
Proponents of transfer taxation argue that well—designed levies on

estates and gifts serve two primary objectives. First, such taxes may
promote an equitable distribution of economic resources by breaking up

large concentrations of wealth. Yet many commentators have noted that
common estate planning techniques allow wealthy individuals to transfer
vast fortunes while paying little or no tax (see e.g. Cooper [1979]).
Accordingly, it is possible that this first objective is served only in
cases where individuals have little or no desire to avoid taxation.

Second, transfer taxes raise revenue. In practice, levies on gifts and
estates have raised roughly $6 billion per year over the last five

years. While this suni

is

certainly substantial, one should bear in mind

that it represents less than 1% of all federal revenues for the same
period, despite the imposition of high statutory marginal tax rates.
One might therefore be inclined to conclude that transfer taxation
achieves the second objective with perhaps a modicum of success.

Unfortunately, this conclusion is premature. In order to measure
the true revenues associated with transfer taxation, one must determine
the net incremental contribution which these taxes make to total federal
revenues, or, to put it another way, one must estimate the amount by

which total revenues would decline if these taxes were eliminated. This
figure may bear very little relation to measures of collected revenue
reported

by the government. In particular, many of the same estate

planning techniques which allow wealthy individuals to escape transfer

—2—

taxation also have important income tax implications. Thus, elimination
of transfer taxes might significantly affect income tax revenues.
In this paper, I argue that, as a consequence of behavioral
responses to estate taxation, a substantial amount of capital income is

taxed at lower marginal rates under the personal income tax. I
emphasize two major channels through which this occurs. First, estate
planners agree that perhaps the best method of avoiding estate taxes is
to make substantial intra vivos gifts, and to make them as early in life

as possible. Typically, wealthy individuals can do this in ways which
minimize, or entirely eliminate gift tax liabilities. The net effect is
to transfer wealth, typically from parents to children, during a period
of life in which children tend to pay lower marginal rates under the

personal income tax. While differences between marginal income tax
rates alone create incentives for wealthy individuals to make intra
vivos gifts,-!1 the estate tax adds to this incentive, presumably

generating larger transfers. The government effectively foregoes a
portion of its tax claim on incrementally transferred assets. Second,
since charitable bequests are deductible from gross estate for tax

purposes, the estate tax creates a substantial incentive to make such

contributions. While one might well deem this a desirable outcome, it
is important to recognize that it, too, has important consequences for

the income tax. In this case, resources are transferred from
individuals with positive marginal tax rates to tax exempt

institutions. As a result, the government foregoes its entire claim on
the transferred assets.

—3—

Unfortunately,

it is extremely difficult to measure these effects

with precision. The most important obstacle is the availability of
extensive financial data on a sample drawn from the wealthiest 5%

of

the

population. While most of this information is in principle contained in
federal personal income, estate, and gift tax returns, the IRS is
reluctant to release such information for fear of violating the

confidentiality of wealthy taxpapers. Even if this data became
available, the measurement of intra vivos transfers (which are often

well—disguised) would pose severe conceptual difficulties. My strategy
in this paper is to estimate true revenues on the basis of the best

available evidence. Since this evidence is admittedly sketchy, it is
appropriate

to think of my calculations as suggestive, rather than

precise.
Two major conclusions emerge from this study. First, the indirect

effects of estate taxation on federal personal income tax revenue are
potentially of the same order of magnitude as the reported revenue

collected by this tax. Thus, these reported figures may lead one quite
far astray. Second, available evidence suggests that, historically,
true revenues associated with estate taxation may well have been near
zero,

or even negative. Recent tax reforms which reduce the

progressivity

of federal personal income tax rates only partially

vitiate this conclusion. Far from "backing up" the income tax as some
have claimed, the estate tax may actually generate a rise in income tax
avoidance

estate

activities sufficient to offset revenue collected through

levies.

—4—

This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, I briefly
review the history of federal estate and gift taxes, paying special

attention to provisions which play prominent roles in the ensuring

analysis. I elaborate upon the incentive effects of estate taxation in
section 3, and present evidence documenting significant behavioral

adjustments to changes in the tax code in section 4. Section 5 contains
estimates of net revenue raised through estate taxation, which are

adjusted to account for the behavioral responses discussed in sections 3

and 4. In section 6, I turn my attention to several additional
considerations, some of which introduce potentially countervailing

forces. Special attention is given to various provisions of the Tax
Reform Act of 1986. Section 7 contains conclusions.

II. A Brief
The

tax was

estate

and

Gift Thxatlon

modern estate tax has been in effect since 1916.

legislation
tax rates

History of Federal Estate

provided for

a $50,000 exemption, with progressive marginal

rising from 1%, to 10% on

instituted in

The original

estates over $10 million. The gift

1924. Rates ranged from 1% to

25%, matching

tax rates in the same year. Donor's were provided with a $50,000

exemption, plus a $5000 annual exclusion per donee. As of 1932, gift
tax rates were reduced relative to estate tax

rates, and remained 25%

lower than estate rates through 1976.
From 1943 to 1976, the basic provisions of federal estate and gift

taxes remained essential unchanged. The law provided for a $60,000
estate tax exemption, with progressive rates ranging from 3% to 77%.
The gift tax exemption was fixed at $30,000, with a $3,000 annual

—5—

exclusion per donee. Decedents were allowed to bequeath one—half of
their gross estates to their spouses tax free (the marital deduction),

and all charitable bequests were deductible. In addition, recipients of
bequests were allowed to step—up the basis on all assets for purposes of
capital gains taxation to the fair market value of those assets at the

time of their benefactor's death. A step—up of basis was not allowed
for assets transferred by gift.

Congress significantly altered the structure of federal transfer

taxes in the Tax Reform Act of 1976. Most importantly, this act
provided for unification of estate and gift taxes. Since 1976, all
cognizable transfers have been taxed jointly under the same progressive

schedule, which originally includes a maximum rate of 70%. Lifetime
giving is still slightly favored, in that the gift tax is imposed only
on the net transfer, while the estate tax base also includes amounts

used to pay the tax. The act also established a unified credit, which
provided tax relief equivalent to a $60,000 exemption, but which was

designed to rise in steps over a period of years. The $3,000 yearly
gift tax exclusion was retained, and the marital deduction was
liberalized, so that decedents could transfer the maximum of $250,000

and 50% of gross estate tax free. Finally, Congress removed the step—up
of basis at death, but this provision was later repealed.
The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 (ERTA) embraced four major

changes to this system of transfer taxation. First, the unified credit
was increased
$600,000

in steps to a maximum of $192,800 in 1987

exemption).

(equivalent to a

Second, the maximum marginal tax rate was

—6—

decreased

in steps

deduction

were removed. Finally, the annual gift tax exclusion was

from

70% to 50%.

Third,

all limits on the marital

raised to $10,000.

III. Incentive
In

Effects of Estate

Taxation

this section, I argue that the

federal estate

tax has generated

strong incentives for individuals to transfer large amounts of

accumulated wealth to their intended heirs prior to death, and in fact

to

do so as early in life as possible. Furthermore, I note that the

deductibility of charitable bequests enhances the attractiveness of
leaving a portion of one's estate to charity. In subsequent sections, I
document

the effects of these incentives on behavior, and compute the

attendent
A.

impact on federal personal income

tax revenues.

Intra vivos gifts

Prior to 1977, the federal tax system treated gifts more favorably

than bequests. Despite the unification of gift and estate taxes in the
Tax Reform Act of 1976, virtually all estate planners still recommend a
plan of systematic lifetime giving as perhaps the most important method
of transfer tax

avoidance

(see Brosterman [1977], Kess and Westlin

[1982], Esperti and Peterson [1983], Clay [1982], and Cooper [1979]).

In fact, Cooper argues that

The first major goal of good estate planning is to freeze
the size of a client's estate at its current level and
divert future growth to the natural objects of the client's
divert future growth than
...
bounty.
it is to disgorge wealth already accumulated, and good
estate planning attempts to get estate—freezing action into
operation as soon as possible so as to cut off wealth

it is far easier to

—7—

accumulation before it becomes a more serious planning
problem.

(emphasis added). In practice, there are many ways to accomplish this
while simultaneously minimizing, or entirely avoiding gift tax

liability. Since these planning techniques have been reviewed at length
elsewhere, I will provide only a brief summary

1.

of

the major strategies.

Undisguised gifts

Since

a substantial amount of gifts is entirely exempt from

taxation, a simple plan of undisguised lifetime giving is, for the
majority

of families, the most effective estate planning tool. By

splitting gifts, a married couple can now transfer $20,000 ($6,000 prior

to 1982) per year to each intended heir without incurring any gift tax

liability whatsoever. Thus, a couple with two children could divest
itself of $1 million over a 25 year period simply by taking advantage of

the gift tax exclusion. If the couple is willing to contemplate gifts
to grandchildren, or to spouses of children or grandchildren, the
potential for transfer tax avoidance grows enormously.

is, however, essential to begin taking advantage of the gift
tax exclusion as early as possible. For one thing, the timing of each
It

individual's death is uncertain, and all assets remaining in his
possession at the time of his death are taxable as part of his estate.

In addition, the exemption is not cumulative, so that failure to take

it in any particular year implies that one opportunity to
make tax—free transfers has been lost forever. This consideration may
advantage of

be quite important for very wealthy individuals who, despite programs of

—8—

systematic lifetime giving, still expect to die with substantial
estates.

The Tax Reform Act of 1976 also provides substantial unified

credits against estate and gift tax liabilities. At first, it might
appear as though this provision treats gifts and bequests neutrally.

However, this impression is erroneous. In fact, as long as the donor
plans to exhaust the credit completely, its value is inversely related

to the date at which he chooses to take it. This principle is easily

demonstrated. For simplicity, assume that
1987 level of $192,800, so that

the

credit is fixed at its

it corresponds to an exemption of

$600,000. Consider a wealthy individual who, among other things, owns a
piece

of property worth $600,000. He may transfer the entire parcel to

his heirs immediately without incurring any tax
eventual

liability.

Upon his

demise, his estate will pay taxes only on the residual

assets. If, on the other hand, he holds the property until his death,

it will ordinarilly escalate in value. Suppose he in fact dies ten
years later, and that the property is then worth $1 million. The first
$600,000 would, of course, be exempt. However, his estate would then
pay taxes not only on the residual assets, but also on the $400,000.

gain.-/ At current rates, this would imply an incremental estate tax
liability of between $150,000 and $200,000.

2. Diversion of profitable investment opportunities
Perhaps the most common and informal estate planning activity
entails the diversion of profitable investment opportunities to one's

intended heirs. Parents can provide valuable information and advice

—9—

concerning

potential investments without incurring gift tax

liability.

many cases, parents devote great effort to locating and arranging
profitable business deals, and then bring their children in as
In

coinvestors. Such diversions do not generate any incremental tax

liabilities,
supplied

even though their success may

depend upon expert services

by the parent. If children lack the necessary capital, parents

can lend it to them. As long as these loans are made at prevailing
rates of interest and observe arms—length regulations, no gift tax
liability

a

is incurred even if the child would have been unable to obtain

similar loan from a third party. Alternatively, the parent can help

his child to obtain

a loan

at favorable rates by guaranteeing repayment,

without risk of transfer taxation. Finally, the parent can provide
assurances that, should the deal fail, he will pick up the loss. In the
event a loss actually occurs, the parent will be compelled to pay gift
tax on the associated transfer. However, from the point of view of a

risk averse child, the parent's

guarantee amounts to

an insurance

policy, the value of which exceeds his expected loss.
For parents who own large portions of businesses or closely held

corporations, additional opportunities for diversions arise. In many
cases, a parent can shift profitable activities from his primary
business to a separate partnership or enterprise owned partially or

completely by his children. A parent may also bring his children into a
family partnership as silent partners, thereby diverting a share of the

earnings and appreciation from his business. In order to accomplish
this while minimizing taxable transfers, it is essential to arrange the

—10—

partnership as early as possible.

3.

Sophisticated estate tax avoidance

Various

sophisticated estate

planning

techniques

allow

wealthy

individuals to transfer resources intra vivos in ways which escape

notice under the gift tax. Important techniques are the use of
preferred stock recapitalizations in closely held firms, installment
sales, and life insurance.
In a preferred stock recapitalization, the parent cancells
outstanding common stock, and issues in its place a combination of

preferred and common stock. He distributes the preferred stock
primarily to himself (or other current owners), and the common stock

primarily to his children (or other intended heirs). If desired, this
can be accomplished without transferring significant control over the

corporation to his children. By selecting an appropriate dividend
entitlement for the preferred stock, the parent can reduce the value of
the common stock to a negligable level, reflecting only the speculative

growth potential of the corporation. In this way, the parent entirely
avoids the gift tax, but succeeds in transferring all future corporate
growth, brought about in part by his own expertise and effort, to his

children. One difficulty is, of course, that

the

parent may be forced

to accept a high level of taxable personal income from the preferred

stock. Nevertheless, there are many cases in which such income is
desirable, and it is in these cases that estate planners tend to
recommend the recapitalization.

—11—

Installment sales are frequently used to transfer real property.

The parent sells this property to his children while simultaneously

providing financing. He then typically foregives interest payments as
they come due. In some cases, the parent uses the property for business
activities, and leases it back from the child. Rental payments then
partially offset interest payments, and the remaining interest is

typically foregiven. All foregiven interest is, of course, potentially
taxable as a gift. The primary advantage of the installment sale is
that the parent can transfer all accumulation on the entire parcel
immediately, despite the fact that the bulk of actual gifts (foregiven

interest payments) will not be made for many years. In addition, when
the parent uses the property for business activities, he may be able to
develop it with the ultimate benefit eventually accruing to his children

free of tax. Finally, it is even possible to provide, as part of the
terms of the original sale, that the installment payments will terminate
upon the parents death, without drawing the unpaid portion into the

parent's estate. The primary disadvantage of the installment sale is
that it forces the parent to realize a capital gain. However, the
parent can defer realization through the use of balloon payments.
Furthermore, upon the parent's demise it
eliminate

appears

possible to largely

capital gains obligations on the remaining portion.

Life insurance provides a particularly attractive estate planning
tool

for highly paid executives. It is quite common for corporations

(particularly those which are closely held) to provide their executives

with large amounts

of such insurance as a fringe benefit. An executive

—12—

may assign ownership in this insurance to prospective heirs, thereby

excluding it from his estate. Although premiums over a certain
threshold are taxable to the executive under the personal income tax,

assignment of ownership in such a policy to heirs is apparently not

cognizable as a gift. As a result, this scheme completely avoids
transfer taxes. Since this arrangement can be used for ordinary life
insurance as well as group term insurance, the net effect can be to

transfer resources into an accumulating whole life policy. Since
investment income accruing to policy holders within life insurance
companies is tax exempt, the government thereby foregoes its entire
claim on the transferred assets until the executive's death.

4.

EvasIon

Many families presumably engage in simple gift tax evasion.
certainly

which

It is

possible for individuals to make substantial gifts in forms

are difficult, if not impossible for the IRS to trace. Outright

gifts of cash and durable goods (clothes, furniture, appliances) fall
into this category.

Each of these estate and gift tax avoidance techniques has the
ultimate effect of transferring resources from parent to child at a

requires

early date. Indeed, in most cases, effective planning
these transfers to be made as early as possible. To the extent

children

face significantly lower marginal rates under the personal

relatively

income, significant losses of tax revenue may result.

—13—

It is important to bear in mind that wealthy individuals are not

solely motivated by the desire to minimize taxes. Indeed, estate
planners emphasize that this goal often conflicts with other legitimate
concerns, such as retaining control over one's assets, maintaining one's
desired standard of living, and providing one's children with

appropriate incentives. Proper estate planning balances the costs and
benefits of tax avoidance at the margin. For this very reason, we would
expect changes in the tax treatment of gifts and bequests to affect
intra vivos transfers significantly.

B. Charitable

Incentives

Bequesta

for charitable giving arise directly from the deducti-

bility of such bequests for estate tax purposes. If, for example, an
individual faces a marginal estate tax rate of 50%, he can
50$

of

by foregoing

bequests to his heirs provide $1 to charity. The effective price

of contributing $1 to charity is therefore only 50$ (in general, this

price is $(1 —

t),

where t is the testator's marginal estate tax

rate). Sophisticated estate planners may in addition recommend the use
of front—end trusts, which provide that the income from an estate be
used for charitable purposes over some specified period, after which all

assets are returned to the decedent's heirs. Such an arrangement can
virtually eliminate all estate taxes while preserving substantial value
for one's descendents.

—14—

IV.

Behavioral Evidence

While the estate tax creates strong incentive for wealthy

individuals to make intra vivos gifts and charitable bequests, this does
not

necessarily imply that these tax incentives have a significant

effect on behavior. Accordingly, I now present empirical evidence
concerning actual behavioral responses. As we shall see, the evidence
strongly supports the view that these responses are extremely large.

A Intra Vivos Transfers
Unfortunately, data on gifts is virtually impossible to obtain, in
part because they are often disguised as other sorts of transactions

(recall the discussion in Section 3). Although one can obtain some
information on trusts from IRS fiduciary income tax data, it is not
possible to distinguish between the formation of revocable and

irrevocable trusts. A revocable trust is not a consumated gift, and is
therefore treated as part of the donor's assets for tax purposes. As a
result, this data is uninformative.
One can, nevertheless, document the sensitivity of intra vivos

transfers to tax code provisions indirectly. Note in particular that
the choice between making a gift or a bequest is essentially one of

timing. A parent can transfer wealth to his children immediately, or
hang on to it for a period of time, eventually making the same transfer

upon his death. This decision is therefore closely related to the
choice of whether to bequeath assets to one's spouse, or directly to

one's ultimate heirs. In this case, the couple can choose to transfer
wealth to its children immediately upon the death of the first spouse,

—15—

or

to hang on to it for a period of time, eventually making the same

transfer upon the death of the second spouse..-! Again, the issue is

simply one of timing. However, unlike intra vivos transfers, ample
information is available concerning bequests to spouses. Furthermore,
ERTA fundamentally changed the tax treatment of spousal bequests as of

1982 by eliminating all limitations on the marital deduction. In
addition, the reduction of tax rates in 1977 somewhat diminished the
penalty associated with double taxation of wealth passed first to one's

spouse, and eventually to one's ultimate heirs. Finally, the reduction
of maximum tax rates in 1982 somewhat vitiated the importance for very

wealthy decedents of planning to split transfers to children or other

ultimate heirs evenly between spouses' estates. Thus, by examining
trends in spousal bequests over the last ten years or so, one can infer
the importance of estate tax provisions in determining the timing of

transfers to ultimate heirs./
In order to measure behavioral responses to changes in the tax
code, I will compare IRS

statistics

on bequests to spouses from 1977 and

1983 returns. Most returns filed in any year concern the estates of
individuals who died in the previous year. Thus, the 1977 returns
primarily

contain estates treated under 1976 law (pre—Tax Reform Act of

1976), and the 1983 returns consist primarily of estates taxed under
ERTA.

Since the filing requirement changed dramatically between 1976 and

1982 (from $60,000 to $225,000), the 1977 and 1983 returns reflect

radically

different samples. In

addition, data is only available on

—16—

1983 returns for which gross estate exceeded $300,000. To restore
comparability, it is essential to restrict attention to 1977 returns on

which reported gross estate is sufficiently large. In particular, the
$300,000 threshold is, adjusting for inflation, roughly equivalent to

$180,000 in 1976. Unfortunately, the IRS is no longer willing to
release data on individual returns, and so it is necessary to employ

aggregated statistics. The IRS does however report sample averages for
these data, grouped by size of gross estate. Thus, it is possible to
restrict attention to 1977 returns on which gross estate exceeded

$150,000, or $200,000. In practice, we consider all estates exceeding a
$200,000 threshold, in part because this is closer to $180,000, and in
part because this selection criterion produces a sample of 59,553

returns. Given their similar sizes, there is every reason to believe
that these two

samples

reflect nearly identical segments of the

population. I should mention, however, that the use of $150,000 (rather
than $200,000) as a selection criterion would not significantly alter my
conclusions.

Comparison of statistics for these samples reveals the following

pattern (see Table 1). For returns filed in 1977, married individuals
left 47.7$ out of every dollar to their spouses. For returns filed in
1983, this figure climbed to 59.4$

on the dollar——a net increase of

24.5%..J

While this response is enormous, one might well wonder why it was
not even more pronounced. After all, ERTA allows individuals to
transfer unlimited resources to their spouses absolutely tax free.

—17—

Table 1: A Comparison of 1977 and 1983 Estate Tax Returns

1977 returns

minimum
gross estate
in sample

1983 returns

$200,000

$300,00

percent gross
estates of married
decedents left
to spouses

47.7

59.4

percent married
decedents claiming
martial deduction

89.8

95.3

percent gross

estates of all

decederits left

to charity

8.09

5.05

—18—

There are at least three explanations. First, individuals may

adjust

their wills somewhat slowly in response to changes in estate tax

provisions. Indeed, one should recall that 1982 was the first year in
which decedents were allowed an unlimited marital deduction; this

deduction

may have been used to an even greater extent in subsequent

years. Second, many decedents exhausted the benefit of the marital
deduction

by driving their estate taxes to zero. Indeed, 78.6% of those

claiming the marital deduction paid no tax. Overall, the effective tax
rate on married decedents was a mere 4.7%, as compared to 17.5% for the

rest of the sample. Third, even with an unlimited marital deduction, it
is not always optimal to bequeath all assets to a surviving spouse,
since this strategy could lead to a large estate tax liability upon the
death of the second spouse.
A comparison of 1977 and 1983 returns also reveals an increase in
the frequency with which individuals claimed the marital deduction

(refer again to Table 1). For the 1977 returns, 102 out of every 1000

married decedents failed to claim this deduction. By 1983, this figure
had fallen to 47 out of every 1000 married decedents, a decline of

ç

c fl

.__J__1_._.l..__J___

—20—

roughly offset each other, so that one can still obtain a feel for the

accuracy of Clotfelter's predictions by comparing charitable bequests
across our two samples.
Specifically, we find that for 1977 returns, decedents left 8.09+

out of every dollar to charity. By 1983, this figure had fallen to
——

+H4c dcr'1in__

—19—

Overall, this evidence confirms the view that

the

timing of

transfers to one's ultimate heirs is extremely sensitive to estate

provisions.

Accordingly, there is a strong presumption that

intra

tax
vivos

gifts exhibit a similar sensitivity.

B.

Charitable Bequests

Previous
estate

investigators have directly estimated the effect of

tax provisions

on charitable bequests (see, e.g., McNees [1973],

Feldstein [1977], Boskin [1976], Barthold and Plotnick [1983], and

Clotfelter [1984]). In general, these estimates suggest that the
behavioral response is extremely large. For example, Clotfelter found
that a 1% rise in the effective price of charitable bequests (see

section 3B) would cause such bequests to decline by roughly 1%, and
perhaps by as much as 1 1/2%. Clotfelter used his estimates to simulate

the effect of ERTA on charitable giving. On the basis of his
calculations, he predicted that ERTA would depress charitable bequests
by between 34% and 52%.

In this instance, economists have the rare opportunity to
determine the accuracy of a prediction based upon econometric estimates

of

behavioral responses by examining actual responses persuant to a

policy change. Unfortunately, the IRS has not

made any data on estate

tax returns available for any year between 1977 and 1983.
necessity, the data samples used here span both the

Thus,

of

1976 and 1981 tax

in behavior reflect responses to both

reforms.

Accordingly, any changes

acts. On

the other hand, ERTA was phased in over a period of several

years, so that

its

full effect was not felt in 1982. These two

factors

—20—

roughly

offset each other, so that one can

still

obtain a feel for the

accuracy of Clotfelter's predictions by comparing charitable bequests
across our two samples.
Specifically, we find that for 1977 returns, decedents left 8.09+

out of every dollar to charity. By 1983, this figure had fallen to
5.05+ on the dollar (see Table 1). The magnitude of this decline——
37.6%——is roughly in line with the low end of the range of possible

responses predicted by Clotfelter. Since, once again, individuals may
adjust their wills slowly in response to changes in estate tax
provisions, the observed response should be thought of as a lower

bound. Actual experience therefore provides striking confirmation of ex
ante econometric forecasts.

Having

established that estate taxation not only creates

incentives for intra vivos giving and charitable bequests, but also that
these

incentives have an enormous impact on behavior, it is now

appropriate to consider the implications for personal income tax

revenues. This is the topic of the next section.

V.

True

I

Estate Thx

have argued in

revenue figures may
one

Revenues

previous sections that reported estate tax

be quite misleading. To calculate true revenues,

must net out indirect effects. As a

determine

first step, it is essential

to

proper methods for measuring revenues. When an individual

holds an asset, the government effectively owns some claim on that

asset. However, the value of the government's claim depends in a fairly

—21—

complex way both upon the individual's marginal tax rate, as well as
upon his behavior.

Consider, for example, the effect of transferring a consol worth

$1 from one taxpayer to another. Suppose that the interest rate is 10%,

so that the consol pays 10+ each year. Taxpayer A is now, and always
will be in the 50% marginal tax bracket. Furthermore, suppose that A
would hold the consol indefinitely, consuming all of the after tax

income which it produces. If A in fact owns the consol, then the
government has a claim on a stream of 5+ payments in every subsequent

year. Taxpayer B is now, and always will be in the 25% marginal tax
bracket. Furthermore, B would also hold the consol indefinitely,
consuming exactly its after tax proceeds. If B owns the consol, then
the government has a claim on a stream of 2.5+ payments in every
subsequent year.

In order to compare these streams with measures of current

revenues, one must calculate present values. The appropriate discount
rate for the government is the after tax rate of return for some average

government bondholder (see Feldstein [1974]). Suppose that this average

bondholder is in the 40% tax bracket. Then if A owns the consol, the
value of the government's claim is 83.3+, while if B holds the consol,

the value of this claim falls to 41.7$. Accordingly, if some policy
induces A to give B the consol, the government loses 41.7$.
I remarked above that the value of the government's claim depends
not only upon the individual's marginal tax rate, but also upon his

behavior. To illustrate, suppose that both A and B would, if given the

—22—

consol, sell it immediately (before receiving any income) to C, and

consume all the proceeds. Then any policy which induces A to give the
consol to B obviously has no income tax implications, despite

differences in the marginal tax rates of these individuals. This
hypothetical case raises a general point: as a taxpayer's marginal
propensity to consume his resources rises, the value of the government's

claim on his wealth falls. Since investments produce taxable income,
reinvestment is tantamount to transferring a portion of the individual's

after tax claim to the government. If, as one would expect, wealthy
individuals have higher propensities to reinvest, then transfers of
assets from high to low bracket taxpayers will have an even greater
impact on income tax revenues than indicated by the preceding
hypothetical calculation.

While I have cast this discussion in terms of a consol, the same
reasoning applies equally well to all coupon bonds (by rolling these

over, one can effectively produce a consol). Since capital gains have
always received special treatment under the tax law, analogous

calculations for stocks and real property are a bit more complex. One
must specify the fraction of earnings paid out as current income
(dividends, or rent) and the frequency with which individuals turn over
assets, in addition to marginal tax rates and propensities to consume.
Details of all such computations appear in the appendix.
Throughout the following analysis, I employ the revenue valuation

formulas derived in the appendix. I assume a nominal interest rate of
8%. In addition, I take the dividend/earning ratio on stocks to be

—23—

0.5. Finally, I assume that investors turn over about 10% of their

each year. This implies that

assets

corporate shares are held on

average for 10 years (see King [1977]). I make no special calculations
for real estate holdings, instead treating them analogously to stock.

A..

Intra

Vivos Transfers

I now turn to the problem of estimating the indirect reveneue

effects of induced intra vivos transfers. The first task is to measure
the average ratio of gifts to bequests in a given year. I infer this
ratio by combining several available figures. Kotlikoff and Summers
[1981] estimated that, in 1974, total intra vivos transfers were
approximated 1.56 times the size of intergenerational bequests..i

Unpublished data collected by Paul Menchik and Martin David from 1967
estate tax records and reported by Kotlikoff and Summers allow us to
determine the fraction of gross estates bequeathed across generations by

sex and marital status of the decedent. Combining the Menchik—David
figures with estate tax data on the distribution of gross estates over
the same categories of decedents, I find that approximately 33.8$ out of

every dollar of gross estates is bequeathed across generations. Thus,
for every dollar of reported bequests, individuals concurrently transfer
approximately 52.7$ (=

1.56X

33.8$) intra—vivos. One can use this

figure to estimate the likely magnitude of gifts in any desired year.

For example, in 1983 the total value of all gross estates exceeding

$300,000 was $50.4 billion. Accordingly, surviving individuals of
similar economic status (age adjusted) probably transferred on the order
of $26.5 billion (=

0.527 X 50.4 billion) intra vivos in

—24—

Of course, not all of this is attributable to the estate tax.
However, it seems reasonable to conclude on the basis of the evidence
presented in Section 4 that elimination of estate levies would have

reduced this number by a minimum of 25%. I have already argued that
this evidence probably understates the true behavioral response for a

variety of reasons. Indeed, estate planners often emphasize that
lifetime gifts have various adverse non—tax consequences, including loss
of control over resources and premature enrichment of one's children,

and they often recommend that individuals consider such transfers only
if the tax advantages are deemed sufficiently important (see, e.g., Kess

and Westlin [1982]). It therefore seems more likely that the estate tax
motivates closer to 50%, and conceivably as much as 75% of lifetime

gifts. I will present separate calculations for each of these
assumptions (25%, 50%, and 75%).

The actual revenue loss associated with the transfer of an asset

worth $1 depends upon several factors. The first of these is the nature
of tax system prevailing subsequent to the transfer, and the associated

marginal tax rates of the concerned parties. I will provide separate
calculations for hypothetical policy regimes in which pre—ERTA and ERTA
income tax rate schedules are assumed to persist indefinitely

,

as well

as similar calculations for the recent Tax Reform Act (TRA) of 1986.
Table 2 contains marginal tax rate assumptions for donors, recipients,

and average bondholders for each tax system. Note that I always place
the donor in the highest tax bracket. The recipient's marginal tax
bracket under the current law corresponds roughly to a married

—25—

Table 2: Marginal Income

Tax Rate Assumptions

Donor

Recipient

Average Bondholder

pre—ERTA

0.7

0.25

0.5

ERTA

0.5

0.25

0.4

TRA of 1986

0.28

0.15

0.23

—26—

individual reporting taxable income (after deductions) of $0,000 per
year. I will return to these assumptions at the end of this section.
The second important factor concerns the propensity of each

individual to consume out of current income. I consider two cases. In
Case I, the donor consumes one—half of realized nominal income, while

the recipient consumes all of it. For Case II, I change the recipient's
marginal propensity to consume to 0.7. Both cases reflect an assumption
that, over the relevant time period, recipients tend to consume a higher

fraction of current income. I expect this pattern because recipients
usually anticipate substantial gifts and bequests in the future, and are

therefore less inclined to save. I note that while the difference
between the marginal propensity to consume of donors and recipients does
somewhat affect my results, the actual levels of these parameters
appears to make very little difference.

The third factor concerns the timing of the gift. If the donor
chose not to make an intra vivos transfer of wealth, the recipient would

inherit this wealth upon the donor's death anyway. Consequently, my
calculations should reflect lost revenues only between the time of the

gift and the donor's eventual death. I will refer to this as the
"acceleration factor." In Section 3, I argued that good estate planning
requires individuals to transfer resources as early in life as

possible. While I present calculations using acceleration factors of 5,

15, and 30 years, I therefore tend to prefer those based upon the larger
figures.

—27--

The fourth and final factor concerns the nature transferred

assets. I present separate calculations for stylized stocks and bonds
(see the appendix for details). The characteristics of actual assets
may, of course, differ from case to case.

Tables 3

through 5 contain results. Each entry in these tables

indicates the revenue loss (in cents) induced by a private transfer of

assets worth $1, under specified assumptions. Unfortunately, I have no
direct evidence either on actual acceleration factors, or on the

composition of assets transferred intra vivos. To avoid conveying a
false sense of precision, I simply eyeball these tables, and select a
figure which corresponds roughly to an acceleration factor of between 15

and 30 years, and a portfolio consisting of stocks and bonds in equal

proportions. For pre—ERTA income tax law, I surmise that the revenue
loss per dollar transferred was close to 40$; for ERTA, it was roughly

20$; for the Tax Reform Act of 1986, it is somewhere between 10$ and
20$.

In Table 6, I calculate the value of lost income tax revenues

under alternative sets of assumptions about the revenue loss per dollar
of transferred wealth, and the displacement factor (i.e., the fraction
of intra vivos transfers attributable to
total

estate

taxation). I take the

value of intra vivos transfers for the target population to be

$26.5 billion, which corresponds to

the estimated level of such

transfers in 1983. My preferred estimates of revenue loss per dollar
transferred, combined with a displacement factor of 0.5, generate the

—28—

Table 3: Loss per Dollar Transferred——pre--ERTA

(In Cents per Dollar)

Case I

Case II

Acceleration
Factor

Bonds

Stocks

5

16.6

6.4

16.3

6.4

15

45.0

18.3

42.3

18.1

30

77.2

33.8

68.8

31.5

Bonds

Stocks

—29-.

Table 4:

Loss per Dollar Transferred——ERTA
(In Cents per Dollar)

Case I

Acceleration
Factor

Bonds

Case II

Stocks

Bonds

Stocks

9.4

3.9

9.1

3.8

15

26.7

11.2

24.3

10.9

30

47.0

20.8

40.7

19.5

5

—30—

Table

5:

Loss per Dollar Transferred——TRA of 1986
(In Cents per Dollar)

Case II

Case I

Acceleration
Factor

Bonds

Stocks

Bonds

Stocks

5

4.9

2.8

4.7

2.7

15

14.1

8.6

12.6

8.3

30

25.5

17.2

21.5

16.0

—31—

Table

6: Revenue Loss from Induced Intra Vivos Transfers
(In Billions of Dollars)

Revenue Loss per
Dollar of Wealth
Transferred

Displacement Factor
0.25

0.5

0.75

0.1

0.7

1.3

2.0

0.2

1.3

2.7

4.0

0.3

2.0

4.0

6.0

0.4

2.7

5.3

8.0

0.5

3.3

6.6

10.0

—32—

following

conclusions. Under the highly progressive pre—ERTA income tax

rates, income tax losses associated with intra vivos transfers induced
by the estate tax would amount to between $4.5 billion and $5 billion.
Under ERTA rates, this figure would be between $3 billion and $3.5

billion. By making the income tax system less progressive, the Tax
Reform Act of 1986 would reduce this loss to perhaps $2 billion (the
effect of this Act is somewhat vitiated by the removal of the capital

gains exemption). To put these numbers in perspective, one should bear
in mind that the federal government collected $5.17 billion from levies
on estates with gross values exceeding $300,000 in 1983._i

It is unfortunately

not entirely appropriate to compare revenue

loss calculations based upon the level of intra vivos transfer in 1983
with

estate tax revenues in 1983 for two of the three tax regimes.

Income tax rates during this period were established by ERTA and

taxpapers probably expected these rates to persist indefinitely. I have
already remarked that differentials between marginal personal income tax
rates by themselves provide incentives for individuals to make gifts,

rather than bequests. Had taxpayers expected pre—ERTA income tax rates
to prevail after 1983, the division of transfers would probably have

been more skewed towards gifts. Accordingly, official estate tax
revenues would have been lower, and the true revenue picture would have

been even worse. Conversely, had taxpapers espected the Tax Reform Act
of 1986 rates to prevail after 1983, the division of transfers might

have been more skewed towards bequests. While this would make the total

—33—

revenue picture a bit better than my calculations suggest, I suspect
that the resulting bias is very small.2!
At this point, it is appropriate to reflect on the accuracy of the

marginal tax rate assumptions employed throughout this exercise. For a
number of reasons, these may be erroneous. First, the children of
wealthy individuals may in many cases be wealthy themselves, especially

after accumulating significant gifts. Second, even comparatively
wealthy individuals may have relatively low taxable incomes upon

retirement. Third, it is well—known that many taxpayers shelter
enormous amounts of income. Some may even drive their marginal tax
rates to zero through vigorous use of provisions such as the investment

tax credit. On the other hand, many of the estate tax avoidance
techniques discussed in Section 3 also allow such individuals to pass
surplus tax shelters to their children, thereby reducing income tax

revenues through a related channel. One should also recall that several
techniques (i.e., the use of life insurance and pension funds) provide

for free accumulation subsequent to the transfer. In addition, children
may often

use transferred funds to purchase homes, in which case

subsequent implicit income escapes taxation entirely. Finally, my
calculations completely ignore the revenue losses associated with
avoidance activities that reduce gross estates below the filing

requirement. It is, however, impossible to account properly for any of
these factors without access to currently unavailable IRS records.

—34—

B.

Charitable Bequests

I now turn my attention to charitable bequests. In 1983,
decedents with gross estates exceeding $300,000 left approximately $2.5

billion to charities. To calculate the indirect impact on income tax
revenues, one must first determine the fraction of this attributable to
estate taxation.

I employ Clotfelter's behavioral estimates to compute the impact

on charitable bequests of eliminating estate taxation. Using parameters
from his most conservative case,i./ I find that charitable bequests would

decline by 79.3%, or, for 1983, about $2 billion. Such bequests would
have all but disappeared for estates under $1 million, and would have
fallen by more than 76% for estates exceeding $1 million.

What is the revenue loss per dollar bequeathed to charity? Here,
the relevant comparison is between having the family retain the wealth
indefinitely, passing the unconsumed portion from generation to
generation, and having it bequeath the same wealth to a tax exempt

institution. I assume that the family is always taxed at the highest
statutory marginal rate, and calculate revenue losses per dollar of

transferred assets. Table 7 contains results for stylized stocks and
bonds under the three tax systems considered earlier. Again I eyeball
this table, and select figures which roughly reflect a portfolio divided

equally between stocks and bonds. Under pre—ERTA income tax law, the
revenue loss exceeded $1.50 on each dollar of induced charitable
bequests, or (for 1983 levels of charitable bequests) about $3 billion

in the aggregate. For rates prevailing subsequent to ERTA, the loss

—35—

Table 7: Revenue Loss per Dollar of Charitable Bequest

(In

Cents per Dollar)

Bonds

Stocks

pre—ERTA

142.9

119.8

ERTA

200.0

137.6

68.3

111.6

TRA OF 1986

—36—

appears to have about $1.25 on each dollar, or $2.5 billion in the

aggregate. Under the tax reform bill, the loss is between 80$ and $1 on
the dollar, or between $1.5 billion and $2 billion in the aggregate.
I have presented estimates of revenue losses from intra vivos

giving and charitable bequests for three hypothetical policy regimes in
which, respectively, pre—ERTA, ERTA, and TRA income tax rates are

assumed to prevail, and to persist indefinitely after 1983. Combining
these estimates produces striking results. Under my preferred
assumptions, estate taxation would have induced a net loss of Federal
tax revenues roughly equal to $3 billion in 1983 for the highly

progressive pre—ERTA income tax regimes. The estate tax probably would
have broken even in 1983 or even generated a small loss under the ERTA
income tax regime (the total net reduction of income tax revenues, $5.5

billion to $6 billion, slightly exceeds offical estate tax revenues for
the target group). For rates adopted in the Tax Reform Act of 1986,
indirect losses would have been in the neighborhood of $3.5 to $4

billion, or roughly 70% to 80% of reported revenues. Even under the
more conservative view that estate taxation is responsible for only 25%
(rather than 50%) of intra vivos transfers, true revenues would still
have been negative under pre—ERTA income tax rates, perhaps 10% of
reported revenues under ERTA, and less than half of reported revenues
under the TRA rates.

I

caution against attaching too much importance to any particular

set of numbers. While it

seems clear that indirect

revenue effects may

—37—

be large relative to reported revenues, available data simply do not
permit precise calculations.

VI.

Additional Considerationa
A.

Ancillary Effects

of Sophisticated Estate Planning Techniques

The income tax implications of many estate planning techniques are
complex. In addition to shifting income between taxpayers, some

techniques create taxable income, while others generate new shelters. A
complete analysis of all indirect effects would represent a major

undertaking. For the time being, I simply note that estate planners
tend to recommend against techniques in cases where they would create

significant income tax liabilities. I have, for instance, already
remarked that the preferred stock recapitalization is typically applied
only when the parent desires a high level of current income for his own
personal purposes.

B. Step—up of

Isis at Death

Another factor which deserves careful consideration is the step—up

of basis at death for income tax purposes. If the estate tax causes
individuals to transfer assets through gifts that they would otherwise
have held until death, then, upon the eventual sale of such assets,

total capital gains tax liabilities will be greater. While this
consideration somewhat vitiates our conclusions, I suspect that it is of
comparatively minor importance, for four reasons.
First, individuals concerned with tax avoidance clearly have an
incentive to transfer intra vivos all assets which they do not intend to

—38—

hold

until death prior to transferring any assets which they never

intend to sell. Thus, the relevant question is whether or not donors
tend to turn over marginal assets at regular intervals. The evidence
presented in Section 5 suggests that affluent individuals transfer
roughly one—third of their total holdings intra vivos, and two—thirds at

death. Thus, as long as these individuals tend to turn over at least
one—third of their assets, I would not expect them to retain the
marginal asset until death.
Second, if a parent is inclined to hold onto an asset for his

entire life, his heirs may well feel similarly inclined. This is
particularly true when the asset in question is a family business or
closely held corporation. Thus, the date of eventual sale may be quite
distant even at the time of the parents death, in which case the
discounted value of the incremental tax would be quite small.
Third, when individuals hold assets until death, they often go to

great lengths to undervalue these assets, thereby minimizing estate tax

liability. In fact, Cooper [1979] points out that, through manipulating
a series of special factors which cause tax courts to reduce the
assessed market value of assets (particularly in closely—held

corporations), decedents have succeeded in sheltering as much as two—

thirds of actual asset value for estate tax purposes. Of course, in the
process, these decedents also lose the step—up of basis.
Fourth and finally, families that engage in deliberate estate tax
avoidance may also be fairly sophisticated about income tax avoidance.
In particular, by appropriately timing the realization of gains and

—39—

losses, taxpayers may be able to minimize, or even entirely eliminate

liabilities

capital gains

tax

that very few

investors employ such techniques

(see Stiglitz [1983]). While it appears
in the course of daily

portfolio management (see Poterba [1985]), they may well find it
worthwhile to do so when realizing large gains on assets which have been
held for very long periods of time.
Consideration of the step—up of basis at death raises a related

issue. While this provision probably does not significantly vitiate my
conclusions,

it may well deter taxpayers from transferring intra vivos

substantially more assets than they do already. Indeed, estate planners
agree that by removing the opportunity to pass on property at death free
of capital gains tax, Congress would "increase greatly interest in
estate tax avoidance" (Cooper [1979, p. ii]).

Accordingly,

such action

would be likely, on balance, to depress federal revenues, contrary to
common wisdom.

C.

The Thx Reform Act of 1986

Throughout

this discussion, I have emphasized that the Tax Reform

Act of 1986 reduces the progressivity of federal income tax
thereby attenuates the revenue loss per dollar

gifts.

rates,

and

diverted from bequests to

The Act may also have other important effects, to which I have

alluded only briefly. Specifically, this decline in progressivity by
itself reduces incentives for intra vivos transfers. Under the new Act,
we might therefore expect both bequests and estate tax revenues to be
higher, while the marginal effect on lifetime giving of eliminating the
estate tax might well decline.

—40—

However, the Act also introduces countervailing forces. First, it
eliminates several opportunities for wealthy individuals to accumulate

resources tax free (e.g. through IRA's). Second, it removes numerous
tax shelters (e.g. the investment tax credit, the capital gains and
dividend exclusions, investment interest deductions, and passive

business loss offsets) through which many wealthy individuals currently

achieve significant reductions in their marginal tax rates. The net
effect of these changes remains to be seen.

In addition, I have been somewhat conservative by assuming that

wealthy parents will face marginal income tax rates of 28%. In fact,
the Act includes a surcharge on taxable income between $71,900 and

$149,250 for couples ($43,150 and $87,560 for single individuals) which
may well produce an effective marginal tax rate of 33% for many wealthy
taxpayers.

Other provisions also bear on these issues to a lesser degree.

Unearned income for children under 14 years of age is now counted as
taxable income for the parent——this somewhat attenuates the ability of

parents to arrange significant transfers of resources very early in
life. The Act also curtails income splitting through trusts, eliminates
the advantages of Clifford and Spousal Remainder Trusts, and strengthens

the Generation Skipping Tax. Yet it is difficult to imagine that these
provisions would have a large effect on the overall picture described
here.

—41—

VII. Conclusions
In this paper, I

have suggested that the

indirect effects of

estate levies on personal income tax revenues are

extremely

large

relative to estate tax collections. Indeed, although it is very
difficult to estimate these effects with any precision, in recent years
true estate

tax revenues

may well have been negative. I have emphasized

that these conclusions are highly dependent on the progressivity of the
personal income tax, but have also shown that indirect revenue effects

would continue to be extremely important even under the new tax reform

bill. Accordingly, common planning techniques severely cripple the
ability of the federal government to achieve the dual purposes of
promoting equity and raising revenue through estate taxation.
Nevertheless, the existence of this tax does appear to effect a
diversion of substantial resources (upwards of $2 billion per year) to
charity, and many may view this as sufficient justification for its

retention. Furthermore, avenues for curtailing estate and gift tax
avoidance have not yet been fully exhausted. By persuing such avenues,
the federal government might

well

succeed in reducing large concentra-

tions of wealth, while significantly enhancing total federal revenue.
Yet in the absence of far—reaching reform, it seems unlikely that the
estate tax will do much more than benefit charitable causes.

—42—

Footnotes

-1-'

For this reason, changes in the taxation of personal income in
affect estate tax revenues, just as estate taxation affects income

tax revenues. We return to this point in section 6.
In general, only part of this gain will be due to inflation.
Thus, the argument remains valid even if the credit is indexed.
One obvious difference is that an individual might not be sure
that his spouse would make the same bequests later on that he

would have made himself. However, it is possible to overcome this
difficulty through the use of a trust.

Al

Unfortunately, this period also witnessed the adoption of

significant income tax reforms (under ERTA). Thus, changes in
gift and bequest behavior may reflect a combination of effects

(see footnote 1). One would not, however, expect income tax
provisions to significantly affect the fraction of bequests left
to spouses since, subsequent to the testator's death, all primary
heirs (spouses and children) will ordinarily pay similar high—

bracket marginal personal income tax rates. In addition, the
limitation of the marital deduction was undoubtably the single
most important tax—related determinant of spousal bequests, and

its elimination probably swamped all other effects. For these
reasons, data on spousal bequests may actually be preferrable to
data on intra

vivos transfers.

—43—

After subtracting liabilities such as funeral and administrative
expenses, debts and mortgages, one finds that bequests to other

heirs

increased by roughly the same proportion.

Specifically, the estimated that

transfers

across generations

totalled about $70 billion, and they attricuted approximately

60.9% of this to intra vivos transfers. Intra vivos transfers
include life insurance policies in which the incidents of
ownership have been transferred to the beneficiary, and which are
therefore excluded from gross estate.
1.!

One could question this calculation on several grounds. First,

wealthy individuals have more incentive to engage in estate
planning, and therefore probably make a larger fraction of their

transfers intra vivos than do average individuals. For this
reason, the calculation probably understates the true magnitude of

such transfers. Second, a number of significant tax reforms took
place between 1974 (the year for which Kotlikoff and Summers made

their calculations) and 1983. These included i) the unification
of gift and estate taxes, ii) the reduction in estate tax rates,
iii) the reduced progressivity of income tax rates, and iv) the
liberalization

exclusion.

of the unified credit and yearly gift tax

The first three factors would tend to reduce intra

vivos giving, while the

of

fourth

has

the opposite effect. In view

the enormous importance of the unified credit and yearly

exclusion to most individuals, I suspect that the

figure

is,

if anything, on the low side.

$26.5

billion

—44—

2/

Total estate tax revenues were slightly higher than this, since,
prior to 1984, the filing requirement was below $300,000.

Unfortunately, the IRS has only released data on estates with

gross values exceeding $300,000 for 1983. Accordingly, my
calculations are intended to approximate the true net revenue

associated with taxing this group.

2/

According to my calculations, transferring an asset worth $1 intra

vivos lowers the present value of income tax payments by

approximately 20+ under ERTA rates, and 15+ under TRA rates. The
effect of this reform on intra vivos transfers should therefore be
more or less equal to the effect of cutting the estate tax rate by

only 5%. Other aspects of the TRA may reduce this effect even
further——see the discussion in section 6C.
1_P_I

For estates of less than $1 million, I assume price and income
elasticities of —1.6, and 0.4, respectively, and a marginal estate

tax rate of 39%. For estates exceeding $1 million, these figures
are —1.0, 0.4, and 45%, respectively.

—45—

References
Barthold, Thomas and Robert Plotnick [1984], "Estate Taxation and Other
Determinants

of Charitable Bequests," National Tax Journal 37,

255—37.

Bentz, Mary [1985], "Estate Tax Returns, 1983," SOI Bulletin, 1—12.
Boskin, Michael [1976], "Estate Taxation and Charitable Bequests,"

of Public Economics 5, 27—56.

Journal

Brosterman, Robert [1977], The Complete Estate Planning Guide, New

York:

McGraw—Hill.

Clay, William

[1982],

The Dow Jones—Irwin Guide to Estate Planning,

Homewood, Ill.: Dow Jones—Irwin.
Clotfelter,

Charles [1985], Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Giving,

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Esperti, Robert and Renno Peterson [1983], The Handbook of Estate
Planning,
Feldstein,

New York: McGraw—Hill.

Martin [1974], "Financing in the Evaluation of Public

Expenditure," in W. Smith and J. Culbertson (eds.), Public Finance

and Stabilization Policy.
Feldstein, Martin [1977], "Charitable Bequests, Estate taxation, and
Intergenerational Wealth Transfers," in Research Papers,
Commission on Private Philanthropy adn Public Needs 3, 1485—1500,

Washington, D.C.: Treasury Department.
Kess, Sidney and Bertil Westlin [1982], CCH Estate Planning Guide,

Chicago: Commerce Clearing House, Inc.

—46—

King, Mervyn [1977], Public Policy and the Corporation, Chapman and

Hall: London.
King, Mervyn and Don Fullerton [1984], The Taxation of Income from

Capital, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Kotlikoff, Lawrence and Lawrence Summers [1981], "The Role of
Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation,"
Journal of Political Economy 84, 706—732.
McNess, Stephen [1973], "Deductibility of Charitable Bequests," National
Tax Journal 26, 81—98.

Milam, Edward and D. Larry Crumbley [1977], Estate Planning——After the

1976 Tax Reform Act, New York: McGraw—Hill.
Poterba, James [1985], "How Burdensome Are Capital Gains Taxes," mimeo,
MIT.

Poterba, James and Lawrence Summers [1985], "The Economic Effects of
Dividend

Edward I.

Taxation," in Recent Advances in Corporate Finance,
Altman

and Marti G. Subrahmanyam, eds., Richard Irwin,

Homewood, Illinois, 227—284.
Stiglitz, Joseph [1983], "Some Aspect of the Taxation of Capital Gains,"
Journal of Public Economics 21, 257—294.
U.S. Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income, 1977 Estate Tax,

Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

—47—

Appendix
In this appendix, we derive formulas which express the value of
the government's claim on a privately held asset as a function of the
holder's characteristics, the tax system, and the nature of the asset.
First, consider a bond (consol) which pays $i per year forever.
Suppose that

the

interest rate is i, so that

the

value of the bond is

$1. Each year, the bondholder, whose marginal tax

nominal after tax income

fraction y of

generated

reinvests the remainder in new bonds. Bonds pay
beginning
the

rate

is m, consumes

by the bond, and

interest at

the

of each year starting in year 1, so that at the end of year

t

investor owns bonds worth

(i + i(1_m)(1_y))t
and pays taxes of
im(1 + i(l_m)(l_y))t_1

in period t+1. Supposing that xii is the marginal tax rate
average

bondholder, the present discounted

through

year T is

value of this revenue stream

T.
ç imtl + i(1—m)(1—y)j\t1
—

L.

t=i
=

(i

+ (1—rn)!)

t

1

(i—) — (1—y)(1—m)

ji

of the

— (1 +

i(1_m)(1_Y))T]

1 + (1—)i

—48—

To calculate the revenue loss associated with transferring the bond from
one taxpayer to another for a period of T years, we simply calculate the

change in the value of this expression associated with changing the

values of m and y.
Next, consider a stock which, in year 0, represents a claim on
capital

assets worth $1. These assets yield after corporate income

earnings

tax

of $p at the beginning of each year, starting in year 1. The

company always pays out the fraction a of earnings as current
dividends, and retains the remainder, investing it in new capital

assets. Thus, at the end of year t, one share of stock represents a
claim on capital assets worth

+

Let

p(1_a)]

At denote the number of shares of vintage t

stock

(shares

bought in period t) which the investor still holds at the end of period
t > -v.

We take Ag = 1.

Each year, the investor sells a fraction X

of his stock, irrespective of vintage, thus,

(1)

At =

A(1_X)t_

He consumes the fraction y of realized after tax nominal income, and

reinvests the proceeds in stock. Once again, we use m to denote the
investor's marginal tax rate, and in

to denote the marginal tax rate of

the average bondholder. In addition, we assume that the fraction e of
realized capital gains is exempt from taxation. Accordingly, in
period t, the investor pays taxes of

—49—

(2)

Rt =

m

+ p(1_a))t_l

kOt

+ X(1—e)(i + p(la))t -

(i

+ (1))k]}

and purchases

(3)

=

(i + (1))t kO Pa(1-y
+ x(i +

-m)(1 + p(la))t

p(1-a))1 + (1-y)(e + (1—m)(1-e))((1 + (1))tk i)]}

shares of new stock. While we were unable to obtain a nice closed—form
expression for total revenues, (1), (2), and (3) form a system of

difference equations which can be solved numerically. We then value the
revenue stream by discounting, as above.

As a final step, we relate p to i through capital market
equilibrium conditions. Under traditional views of capital market
equilibrium (see Poterba and Summers [1985]),

—

i(1-m)
a(i—m) + (1—a)(1—z)

where z, the effective tax

rate
Z =

(see King and Fullerton [1984]).

on capital gains, is given by
X(1—e)m
X + 1(1—rn)

