                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  NEGLECTED RISKS:
                         THE PSYCHOLOGY OF FINANCIAL CRISES

                                          Nicola Gennaioli
                                          Andrei Shleifer
                                           Robert Vishny

                                        Working Paper 20875
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20875


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




Gennaioli thanks the European Research Council (Starting Grant #241114) for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Neglected Risks: The Psychology of Financial Crises
Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny
NBER Working Paper No. 20875
January 2015
JEL No. G01,G02

                                            ABSTRACT

We model a financial market in which investor beliefs are shaped by representativeness. Investors
overreact to a series of good news, because such a series is representative of a good state. A few bad
news do not change investor minds because the good state is still representative, but enough bad news
leads to a radical change in beliefs and a financial crisis. The model generates debt over-issuance,
“this time is different” beliefs, neglect of tail risks, under- and over-reaction to information, boom-
bust cycles, and excess volatility of prices in a unified psychological model of expectations.


Nicola Gennaioli                                   Robert Vishny
Department of Finance                              Booth School of Business
Università Bocconi                                 The University of Chicago
Via Roentgen 1                                     5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
20136 Milan, Italy                                 Chicago, IL 60637
nicola.gennaioli@unibocconi.it                     and NBER
                                                   Rvishny@gmail.com
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
                       Neglected Risks: The Psychology of Financial Crises

                        Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny

                                              December 2014



        Financial crises are supposed to be rare events, yet they occur quite often. According to

Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), investors suffer from “this time is different” syndrome, failing to

see crises coming because they do not recognize similarities among the different pre-crisis

bubbles. As a result, each crisis surprises investors.

        Economists typically model financial crises as responses to shocks to which investors

attach a low probability ex ante, but which nonetheless materialize. Such shocks (sometimes

referred to as “MIT shocks”; e.g., Caballero and Simsek 2013) are consistent with rational

expectations in that investors recognize that there is a small chance that the shock might occur,

but they are harder to reconcile with the Reinhart Rogoff observation that crises are not that

unusual.

        The 2008 financial crisis in the US has deepened the challenge, by bringing up direct

evidence that investors underestimated the risk of a crisis. Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009)

show that investors underestimated the probability of mortgage defaults in pricing mortgage

backed securities. Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012) find that investors did not even contemplate

the magnitude of home price declines that actually materialized. Rather than being considered

unlikely, the risks appear to have been entirely neglected. We need a theory of beliefs consistent

with sharp underestimates of the odds of a crisis.


   Gennaioli: Universita Bocconi, Department of Finance, Via Roentgen 1, Milan, Italy (e-mail:
nicola.gennaioli@unibocconi.it); Shleifer: Harvard University, Economics Department, Littauer Center, 1805
Cambridge Street, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA (e-mail: shleifer@fas.harvard.edu); Vishny: ChicagoBooth, University
of Chicago, 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 (e-mail: Robert.vishny@chicagobooth.edu).
Gennaioli thanks the European Research Council (Starting Grant #241114) for financial support.

                                                          1
       In this paper, we present a psychological theory of the neglect of risk and financial crises.

The theory seeks to explain precisely why the probability estimates of a crisis in a boom are too

low, offering a foundation of “unanticipated” shocks, and of zero probabilities attached to some

states of the world by investors (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny 2012). Our theory yields boom-

bust financial crises based entirely on beliefs; we do not incorporate into the model any

economic mechanisms that amplify the shocks, such as fire sales or imperfect capital markets.

       Our theory is based on Kahneman and Tversky’s (1972) idea of representativeness,

previously modeled by Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010), and

Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2014). In our model, representativeness induces people to

over-estimate the probability of outcomes that are relatively more likely in light of recently

observed data. Representativeness is intimately related to the idea of similarity: after seeing

some data, people concentrate their forecasts on outcomes similar to the data observed,

neglecting alternative future paths.

       This principle has far-reaching implications for finance. An investor observing a string of

good news (internet stocks, housing prices) views them as being generated by a favorable

economic scenario. A series of good news is similar to a continuing boom. The investor then

puts too much probability weight on that scenario and neglects the risk of bad outcomes. If

investor expectations are elicited at this point, they look extrapolative.

       Observing some bad news intermixed with good news does not change the investor’s

mind. He views the few bad news as an aberration and under-reacts. Only after a string of

unfavorable news the bad outcome becomes sufficiently more likely that the representative

scenario changes from boom to bust. A pattern of sufficiently dramatic or continuing bad news

is similar to the low payoff state, leading to a change in the underlying beliefs. Previously



                                                      2
ignored bad news is remembered, leading to a sharp rise in the perceived probability of a crisis

and a collapse of prices. The investor now overreacts to the bad news, especially if the true

probability of the low state remains low. The possibility of black swans is initially ignored, but

ultimately turns into an overstated fear that leads to a self-generating crisis. In contrast to

rational expectations, the model yields purely belief-driven boom bust cycles.



   I.        The Model

        There is one asset, such as a mortgage, and one investor. The cash flow of the asset,

received at the very end, is a random variable taking values in              {        }, where       .

There are three periods                The investor receives bits of news about the probability of

each final payoff between periods, and updates his beliefs (the news could be payoff realizations

of similar assets). At        , the investor’s prior expected probability of     is     , with       .

We do not think of either state as extremely unlikely, although good times are more likely than

bad. At time , after observing a sample of                 bits of good and bad news, a Bayesian

investor would update the posterior expected probability of          to

    This updating rule obtains if the prior distribution over             is Dirichlet with parameters

         .

        At       , debt is issued to the investor against the asset’s cash flow. Issuers maximize

profits. The investor is assumed to be risk neutral as long as the expected default probability is

below , but infinitely risk averse if the expected probability of default is higher than , where

        . This discontinuity in risk bearing capacity may reflect an institutional constraint facing

the investor, such as a value-at-risk constraint.




                                                      3
            To see what happens in a boom, assume that, between             and t = 1, a string of

good draws is observed, and no bad news. By Bayesian updating, the expected probability of

state       at       is                . To make our points, we assume:

A.1                       .

Good news increases the expected probability of a good state, but not enough to make it tolerable

for investors to bear default risk in the low state    . We then have:

Lemma 1 (rational benchmark) Under A.1, after the observation of               bits of good news, the

amount of debt issued at          and its price are                   .

            A moderate amount of good news does not change the Bayesian posterior enough. As a

consequence, the amount of debt issued and its value do not change relative to what would in

principle have happened at            if debt were issued then. The rational expectations funding

policy is very conservative. This (low) amount of debt is completely information insensitive, so

its price does not change at         either.



      II.        The Boom Under Thinking through Representativeness

            In contrast to the rational benchmark, suppose that belief formation is guided by

representativeness. In particular, what is representative at       depends on a comparison with the

past,            .

Definition 1 At time , the representativeness of cash flow         is formally defined as:




Investors then deflate by a factor       [     ] the odds of the less representative cash flow. Equally

representative cash flows are deflated by the same factor.

                                                        4
         Representativeness maps reality into what investors are thinking about.                           The most

representative cash flow at is the one whose probability exhibits the largest percentage increase

in light of the data.1          The probability of this cash flow is inflated relative to the less

representative one (but probabilities still add up to one). Intuitively, investors weigh recent data

too much in their assessments.

         Parameter        captures the severity of the distortion of probabilities.                   When             ,

investors only think about the most representative cash flow, forgetting the other. This case

corresponds to a complete neglect of risk, as in Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012). When

       , investors hold rational expectations. For intermediate                   ’s, investors overestimate the

likelihood of representative states.

         Consider now the implications of this logic. Begin with a stable situation in which no

updating occurs and the distribution              is always the same as          . By Equation (1), in this case

all cash flows are equally representative, since                                                    . Even under

representativeness, then, the rational benchmark                                   obtains.

         Consider what happens in a boom under representativeness. Now, observing                              bits of

good news exerts a more drastic effect on beliefs than under rational expectations. Under

representativeness, this news does not just raise the probability of the high cash flow state, but it

also renders that state representative. The following result holds:

Proposition 1 Under representativeness, after observing                    pieces of good news the beliefs

of investors at           are distorted in favor of higher cash flows:



1
 Kahneman and Tversky (1972) write that “an attribute is representative of a class is it is very diagnostic; that is, if
the relative frequency of this attribute is much higher in that class than in a relevant reference class”. In line with
this definition, our model specifies that a cash flow realization is representative of a sequence of data if such
realization becomes relatively much more frequent after the data are observed.

                                                               5
where      is the Bayesian posterior. If         is small enough, after observing      bits of good news

the debt issued at           and its price are          ,                                .

        When the investor assesses risk by representativeness, he overreacts to good news. Good

news increases the probability of        , but the investor extrapolates too much from this favorable

change. As a consequence, he downplays the probability of                 , which facilitates greater debt

issuance at higher prices. If            these effects are so strong that debt is viewed as absolutely

safe, so its price equals the maximum                       . Compared to the rational case, debt is over-

priced and over-issued, as in Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012, 2013).

        Although investors fail to fully anticipate the risk of losses, they do so not because losses

occur with a low probability. In fact, the loss state           may be quite likely. Losses are neglected

because they are not representative of the good news that market participants have observed.

This is a form of “this time is different syndrome”: the good news creates too much faith in good

fundamentals, which leads to neglect of risk and excessive debt issuance, as in Baron and Xiong

(2014). Extrapolation of good times and the neglect of downside risk are part of the same

psychological mechanism of representativeness.

        This mechanism highlights two major differences between this psychologically founded

model and the canonical “unanticipated shock”. First, markets will get exposed to the risk of

losses rather frequently: even relatively likely outcomes such as            may be neglected. Second,

the risks that get neglected endogenously depend on actual fundamental changes and news. This

is a testable implication.

                                                            6
   III.      The Bust under Thinking Through Representativeness

          Another key difference between the psychology of neglected risks and the canonical

“unanticipated shock” is how crises unfold. Under representativeness, a few disappointing bits

of data intermixed with good news are not enough for neglected risks to become salient. Enough

bad news must accumulate for the bad scenario to become representative. As a consequence,

investors initially under-react to bad news, but when enough bad news accumulates, investors

over-react because their representation changes, causing them to overestimate the probability of

the low state. There is an exact parallel here between the psychology of booms and busts.

          To see how this works, suppose that after                 a number       of low realizations is

observed intermixed with           good realizations, so that the news sample at         is          . At

     , then, the market beliefs          and outcomes are:

Proposition 2 (Under and over reaction) Suppose that psychological biases are severe, namely

      . Then the market reacts to news                as follows:

   1) If                               , the market neglects the bad news and still believes that debt is

          perfectly safe, namely             and               .

   2) If                               , the market over-reacts to the bad news. It now believes that

          occurs with probability 1, namely             and               .

          This result is particularly stark due to the extreme assumption           , but it brings out our

main points. First, provided only a few bits of bad news are observed, investors disregard them,

and continue to extrapolate from the more representative good news.                 Relative to rational

expectations, the reaction to information is delayed. This result may shed light on one of the

most puzzling aspects of the pre-Lehman market behavior in the US, when investors shrugged

                                                         7
off extremely bad news during 2007-2008, such as the collapse of Bear Stearns and several

market runs, and only panicked after Lehman.

         Second, after sufficiently many bits of bad news are observed, the low state with large

losses on debt becomes representative. At this point, investors discard the good news as mere

instances of chance and exaggerate the likelihood of future losses. Investors become pessimistic

according to the same psychology that caused euphoria at          . An event such as the collapse

of Lehman reminds investors of all the other bad things that have happened, fundamentally

changes beliefs, and leads to a crisis.

         In Proposition 2, low probability outcomes require relatively few observations to become

representative (formally       can be low precisely when        is low). Bad news episodes are

dangerous because they very quickly change representation, not because of the objective (and

unlikely) consequences they bring about. More generally, representativeness can cause large

swings in confidence and thus in market outcomes in response to news, increasing volatility

relative to rational expectations.



   IV.      Conclusion

         We have outlined a psychological model of beliefs in financial markets in which

investors attach excessive probabilities to states of the world that are representative for the news

they observe. In this model, optimism and pessimism are outcomes of the same psychological

mechanisms. The very simple model yields several results.

         First, it explains how moderate probability events are first neglected, but then

exaggerated when news pattern becomes consistent with them. It thus accounts for “this time is

different” phenomenon without recourse to low probability shocks.



                                                     8
       Second, it provides a unified psychological interpretation of neglect of risk and

extrapolation that have been seen as central to the accounts of boom and bust cycles. This

framework also allows for thinking about under- and over-reaction to information that has been a

central set of phenomena in behavioral finance, but has not yet been obtained in a unified

psychological model (see Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny 1998).

       Third, it explains how boom and bust cycles in debt valuation and issuance can arise

purely through volatility in expectations, even without the standard economic mechanisms of

amplification.

       Obviously we have presented only a rudimentary version of this analysis. Yet the goal of

having a unified psychological model of financial instability appears a bit closer.




                                                     9
                                          References


Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. “A Model of Investor Sentiment”,
Journal of Financial Economics 49 (3), 307-343.

Baron, Matthew, and Wei Xiong. 2014. “Credit Expansion and Neglected Crash Risk”, Princeton
University Working Paper.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2014. “Stereotypes”, NBER Working
Paper.

Caballero, Ricardo, and Alp Simsek. 2013. “Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity”, Journal of
Finance 68 (6), 2549-2587.

Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek, and Erik Stafford. 2009. “The Economics of Structured Finance”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 3–26.

Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul Willen. 2012. “Why did so many people make
so many ex post bad decisions? The causes of the foreclosure crisis”, Working paper, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston.

Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer. 2010.“What Comes to Mind”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125 (4), 1399-1433.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2012. “Neglected Risks, Financial
Innovation and Financial Fragility”, Journal of Financial Economics 104 (3), 452-468.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2013. “A Model of Shadow Banking”,
Journal of Finance 68(4), 1331-1365.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1972. “Subjective probability: A judgment of
representativeness”, Cognitive Psychology 3 (3), 430–454.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. “This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly”, Princeton University Press.




                                                  10
