                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          CAPITAL TAXATION IN THE 21ST CENTURY

                                             Alan J. Auerbach
                                              Kevin Hassett

                                          Working Paper 20871
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w20871


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2015




We thank Joe Sullivan for excellent research assistance, and Dan Feenberg, Wojciech Kopczuk, and
Thomas Piketty for helpful comments. Alan J. Auerbach received financial support from the Robert
D. Burch Center for Tax Policy and Public Finance, UC Berkeley and is a member of the Academic
Advisory Boards of the American Enterprise Institute and the International Tax Policy Forum. Kevin
Hassett declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described
in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Alan J. Auerbach and Kevin Hassett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Capital Taxation in the 21st Century
Alan J. Auerbach and Kevin Hassett
NBER Working Paper No. 20871
January 2015
JEL No. H21,P17

                                             ABSTRACT

In his influential book, Capital in the 21st Century, Thomas Piketty argues forcefully that rising wealth
and wealth inequality is an inherent characteristic of capitalist economies and calls for strong policy
responses, in particular a substantial wealth tax implemented globally. This paper takes issue with
the facts, logic, and policy conclusions in Piketty’s book, suggesting that the factors needed to support
the inexorable rise in capital’s share and concentration are lacking and that among tax policy reforms
aimed at dealing with economic inequality a wealth tax finds little support either in Piketty’s own
work or elsewhere in the literature.


Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu

Kevin Hassett
American Enterprise Institute
1150 Seventeenth Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20036
khassett@aei.org




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20871
       In producing Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Thomas Piketty has taken a large step

beyond the customary turf of economists’ debates, presenting to a much broader readership a

compelling story of the ascendency of capital and the powerlessness of the market forces of

capitalism to arrest the growing threat to democracy from growing wealth and its increasing

concentration in the hands of the few. Piketty prescribes a global, coordinated tax on wealth as

the antidote to this dystopian trend, arguing that only such a direct assault on wealth

concentrations will succeed where the other policies of governments that already play large roles

in their respective economies have failed.

       Piketty’s book has three main components: a sweeping historical analysis of data on the

evolution of capital shares and concentration, a theoretical framework intended to explain this

apparently inexorable rise of capital and concentration of income, and policy recommendations to

put economies like ours on an alternate path. While adopting the same logical division of topics

in our presentation, we recognize that there have been very many excellent contributions since the

book’s publication, focusing particularly on Piketty’s explicit and implicit theoretical assumptions

regarding capital’s income share and concentration. Thus, although we find many of the points in

these recent contributions compelling, we are selective in our discussion and concentrate

particularly on the role of capital income and wealth taxation in promoting economic well-being.


I.    A Note on Data and Data Sources

       Piketty’s empirical analysis covers the sweep of western history from the 18th century

onward. While the discussion of data and contemporaneous European literature from earlier eras

is among the book’s more appealing aspects, postwar trends have received the most attention

from economists and are the most immediately relevant in evaluating Piketty’s theory and policy

recommendations. Piketty’s approach is to document trends in a number of series, and then
discuss the implications of these trends for tax policy. Adopting that approach, we begin by

evaluating the evidence regarding trends in capital and wealth, and then turn to discussing the

lessons of tax policy. Others have raised a variety of issues concerning the sources and

construction of the data, and we will not attempt to review all of these issues here. However, we

do feel some attention is merited by the possibility that the translation of the data from original

sources into the series used in the book may have overstated the extent of the recent growth in

the wealth-output ratio and the increasing share of wealth received by the top 1 percent of the

wealth distribution, at least in the United States.1 In addition, the relevance of the relationship

between the growth rate and the rate of return on capital, capital’s share in national income, and

the wealth share at the top merits reconsideration.


    A. The Trend of the Wealth Share of the Top 1 Percent

         Piketty’s presentation of US wealth data gives the impression of a strong deterministic

postwar trend in the wealth share of the top 1 percent. The data sources cited by Piketty in his

online technical appendix and the accompanying US data file2 offer many more points of

observation than the graphs featured prominently in Capital suggests. The original sources cited

by Piketty contain observations for the years 1962, 1983, 1989, 1992, 1995, 1998, 2001, 2004,

and 2007.3 If one couples each of these observations with the 1970 and 1950 US observations


1
  It is worth noting that the original publication to raise questions about Piketty’s treatment of data, Giles (2014),
raised questions about the data used for a number of the countries analyzed, not just the United States. See: Giles,
Christopher. 2014. “Data problems with Capital in the 21 st Century.” Financial Times, Money Supply, May 23.
http://blogs.ft.com/money-supply/2014/05/23/data-problems-with-capital-in-the-21st-century/
2
 The specific file in question is the “Chapter10TablesFigures.xlsx” file, as last modified on May 26 2014 and
available for download on Piketty’s website at: http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/files/capital21c/en/xls. The relevant sheet
within that Excel file is entitled “TS10.1DetailsUS”.
3
 Specifically, Wolff (1994) and Kennickell (2011) both contain observations for the year 1962. Wolff (1994)
contains observations for 1983. Kennickell (2009) and Kennickell (2011) both contain observations for 1989, 1992,
1995, 1998, 2001, 2004, and 2007. All sources contain both top 1% and top 10% for the years in which they contain
either.

                                                                                                                         2
imputed by Piketty from the estate tax data series of Kopczuk and Saez (2004), this generates a

total of eleven observations for the post-war time period in both the top 1 percent and top 10

percent time series. The relevant figure in Capital, Figure 10.5, shows only seven observations

for the post-war United States, one on the decennial year of each decade from 1950 to 2010. This

reduction in displayed observations and the pattern they represent stems from adjustments to the

source data made by Piketty.

       According to the annotations in Piketty’s dataset, these values appear to have been

averaged in a way that seems difficult to reconcile with the way in which they are presented in

some of the key charts in the book. For instance, an annotation in the dataset implies that the

1980 value is the average of the 1983 value in Wolff (1994) and the 1989 value from Kennickell

(2009). Likewise, the annotation for the 1990 value implies that it is the average of the 1992,

1995, and 1999 values from Kennickell (2001). These averaging schemes yield, respectively,

average years of observation of 1986 and 1995. A representation of the values generated by this

averaging scheme as point-in-time values for 1980 and 1990 thus seems highly-stylized.

       Though the disparity between the actual year of observation and the depicted year of

observation is smaller than for 1980 and 1990, the same phenomenon also occurs in the most

recent data shown by Piketty. His spreadsheet indicates that the average of observations from

the years 2001 and 2004 form the observation for the year 2000 in his book. A single value from

the year 2007 serves as the most recent 2010 observation. The latter choice creates the

impression that the chart includes data after the recent financial crisis, but it does not.

       The values in the book do not always appear to be generated according to the

methodology his spreadsheet’s annotations describe. In contrast to his spreadsheet’s annotation,

the 1980 value in Capital is simply the 1989 value from Kennickell (2009), for both the share of



                                                                                                  3
wealth held by the top 1 percent and the share held by the top 10 percent. As does Piketty’s

chart for the year 1980, Table 4 of Kennickell (2009) shows the top 1 percent’s share in 1989 at

30.1 percent and the top 10 percent’s at 67.2 percent. The 1983 values in Table 4 of Wolff, by

contrast, are 33.7 percent for the top 1 percent share and 68.1 percent for the top 10 percent

share. These two sets of values were not averaged. The result is that what appear to be point-in-

time values for the year 1980 are in fact point-in-time values for 1989.

       A similar discrepancy emerges in the case of 1990. Piketty cites “Kennickell (2001)” as

the source of the data. We were unable to identify such a publication using standard search

techniques, although Kennickell (2009) and Kennickell (2011) do contain data for the years in

question. As his annotations indicate, Piketty obtains a value for the top 1 percent in 1990 by

averaging observations from 1990, 1992, and 1995. But this changes in the case of the top 10

percent calculation. Kennickell decomposes the top 10 percent share of wealth into the share

held by the top 1 percent and the share held by the 90th-99th percentiles. The formula that

Piketty uses to calculate the share of wealth held by the top 10 percent in 1990 adds the average

of the share of wealth held by the 90th-99th percentiles only for the years 1992 and 1998 to the

average of the share of wealth held by the top 1 percent in each of the years 1992, 1995, and

1998. No explanation for this exclusion of 1995’s 90th-99th percentile value from the top 10

percent calculation given. The effect of including 1995’s value for the top percentile but not

percentiles 90 through 99 is to bias the reported level of wealth inequality upwards: the 1995

value for the top 1 percent is the highest of the three years 1992/1995/1998, but its value for the

90th-99th percentiles is the lowest of the three.

       To clarify the data construction issues relevant for assessing trends in the wealth share,

we constructed a version of Piketty’s figures drawing on his source data, but without averaging



                                                                                                      4
or other manipulation. Rather than averaging values from different points in time to generate a

single decennial value, we simply graphed the values in the year of their observation, without

imposing any analytical transformation or statistical judgment. Figure I shows these data

alongside the series Piketty constructed. The chart includes the 1983 top 1 percent observation

excluded from Piketty’s series despite his annotation’s indicating that it was averaged with the

1989 value to generate the reported 1980 observation. Beyond that, however, the figure simply

depicts the data used in Piketty’s constructed series, but without averages and in the

observation’s actual year (e.g., 2007 is shown in 2007 rather than in 2010).




       When presented in the manner depicted in Figure I, the post-WWII trend in American

wealth inequality does not look as stark as in the comparable chart in Capital. Indeed, inequality


                                                                                                   5
appears to be declining at the end of his sample. The series no longer rises without interruption

in an apparently deterministic trend from 1970 onward, and appears too “noisy” to provide

evidence of the working of a “fundamental law of capitalism.” Though the 1 percent’s share of

wealth rose from 1970 to 1983, it then dropped through 1992 before reaching a post-war peak in

1995 that preceded yet another decline through 2001. These two dips coincide with the

recessions of 1990-91 and 2001, illustrating the potential importance of cyclical factors in

determining the short-run movements of series like this. One would also expect changes in tax

policy to exert short-run impacts, as has been demonstrated for the income distribution, where

changes in top marginal tax rates led to changes in the level and timing of reported income at the

top (Feldstein 1995, Goolsbee 2000). Both factors should lead to caution in drawing strong

conclusions about underlying trends.

           While Piketty does not report estimates of trends in his data, a natural question emerges

whether the source data exhibit a statistically significant trend. In his discussion, Piketty favors

discussion of the trend in the data since 1970. Trend estimates suggest, however, that the

observed trend in wealth inequality is sensitive to the choice of 1970 as the starting year.4 With

the raw observations, the trend is positive and significant if estimated from 1970 through 2007. If

estimated beginning in 1960, 1980, or 1990, the trend loses statistical significance and the

coefficients become smaller, though they always remain positive. If one focuses on the very end

of the sample, the trend estimate becomes negative.5



4
    The specifics of the trend estimates are available upon request.
5
  This is not to suggest that there is no evidence in favor of an increasing recent share of wealth at the top. For
example, Saez and Zucman (2014) find an increasing share from estimates based on capitalizing flows of capital
income. Such a trend is much less evident when one uses alternative approaches based on estate tax returns or
survey evidence. The sources of these differences and a consideration of which approach might be most accurate
are considered by Saez and Zucman (who favor the capitalized income method) as well as Kopczuk (2014) and
Bricker et al. (2014), who argue in favor of the survey-based method of measurement.

                                                                                                                      6
       Piketty similarly reduced the variation in the data in his analysis of longer time series.

While averaging and displacing of the dates of the source data can create the appearance of

steady trends in the data, the statistical confidence one might have in such trends is much lower

than his discussion implies. This low confidence follows naturally from the fact that stock

market wealth is such an important determinant of the value of overall wealth. This component

varies enormously even over short periods of time, and the most recent fluctuations can have a

large impact on a trend estimate.


II.   r vs. g

       A key to effective communication is one’s ability to distill complex issues into simple

ones. In Capital, the relationship between the return to capital, r, and the economic growth rate,

g, is presented as a fundamental relationship determining our economic path, and both theory and

historical evidence are mustered to bolster the claim that r > g is an inevitable outcome. The basic

syllogism is (1) the rate of return exceeds the economic growth rate; (2) saving generated by this

high rate of return causes capital and wealth to grow faster than the economy; and (3) capital

income grows as a share of income because the rate of return does not fall sufficiently fast with

capital deepening to offset this growing capital-output ratio.

       But what measure of r should one use for such a calculation? To motivate this question,

consider Figure II, constructed using data from Piketty and Zucman (2014), showing the

evolution of capital-income ratios since 1870 for key economies. One interpretation of this figure

is that the capital-income ratio is very high in normal times, and that the major disruptions of the

20th century – two world wars and the worldwide Great Depression – were important but

temporary disruptions to the normal economic process. But another interpretation is that part of




                                                                                                       7
the normal process is that bad things happen to capital on occasion, and that one shouldn’t ignore

such outcomes any more than one should count only the heads from a series of coin flips.




       The analogy to this distinction from standard financial theory is between the safe rate of

return, rf, and the market rate of return, R. Absent fundamental risk or capital taxation, the

expected return would equal the safe return in market equilibrium. But with market risk and risk-

averse investors, the expected market return should include a risk premium, so that markets will

outperform safe investments on average, but will do worse in bad states of nature where resources

are particularly highly valued. Thus, excluding returns in bad states is certainly not the way to

measure r, and even including all returns misses the point that one shouldn’t weigh good and bad

outcomes equally.

       As an illustration, consider the performance of equity markets during the 20th century.

According to Jorion and Goetzmann (1999), global equity markets returned an asset-weighted real

return of about 4 percent over the 75-year period 1921-96; excluding the United States, the return


                                                                                                    8
was 3.4 percent. These relatively low returns (which do not incorporate the negative shocks

during World War I) are averages, and thus presumably incorporate an equity premium. How

large an equity premium one can justify has been a central topic in finance, although as recent

research (e.g., Barro 2006) has emphasized, even a small likelihood of rare catastrophic events

helps rationalize a sizable equity premium, meaning that average observed asset returns may

exceed the safe return by a sizable amount.

       Further, the rate of return to investors relevant to Piketty’s comparisons with the rate of

economic growth is an after-tax return, even though in some places Piketty’s analysis seems to

presume that the historical tax on capital income is zero, an odd choice given that the taxation of

capital and wealth is Piketty’s solution to the problem of wealth accumulation. While countries

following Piketty’s recommendations might pursue such policies much more aggressively, capital

income and wealth are taxed under current policies. Thus, perhaps the most relevant rate of return

to compare with the economic growth rate is the safe, after-tax rate of return.

       In keeping with the broad historical sweep of the book, Piketty offers a panoramic view

of the long-run evolution of the global return on capital from the year 0 through 2100. This

extraordinarily long choice of time frame gives the appearance that r, even his after tax measure,

is almost always greater than g. It is worth noting, however, that the modern tax system as we

know it did not exist for much of the time period shown in his graph. For instance, though it

may be hard to imagine a world without it, the US federal income tax system came into existence

only in 1913, a little more than a century ago. While Piketty’s data seem to show r > g as a

condition that prevailed for much of human history, the fact much of that history also predates

the modern tax system in the United States and elsewhere seems to undermine its relevance for

contemporary considerations. Moreover, the data after 2012 are projections rather than



                                                                                                      9
observations per se. The charts in the book, however, fail to make this crucial distinction

between observation and forecast clear. In fact, the book’s series for g appears to cross below

that for after-tax r only after 2012, the last year of observation. For every year in the chart for

which there are both data and a modern tax system, the after-tax rate of return is lower than the

rate of growth. It is only during the 2012-2050 time periods and the 2050-2100 periods that are

projections rather than observations that g moves below the after-tax rate of return.

        Piketty’s time series on after-tax rates of return faces two additional shortcomings. First,

the tax rates used to calculate the after-tax returns on capital in Piketty and Zucman (2014) are

average tax rates. But policy discussions engendered by the book tend to focus on the share of

wealth held by the top 1% and even the top 0.1%. It seems very likely that the majority of the

income of individuals in the right-tail of the wealth distribution falls into the highest tax bracket

and therefore pays the top marginal rate. Thus, the relevant tax policy parameter for the

discussion generated by Piketty’s work seems to be the top marginal tax rate rather than the

average tax rate. Second, Piketty calculates the return on capital based on national accounts data

and does not adjust for risk. As discussed above and noted by others as well (e.g., King 2014),

failure to adjust returns for the risk taken to generate them may lead to an overly generous

assessment of the circumstances faced by the owners of capital.6 We rely on an alternative time-

series on the after-tax rates of return in the US that takes into account these two criticisms.

        To derive the after-tax rate of return from the pre-tax rate of return, we simulated using

NBER’s TAXSIM the increase in tax liability that would result from an increase of 1% in the

interest income accruing to the top 1% of income earners in each year, and then calculated the


6
 See: King, Mervyn. 2014. “Capital in the Twenty-First Century by Thomas Piketty, review.” The Telegraph, May
10. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/10816161/Capital-in-the-Twenty
First-Century-by-Thomas-Piketty-review.html


                                                                                                           10
effective tax rate that would be paid on the average dollar of that additional income.7 To proxy

for the risk-free return on capital, and following the use of long-term government bond yields to

proxy for r in Acemoglu and Robinson (2014), we use historical time-series data on 10-year

Treasury bond yields for the pre-tax rate of return. Figure III graphs both this alternative series

and the series on pre- and post-tax returns on capital from Piketty and Zucman (2014). As one

can see, the pre-tax rate of return using the alternative specification is substantially lower than

when calculated by Piketty and Zucman (2014), who use a national accounts based procedure.

Likewise, the post-tax rate of return on capital using the top marginal tax rate is substantially

lower than the post-tax rate derived in Piketty and Zucman (2014). Indeed, the post-tax rate of

return in the alternative series remains consistently lower than GNP growth. From this

perspective, the apocalyptic r > g “exploding wealth inequality” scenario does not look

especially likely.




7
  That is, the calculation is done by first calculating the initial tax liability of the taxpayers who are in the top 1% of
income earners. Then every taxpayer's interest income is multiplied by 1.01 and tax liability is calculated again. That
recalculated tax liability is then divided by .01 times interest income and becomes the “average marginal rate” that is
here used as the tax rate. We are grateful to Dan Feenberg for performing these calculations.

                                                                                                                        11
III. If a Global Wealth Tax is the Answer, then what is the Question?

         The essence of Piketty’s theory is that societal inequality arises from a combination of

unequal capital ownership, a high rate of saving from capital income, and a high degree of

substitutability between capital and labor that allows capital to accumulate without causing the

rate of return to fall enough to offset the growing share of capital income. From such a theory, the

jump to recommending a global wealth tax as a key government policy instrument is

understandable, if not without its problems. But there are gaps between theory and reality that

lead one to question the logic underlying the wealth tax prescription.


   A. Sources of Recent Increases in Income Inequality

         There is little argument that the distribution of pre-tax income has become more unequal,

around the world and perhaps especially in the United States. There is also little dispute that

capital income is more concentrated at the top of the income distribution than labor income. But

Piketty’s own evidence suggests that the recent growth in before-tax income inequality is to a

large extent attributable, in a simple accounting sense, to the growing inequality in wage and

salary income. As discussed by Furman (2014), it is helpful to decompose changes in the share

of income going to a top quintile into three components, associated with changes in the labor

income share, changes in the capital income share, and changes in the economy’s share of

income going to capital, which would be associated with higher inequality because capital

income is more unequally distributed than labor income. That is:

   (1)

where  is the overall capital income share, li and L are quantile i’s and overall labor income, and

ki and K are quantile i’s and overall capital income. Based on the data provided by Piketty and


                                                                                                    12
Saez (2013a), Furman (2014) reports that (excluding capital gains), roughly two-thirds of the

increased share of income going to the top 1 percent since 1970 (and roughly half of the

increased share of the top 0.1 percent) is attributable to increases in labor-income inequality.

       To the extent that labor income inequality is the underlying source of overall inequality,

it is hard to see why the appropriate policy response is a wealth tax, rather than, for example, an

increase in the progressivity of labor income taxes, as indeed Piketty and his collaborators have

proposed in other work (e.g., Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva 2014). It may well be true that the

growing inequality of labor income is leading to a growing concentration of capital ownership,

and even possible that this process is accelerated by differences in saving rates among income

classes, as suggested by recent estimates by Saez and Zucman (2014). Even so, the underlying

factor driving inequality would be the dispersion of labor income.


   B. The Growth of Housing Capital

       While Piketty’s theory may evoke the image of a steady process of workers being

displaced from their jobs by an expanding stock of productive capital, much of the postwar

growth in capital income shares and capital-output ratios, in the United States but particularly in

other countries, has come through increases in the stock of housing capital as well as increases in

the value of existing houses. As Piketty notes, capital’s share of national income has indeed

risen over the decades since 1970. Figure IV shows the trajectory of US capital income since

1940. However, as Figure V suggests, the increasing share of capital income in national income

reflects an increase in housing’s share of capital income. Though the chart focuses on the case of

the United States, others have found that some of the upward trends that are central to Piketty’s

argument appear relatively stable if one removes the influence of housing capital for other

countries (Bonnet et. al. 2014).


                                                                                                   13
        The distinction between housing and other types of capital is consequential: a key factor

determining whether it is plausible that the capital income share will increase as the capital stock

increases is the substitutability of capital for labor. Piketty argues that this substitutability is very


                                                                                                      14
high. The traditional production function intuition that he relies upon, however, is suspect with

respect to housing capital, which presumably is a very poor substitute for labor.

       If the growth in the capital-output ratio and capital income’s share of overall income is

attributable to the growth in housing capital, focusing on a general wealth tax again seems like a

missed opportunity. This is particularly the case for the United States, where the tax benefits for

both owner-occupied and rental housing have long been recognized as the source of a major

distortion in the allocation of capital. Indeed, there have been many proposals over the years to

reduce the tax benefits for owner-occupied housing in a progressive manner, for example by

lowering the ceiling on mortgage amounts qualifying for an interest deduction or converting the

interest deduction to a tax credit. Like increases in marginal tax rates on labor income, such

changes would discourage labor supply by those affected by effectively reducing the real after-

tax wage, but they would also improve the efficiency of overall capital allocation.

       There is also evidence that markets with high housing costs may have those high costs in

part because of building codes and land use regulations that create conditions of artificial scarcity

(Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saks 2005; Quigley and Raphael 2005). As others have also noted, this

implies that land use regulations, rather than taxation, may be a more direct tool for addressing

the high value of housing capital (Rognlie 2014; Summers 2014).


   C. Post-Tax Inequality

       The distinction between after-tax and transfer inequality and pre-tax and transfer

inequality is also lost in Piketty’s framework. This is not a trivial distinction. According to the

Bureau of Economic Analysis, government transfer payments as a fraction of GDP have more

than doubled between 1970 and 2009, rising from 6.7% to 14.7% during that time period. By

contrast, according to Piketty’s data, the top decile’s share of income in the US increased by

                                                                                                      15
about 43%, rising from 32.6% to 46.5% over that same time period (Piketty 2014). The pre-tax

and transfer measures analyzed by Piketty therefore tend to overstate to the extent of the

differences in the economic welfare of those at the top versus those at the bottom. Burtless

(2014) also notes that government social benefits as a percentage of total US personal income

has steadily trended upwards for the time period that spans 1929 to 2012.




       Figure VI, a replication of a chart originally found in Burtless (2014), shows how

government social benefits as a share of total US personal income have steadily increased over

the time period. Moreover, many economists would agree that consumption is a better measure

than income of economic welfare. Hassett and Mathur (2010) show that the difference between

the consumption of those at the bottom and those at the top remained relatively stable from 1984

to 2010. Though the market income data cited by Piketty appears to show a surge in inequality,

this measure alone therefore overstates the extent of inequality in economic welfare. A more

thorough analysis of trends in economic well-being instead leaves one with the impression that




                                                                                                 16
government transfer programs may have largely ameliorated the tendency of the pre-tax trends in

income documented by Piketty to widen welfare inequality.


   D. Capital Prices vs. Quantities

       Wealth accumulation occurs not only because of increases in the amount of capital, but

also because of increases in asset prices, as Piketty (2014) himself discusses (see, for example,

the discussion on pages 187-191). But the implications for Piketty’s theory and his prescriptions

for tax policy differ according to the decomposition of increases in wealth between prices and

quantities and the causes of price increases. First, as discussed by Rognlie (2014), calculations

of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, which plays a key role in Piketty’s

argument about the persistence of r > g, require adjustment when capital-output ratios are based

on market values. Second, to the extent that asset prices do not reflect increases in the

productivity of capital, but are attributable to other factors such as a decline in discount rates or

increasing scarcity of land, one would not necessarily want to include capital gains as a measure

of the returns to capital in assessing trends in capital income. As shown by Saez and Zucman

(Figure 3), excluding capital gains significantly moderates the increase in the estimated taxable

capital income share of the top 0.1 percent of households between 1962 and 2012.

       Finally, capital taxation itself can play an important role in determining asset prices,

working through two channels. First, to the extent that new capital receives more favorable

treatment (e.g. for depreciation allowances) than otherwise equally productive existing capital,

the difference should be capitalized into the value of existing assets (Auerbach 1983). Second,

to the extent that firms use internal funds as the source of equity finance, corporate equity values

should capitalize deferred taxes on dividend distributions (Auerbach 1979). Both of these factors

can be significant, and changes over time can produce trends in asset values. Indeed, McGrattan


                                                                                                    17
and Prescott (2005) find that such changes due to tax policy can explain an important part of the

movement in US equity values over the period 1960-2001, including the fall during the 1970s

and the sustained rise in the 1980s and 1990s, during which time there was relatively little

change in the capital-output ratio itself; the same factors appear important in the United

Kingdom as well.


IV.      Global Wealth Taxation and its Alternatives

           Moving from theory and evidence to policy recommendations, Piketty (pp. 528-530)

argues passionately for a substantial annual wealth tax, with a progressive rate structure

exempting low levels of wealth and with marginal tax rates of 2 percent, 5 percent, or even 10

percent on the highest wealth levels. To make such a tax more enforceable, Piketty envisions it

as applied as a coordinated policy, for example as a European wealth tax, rather than by

individual countries.

           Putting forward such a proposal is truly a bold step, taking place as it does against a

backdrop of intense international tax competition and declining corporate tax rates, in which the

major current attempt at international tax policy coordination, the OECD project on “Base

Erosion and Profit Shifting,” is aimed at trying to preserve the existing system of capital

taxation, not at expanding it. It is a bold step, also, in terms of the logical support one can find

for it elsewhere in the book, or for that matter in the substantial literature on the design of

optimal tax systems, to which Piketty himself has contributed.

           Recent literature has taken several steps back from the strong conclusions from two key

strands in the literature, associated with papers by Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) and Chamley

(1986) and Judd (1985), suggesting that capital income tax rates should be zero.8 But this

8
    Banks and Diamond (2010) and Auerbach (2013) provide surveys of this recent literature.

                                                                                                       18
literature has not produced results that capital income taxes should be as high as would be

needed to produce the equivalent annual wealth taxes that Piketty recommends.9 10 Indeed,

Piketty turns a key insight from this literature on its head.

           One of the important developments in the literature on taxation and saving is a fuller

understanding of the relationships among different tax bases, in particular consumption taxes,

labor income taxes and capital income taxes. While simple models often equate taxes on labor

and consumption, a major difference, implicit in some of the early arguments for consumption

taxation (e.g. Kaldor 1956), is the ability of consumption taxes to hit existing sources of wealth,

attributable to rents, inheritances, disguised labor income, etc. The broader consumption tax

base can provide a tax system that is more efficient (e.g., Auerbach and Kotlikoff 1987) than a

labor income tax and, with a progressive rate structure, a reasonably progressive distribution of

the tax burden, as measured on a lifetime basis (Altig et al. 2001). As is now also well

understood, a consumption tax differs from a capital income tax in its treatment of capital

income only by its exemption of the safe rate of return on investment.11 Thus, consumption

taxes hit wealth without interfering with the incentive to save associated with the intertemporal

terms of trade. Wealth taxes, on the other hand, effectively tax the safe rate of return on

investment because they do not depend on actual rates of return, thereby incurring the

intertemporal distortion but forgoing tax on other components of the rate of return.

9
  Piketty and Saez (2013b) argue for tax rates on inheritances as high as 50 percent in the United States, but these
results come from a model with no other capital income taxes and no saving except for bequests. In a working paper
version (Piketty and Saez 2012), they do argue in favor of lifetime capital income taxes as an alternative when there
is (1) uninsurable rate-of-return risk; or (2) a fuzzy borderline between labor income and capital income. But the
insurance that capital income taxes (as opposed to wealth taxes, which Piketty and Saez do not consider) can provide
is also provided by consumption taxes, without the intertemporal distortion associated with capital income taxation;
consumption taxes eliminate the second argument for capital income taxation as well by obviating the need to
distinguish between labor and capital income.
10
  See DeBacker et al. (2014) for a recent attempt to explore the impact of income and wealth taxes on steady-state
inequality.
11
     See the extended discussion of the tax treatment of savings under different tax bases in Mirrlees et al. (2011).

                                                                                                                        19
         Thus, consumption taxes reduce the value of wealth, just as wealth taxes do12, so we see

no basis to argue that wealth taxes have a greater capacity to limit the power that wealth

provides. A distinct question is how certain expenditures, for example, political campaign

contributions, should be taxed. But this question actually highlights a further potential advantage

of a consumption tax relative to a wealth tax. Under a wealth tax, the purchasing power of wealth

that is spent currently is reduced by the same amount, regardless of how the funds are used.

Under a consumption tax, however, an additional level of tax could be added by defining

political contributions to be consumption, so that both the act of contributing and the

expenditures of contributed funds would be taxed. Thus, if the disproportionate political power

of the wealthy is the concern, a consumption tax is potentially a more powerful tool.

         Finally, there is an irony in arguing in favor of taxing capital income or wealth and also

that the elasticity of substitution in production is very high. While the latter attribute is a key

part of Piketty’s dark scenario of the consequences of capital deepening, it also exacerbates the

efficiency costs of capital income or wealth taxation. A low elasticity of substitution in

production would limit the decline in saving in response to capital taxation, as the initial decline

in the capital-labor ratio would bring forth a large increase in the before-tax return to capital,

thereby muting the substitution effect discouraging saving. Hence, efficiency costs of capital

taxation (or efficiency gains from removing capital taxes) would be smaller, as discussed in

Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987, chapter 5) or Engen, Gravelle, and Smetters (1997). On the other

hand, this same general equilibrium response would cause more of a shift in the incidence of

capital taxes from capital to labor. Thus, the policy is damaging from an efficiency perspective

to the extent that it is effective from a distributional perspective.
12
  Whether the value of existing capital falls depends on how the general price level responds to the imposition of a
consumption tax. But whether the consumption tax increases the price level or reduces the value of existing assets,
the real value of existing assets, deflated by the price of consumption, will fall.

                                                                                                                  20
       In summary, tax policy can play an important role in addressing inequality, but we find

little support for Piketty’s particular approach either in Capital or elsewhere in the literature of

recent decades.


V.    Conclusions

       The sources of economic inequality should be a major concern to economists and policy

makers, as should the most effective policies to deal with inequality. In the context of our

review of Thomas Piketty’s book, we have argued that the tax system occupies an important

place in this endeavor, in particular (1) in the analysis of the extent to which returns to capital

exceed the growth rate of the economy; (2) as a factor behind the role of housing growth in

capital accumulation, which further modifies one’s assessment of the growth rate of productive

capital; and (3) most importantly, through tax reform, as a means of improving the equity-

efficiency trade-off. Serious problems call for serious solutions. But policy can only succeed by

addressing actual problems with effective solutions.


References

Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2014. “The Rise and Fall of General Laws of

       Capitalism.” http://economics.mit.edu/files/9834.

Altig, David, Alan J. Auerbach, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Kent A. Smetters, and Jan Walliser. 2001.

       “Simulating Fundamental Tax Reform in the United States.” American Economic

       Review 91 (3): 574-595.

Atkinson, Anthony B., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1976. “The Design of Tax Structure: Direct versus

       Indirect Taxation.” Journal of Public Economics 6 (1): 55-75.




                                                                                                       21
Auerbach, Alan J. 1979. “Wealth Maximization and the Cost Capital.” The Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 93 (3): 433-446.

Auerbach, Alan J. 1983. “Corporate Taxation in the United States.” Brookings Papers on

       Economic Activity no. 2, pp. 451-513.

Auerbach, Alan J. 2013. “Capital Income Taxation, Corporate Taxation, Wealth Transfer Taxes

       and Consumption Tax Reforms.” Presentation at the Becker-Friedman Institute, Chicago,

       September 27.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge:

       Cambridge University Press.

Banks, James and Peter Diamond. 2010. “The Base for Direct Taxation.” In Dimensions of Tax

       Design, edited by James Mirrlees et al., 548-648. Oxford University Press.

Barro, Robert J. 2006. “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century.” The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (3): 823-866.

Bonnet, Odran, Pierre-Henri Bono, Guillaume Chapelle, and Etienne Wasmer. 2014. “Does

       Housing Capital Contribute to Inequality? A Comment on Thomas Piketty’s Capital in

       the 21st Century.” Sciences Po Department of Economics Working Paper No. 2014-07.

Bricker, Jesse, Jacob Krimmel, Alice Henriques, and John Sabelhaus. 2014. Measuring Income

       and Wealth at the Top Using Administrative and Survey Data. Presentation at the

       European Central Bank, November 18.

Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1929-2013. “Government current transfer payments: Government

       social benefits (W063RC1A027NBEA); Gross National Product (A001RC1); total

       personal income (A065RC1A027NBEA).” United States Department of Commerce.




                                                                                            22
       http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/ (accessed through the Federal Reserve Economic

       Data system in December 2014).

Burtless, Gary. 2014. “Has Rising Inequality Brought Us Back to the 1920s? It Depends on How

       We Measure Income.” Brookings Institution Up Front, May 20.

Chamley, Christophe. 1986. “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with

       Infinite Lives.” Econometrica 54 (3): 607-622.

DeBacker, Jason, Richard W. Evans, Evan Magnusson, Kerk L. Phillips, Shanti P. Ramnath, and

       Isaac Swift. 2014. “The Distributional Effects of Redistributional Tax Policy.” BYU

       Macroeconomics and Computational Laboratory Working Paper #2014-08.

Engen, Eric, Jane Gravelle, and Kent Smetters. 1997. “Dynamic Tax Models: Why They Do the

       Things They Do.” National Tax Journal 50 (3): 657-682.

Feldstein, Martin. 1995. “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study

       of the 1986 Tax Reform Act.” Journal of Political Economy 103 (3): 551-572.

Furman, Jason. 2014. “Global Lessons for Inclusive Growth.” Lecture delivered at the Institute

       of International and European Affairs, Dublin, Ireland, May 7.

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. “Why is Manhattan So Expensive?

       Regulation and the Rise in House Prices.” Journal of Law and Economics 48 (2): 331-

       370.

Global Financial Data. 2014. “USA 10-year Bond Constant Maturity Yield (IGUSA10D).”

       https://www.globalfinancialdata.com (accessed December 2014).

Goolsbee, Austan. 2000. “What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive

       Compensation,” Journal of Political Economy 108 (2): 352-378.




                                                                                              23
Hassett, Kevin A. and Aparna Mathur. 2012. “A New Measure of Consumption Inequality.”

       http://www.aei.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/-a-new-measure-of-consumption-

       inequality_142931647663.pdf

Jorion, Philippe, and William N. Goetzmann. “Global Stock Markets in the Twentieth

       Century.” The Journal of Finance 54 (3): 953-980.

Judd, Kenneth L. “Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model.” Journal of

       Public Economics 28 (1): 59-83.

Kaldor, Nicholas. 1956. An Expenditure Tax. London: George Allen and Unwin.

Kennickell, Arthur B. 2009. “Ponds and Streams: Wealth and Income in the U.S., 1989 to 2007”.

       Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion

       Series 2009-13.

Kennickell, Arthur B. 2011. “Tossed and Turned: Wealth Dynamics of U.S. Households 2007-

       2009.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics

       Discussion Series 2011-51.

Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2014. “What do We Know about the Evolution of Top Wealth Shares in the

       United States?” NBER Working Paper No. 20735.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Emmanuel Saez. 2004. Top Wealth Shares in the United States: 1916-

       2000: Evidence from Estate Tax Returns. NBER Working Paper No. 10399.

McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott. 2005. “Taxes, Regulations, and the Value of U.S.

       and U.K. Corporations,” Review of Economic Studies 2(3), July, pp. 767-796.

Mirrlees, James, et al. 2011. Tax by Design: The Mirrlees Review. Oxford University Press.

Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-first Century. Harvard University Press, 2014.




                                                                                              24
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “A Theory of Optimal Capital Taxation.” NBER

       Working Paper No. 17989.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013a. “Top Incomes and the Great Recession: Recent

       Evolutions and Policy Implications.” IMF Economic Review 61 (3): 456-478.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013b. “A Theory of Optimal Inheritance Taxation.”

       Econometrica 81 (5): 1851-1886.

Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2014. “Optimal Taxation of Top

       Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities.” American Economic Journal: Economic

       Policy 6 (1): 230-71.

Piketty, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. “Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich

       Countries, 1700-2010.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3): 1255-1310.

Quigley, John M., and Steven Raphael. 2005. “Regulation and the High Cost of Housing in

       California.” American Economic Review 95 (2): 323-328.

Rognlie, Matthew. 2014. “A Note on Piketty and Diminishing Returns to Capital.”

       http://www.mit.edu/~mrognlie/piketty_diminishing_returns.pdf.

Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. “Wealth Inequality in the United States Since

       1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Data.” NBER Working Paper No. 20625.

Summers, Lawrence. 2014. “The Inequality Puzzle.” Democracy: A Journal of Ideas (33).

Wolff, Edward N. 1994. “Trends in Household Wealth in the United States, 1962–83 and 1983-

       89.” Review of Income and Wealth 40 (2): 143-174.




                                                                                            25
