                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  USING FIELD EXPERIMENTS TO ADDRESS ENVIRONMENTAL EXTERNALITIES
                        AND RESOURCE SCARCITY:
   MAJOR LESSONS LEARNED AND NEW DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH

                                           Michael Price

                                       Working Paper 20870
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20870


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




This manuscript was prepared for a special issue of the Oxford Review of Economics and Policy on
Field Experiments to Address Developed World Policy Issues. I thank the editors for their tremendous
patience with this manuscript and Hunt Allcott for comments that greatly improved the quality of the
manuscript. I thank collaborators on related projects – Alec Brandon, Paul Ferraro, David Herberich,
Scott Holladay, Mark Jacobsen, Jacob LaRiviere, John List, Robert Metcalfe, David Novgorodsky,
Steve Puller, and Marianne Wanamaker – and other colleagues including James Andreoni, Stefano
DellaVigna, Michael Greenstone, Matthew Harding, Koichiro Ito, Katrina Jessoe, Matthew Kahn,
David Rapson, Kerry Smith, and Catherine Wolfram for thoughtful discussions that have helped shaped
the way that I think about the topics covered in this manuscript. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Michael Price. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Using Field Experiments to Address Environmental Externalities and Resource Scarcity: Major
Lessons Learned and New Directions for Future Research
Michael Price
NBER Working Paper No. 20870
January 2015
JEL No. D03,D04,D62,D83,H41,Q41,Q48

                                              ABSTRACT

This article provides an overview of the use of field experiments in energy and resource economics.
 I concentrate on two areas of study; field experiments that (i) speak to the use of dynamic pricing
plans to manage the use of electricity and water and (ii) explore the adoption of energy saving technologies.
Viewed in its totality, this work suggests that both neo-classical factors such as prices or search costs
and behavioral constructs such as salience or social norms influence the use of energy and water.
For academics, the studies reviewed provide a deeper understanding of individual behavior and the
factors that drive the private provision of public goods. For policy makers, the studies reviewed provide
a blueprint outlining ways to combine insights from neo-classical and behavioral economics to manage
energy/water demand and mitigate externalities generated through their use.


Michael Price
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
mprice25@gsu.edu
I. Introduction

The problem of externalities and natural resource scarcity provide a cornerstone upon which

environmental economists has developed. The standard economic model of these problems links

pollution and related externalities to the lack of markets for scarce environmental goods such as

clean air or the common nature of natural resources such as groundwater and fish stocks. Given

this focus, traditional solutions center upon mechanisms such as tradable permits or emissions

taxes that introduce an added price on pollution or the extraction of groundwater stocks.

         Spurred by the growing popularity of behavioral economics, more recent manifestations

of these models have been augmented to include non-pecuniary motives such as altruism, social

pressures, and moral costs (see, e.g., Kotchen, 2006; Kotchen and Moore, 2007; Jacobsen et al,

2012; Ferraro and Price, 2013; Jacobsen et al., 2014; LaRiviere et al., 2014). The introduction of

such motivations reflects a fundamental shift in the literature and creates a direct link with work

exploring the private provision of public goods (see, e.g., Becker, 1974; Bergstrom et al., 1986;

Andreoni, 1988). Intuitively, such models allow for conservation efforts at the individual level

by introducing either an added “cost” of consumption or an added benefit of voluntary reductions

in demand.1 In doing so, such models suggest a role for policy measures such as normative

appeals or “green” labels that are designed to target such motives as a means to encourage

private provision. Yet, as the goal of any policy action is to improve social welfare, the disparate

nature of this literature highlights the need for researchers to take a step back and design studies




1
  An alternate strand of the literature relies upon models that introduce behavioral biases such as temptation
(Tsvetanov and Segerson, 2013), limited attention (Allcott, Mullainathan, and Taubinsky, 2014; Sallee, 2014),
hyperbolic discounting (Heutel, 2011), or salience (Gilbert and Graff-Zivin, 2014; Sexton, 2014). Intuitively, such
biases lead consumers to systematically miscalculate the potential benefits of purchasing energy efficiency
technologies or engaging in conservation activities and thus provide scope for a broader array of policy interventions
including targeted messaging campaigns or energy efficiency standards. I refer the interested reader to Allcott
(2014) for a nice overview of such models and the associated policy implications.
that allow them to disentangle competing theories and identify policies that directly target the

underlying cause of observed market failure.

       This article provides an overview of the use of field experiments within the realm of

energy and resource economics. The primary focus of the article derives from studies designed to

explore the use of electricity (water) at the household level and how various policy alternatives

impact the demand for such resources. Within this rubric I concentrate on two areas of study;

field experiments that (i) speak to the use of dynamic pricing plans as a means to regulate peak

load and (ii) explore the origins of the energy-efficiency gap and the adoption of energy saving

technologies.

       Viewed in its totality, the extant body of work underscores that there is no one-size fits

all approach to the management of residential water and energy demand. Both neo-classical

factors such as prices or search costs and behavioral constructs such as salience or social norms

ultimate impact the use of energy and water resources. For example, there is mounting evidence

that one can increase the demand for energy saving technologies by lowering prices/search costs

or by targeting behavioral preferences and common decision heuristics such as loss aversion.

Moreover, in many instances there are important complementarities between neo-classical and

behavioral motives. Even if the demand for electricity is highly inelastic, it is possible to

increase price sensitivity by providing households information that makes salient both the

prevailing price and the amount of electricity consumed at any given point in time.

       For academics, such studies are notable as they speak to the heart of the externalities

problem and foster a deeper understanding of individual behavior and the factors that underlie

the private provision of public goods (bads). By elucidating the various influences that drive

such actions, the collected evidence highlights which models best predict behavior and outlines
directions for new theories and associated policy prescriptions. For policy makers, such studies

are invaluable in that they provide a blueprint outlining ways to combine insights from neo-

classical and behavioral economics to manage the demand for energy/water resources and the

associated externalities generated through the use of these resources.

       Before proceeding, it is important to note that I have in no way attempted to review the

voluminous literature in environmental and resource economics to which field experiments are

beginning to add. Rather I limit attention to studies that speak directly to conservation efforts

and the private provision of environmental quality; particularly as viewed through the lens of

residential households and the individual agent. Within these topics, I discuss a limited number

of papers and instead focus my comments on major lessons learned from the collected body of

evidence.

       I aim for the article to demonstrate how field experiments have been used to advance our

understanding of the factors that underlie the private provision of public goods (bads) and

identify effective strategies to manage the demand for energy/water as a way to mitigate the

externalities that are a direct by-product of their use. In doing so, I wish to highlight the

importance of studies such as Allcott and Taubinsky (2014) or LaRiviere et al. (2014) which

utilize a battery of experimental manipulations to disentangle competing theories and understand

what drives the observed market failure. Such efforts are significant in that they shift attention

from measuring changes in energy (resource) use to thinking about how various policies options

affect social welfare. Before one can begin to craft effective policies, it is critical to identify

both the existence and underlying source of observed market failure.

       The remainder of the study proceeds as follows. Section II provides an overview of

dynamic pricing experiments and outlines factors that influence the effectiveness of such
programs. Section III summarizes major lessons learned from a series of field experiments

designed to uncover what drives the adoption of energy efficient technologies and measure the

impact of such technologies on subsequent energy use. Section IV concludes with directions for

future work.

II. Managing the Demand for Electricity – Dynamic Pricing Experiments

Economists have long recognized the promise of dynamic pricing strategies such as “peak load”

or “real-time” pricing as a means to manage to manage consumption during periods when the

marginal cost of production is high. Yet there are a number of reasons to question whether the

promise of such strategies may prove unfulfilled. First, electricity accounts for but a small share

of overall expenditures for many households. Second, there are a number of energy using

durables in the home – e.g., refrigerators and freezers – for which there is a limited ability to

adjust use. Taken jointly, one would expect the demand for electricity to be inelastic thereby

limiting the potential impact of prices as a means to manage overall consumption.

       Finally, and perhaps most importantly, managing residential energy consumption reflects

an incredibly complicated dynamic programming problem – a type of decision task which prior

evidence suggests individuals have difficulty solving (e.g., Houser, Keane and McCabe, 2004;

Cho and Rust, 2010; Brown, Chua and Camerer, 2009; Li, Kahn, and Nickelsburg, 2014). At

any given point in time, a household is engaged in a variety of activities that consume energy but

rarely (if ever) observes the marginal contribution of any single activity. Moreover, acquiring

such information is prohibitively costly in the absence of technologies that provide the household

real-time feedback on appliance level consumption. Faced with a dynamic pricing plan, it is thus

reasonable to conjecture that individuals will have troubles identifying the relative benefits of
adjusting energy use along various margins thereby dampening the response the changing

prices.2

           In this section I summarize the major lessons learned from a series of field experiments

designed to examine the effectiveness of dynamic pricing schemes. I break the discussion out

into three distinct periods of interest; (i) pilot experiments on time-of-use pricing initiated by the

U.S. Federal Energy Administration in the spring of 1975, (ii) a second wave of pilots during the

early to mid-2000s exploring both time-of-use and critical-peak-pricing, and (iii) a more recent

set of targeted field experiments designed to isolate the importance of information feedback on

price sensitivity.

           Taken jointly, this body of literature provides mixed evidence on the effectiveness of

dynamic pricing plans as a means to promote energy conservation and a corresponding reduction

in greenhouse gas emissions. Time-of-use rates produce but modest reductions in energy use

during peak periods as the short-run demand for electricity is found to be highly inelastic. Yet,

overall price sensitivity depends on the capital stock of the home with much greater

responsiveness observed amongst those with some form of air conditioning system in the home.

Critical-peak pricing tariffs induce greater reductions in use during peak periods but the overall

effectiveness of such programs depends on the way in which the tariff is framed – e.g., as a

carrot for conserving energy relative to prior peak periods or a stick for consuming energy during

peak periods. Finally, this literature is ubiquitous in demonstrating a strong complementarity

between dynamic pricing plans and enabling technologies that provide the household real-time

feedback on energy consumption and the prevailing price of electricity. As such, it is likely that

2
 For example, Atarri et al. (2010) provide evidence that many individuals incorrectly perceive the amount of energy
used when operating energy intensive appliances such as a dish-washer or a central air conditioner relative to that
used by a standard incandescent lightbulb. As such, it is reasonable to assume that individuals facing dynamic
pricing plans will disproportionately adjust use along lower “benefit” margins such as lighting rather than adjusting
use by changing thermostat settings.
the extant literature provides a lower bound on the “true” impact of dynamic pricing plans as it

does not capture and account for long-run capital adjustments that would enhance observed price

sensitivity.

The Early Federal Energy Administration Time-of-Use Pilots

Beginning in the spring of 1975, the U.S. Federal Energy Administration initiated a cooperative

program sponsoring a series of pilot studies on time-of-use pricing. The aim of these early

experiments was to explore the extent to which TOU pricing could be used to shift the load

profile of residential consumers. In the decade that followed the initiation of these pilots, a

number of academic papers and consulting reports summarizing the impact of these programs

were written. The primary focus of this work was to derive estimates for the own-price elasticity

of demand and explore how the ratio of peak to off-peak consumption was affected by the

introduction of TOU pricing (see, e.g., Atkinson, 1979; Granger et al., 1979; Hendricks,

Koenker, and Poirier, 1979; Lawrence and Braithwait, 1979; Caves and Christensen, 1980;

Caves, Christiansen, and Herriges, 1984; Aigner, 1985).

        Despite the amount of attention garnered by these pilots, there was little consensus as to

the overall impact and resulting promise of TOU pricing. For example, Aigner (1985) reports

incredibly diffuse estimates of own-price elasticities for pilot studies in Arizona, Connecticut and

Wisconsin – estimates for these study range from approximately -0.20 to -0.85. Similar variation

is reported in other measures of interest including estimates of cross-price elasticities capturing

the extent to which changing prices affect the temporal pattern of consumption across peak and

off-peak hours.3


3
  Whereas Lawrence and Brathwait (1979) obtain results from the Connecticut experiment suggesting a degree of
substitutability between consumption in peak and off-peak hours Caves and Christensen (1980) obtain results from
the Wisconsin experiments suggesting that the relationship between peak and off-peak consumption depends on
whether one considers compensated or uncompensated demand.
       Although point estimates for the various measures of substitution varied widely across

pilots, there were a number of common themes that arose from this early work. First and

foremost, all studies found that price sensitivity and related elasticity measures were greater

during the broader peak period (approximately noon to 7pm) than during off-peak hours.

Moreover, observed substitution possibilities and changes in the ratio of peak to off-peak

consumption depend critically on the prevailing price ratio. For example, Caves and Christensen

(1980) find that the estimated partial price elasticity of demand is approximately 40 percent

greater (-0.812 versus -0.574) when calculated using a peak to off-peak price ratio of 8:1 as

opposed to that derived under a 2:1 ratio.

       Second, estimated elasticities and related measures of conservation depend crucially on

the type of appliances within the home. For example, Granger et al. (1979) examine data form

the Connecticut Light and Power pilot study and show that observed shift in consumption

between peak and off-peak hours is more pronounced for households with electric heating and

dishwashers. Similar results are presented in Caves, Christensen, and Herriges (1984) who

examine data from pilot studies across five utilities and find that substitution between peak and

off-peak periods is significantly greater for households with common appliances such as electric

heating and cooling systems, electric water heaters, electric washers and dryers, and dish

washers. That estimated substitution possibilities depend on capital stocks in the home suggests

the importance of adjustment costs and associated optimization frictions as factors that serve to

dampen price sensitivity.

       Finally, estimated elasticities and shifts in consumption between peak and off-peak hours

vary both with seasons and climatic conditions. Caves, Christensen, and Herriges (1984) find
that substitution between peak and off-peak hours during summer months is greater in warm

climates than what is observed in cooler climates. As would be expected, this pattern is reversed

during winter months – substitution is greater in cooler climates. Moreover, for households with

electric heating and cooling, substitution is greater in winter months whereas the opposite is true

for households that do not rely upon electric heating or cooling. Such differences again highlight

the importance of adjustment costs as a factor that limits the willingness of households to alter

energy use in response to price changes.

       Before proceeding, it is worth noting that one should interpret the results of these early

pilot studies with a degree of caution. There are a number of design features inherent in each

that undoubtedly impacted observed behavior. First and foremost, participants in the various

pilots selected into the program and were provided a guarantee that their overall monthly energy

bill would not increase during the sample period. This is problematic for two reasons; (i) it

introduce the possibility of Hawthorne effects and (ii) the guarantee of no bill increase dampens

the incentive for households to conserve energy during periods of high prices. Second, across

most of the pilots, there was limited variation in prices between peak and off-peak hours. From

an econometric perspective, this makes it difficult to estimate the subsequent substitution

possibilities. Finally, the pilots were conducted over a relatively short time horizon and thus

captures little more than short-run substitution patterns. Given that demand in the short-run is

less elastic than that in the long-run and the critical import of capital stock on such measures,

results from the pilot likely provide a lower bound on the types of substitution/conservation one

would expect to see if TOU pricing were made permanent and households allowed to adjust

capital stocks – a point largely overlooked in the existing literature.

The Second Wave – Critical Peak Pricing
Despite the results of the early TOU pricing experiments, interest in dynamic pricing plans

largely faded in the two decades following the initial DOE pilots. In the wake of the California

energy crisis, interest in time-varying prices was renewed and a second wave of fifteen pilots

exploring time-varying prices was launched in the early 2000s. Unlike the initial pilot studies,

the second wave of experiments focused on pricing during critical peak events where

approximately nine to seventeen percent of annual peak energy is generated. Moreover, the

second wave of pilots were designed with an eye towards evaluation and relied more heavily

upon randomization and observation of households in both a pre- and a post-intervention period

allowing impacts to be measured using a difference-in-differences estimator. The remainder of

the section summarizes the major lessons learned from these pilots and how they have shaped

our understanding of residential energy demand.4

           Unlike the initial TOU experiments, the second round of pilots provided a more

consistent pattern of savings. Across the various pilots, critical peak pricing tariffs induced

reductions in peak demand that range from 13 to 20 percent. For example, Wolak (2006)

evaluates data from a CPP pilot involving residential consumers of the City of Anaheim Public

Utilities where customers in the treatment group received a rebate of 35 cents/KWh for

reductions in use relative to a reference level – an average of the three highest peak consumption

levels over all prior non-CPP days. Results from the APU pilot show the promise of CPP tariffs.

Relative to counterparts in the control group, treated households consumed approximately 12

percent less electricity during peak hours on CPP days. However, nearly half of the estimated

treatment effect arose through a perverse effect whereby households in the treatment group

significantly increased use during peak periods on non-CPP days.



4
    For a more detailed summary of these fifteen pilots, I refer the interested reader to Faruqui and Sergici (2010).
        Similar results are reported in both Faruqui and George (2005) and Herter et al. (2007)

who summarize findings from a statewide pricing pilot in California that was designed to

compare the relative impact of TOU and CPP pricing plans. Empirical findings demonstrate the

relative superiority of CPP plans – particularly for households provided enabling technology.

Whereas households facing TOU pricing reduced peak use by 5.9 percent during the summer

2003, those facing a CPP plan reduced peak use on critical days by approximately 13.1 percent

over this same period.5 Furthermore, whereas the impact of the TOU plan was found to dissipate

in the second year of the pilot, households facing the CPP tariff reduced peak use by

approximately 4.7 percent over the life of pilot.

        As with the initial TOU experiments, the estimated impact of critical peak pricing tariffs

was found to depend on a number of factors. An important feature of several of the second wave

pilots was the inclusion of enabling technology that provided households real-time feedback on

energy use and the ability to remotely adjust settings for various energy consuming durables

within the home. For example, a subset of participants in the California statewide pricing pilot

was provided enabling technology such as a two-way communicating smart thermostat. For such

households, observed reductions in energy use during critical peak periods ranged from 15 to 27

percent – figures that are significantly greater than those realized amongst counterparts facing a

CPP tariff alone. Similar impacts were observed in a number of the other pilots where the

combination of CPP tariffs and enabling technology generated reductions in peak energy demand

that was approximately twice that observed amongst households facing a CPP tariff without such

technologies (Faruqui and Sergeci, 2010).




5
 Of course it is important to recognize that a direct comparison of TOU and CPP plans is somewhat misleading as
CPP programs enact substantially larger price changes that arise on a limited subset of days..
       Taken in its totality, results from the second wave of dynamic pricing pilots underscore

three challenges associated with managing residential electricity demand. First and foremost, the

impacts of such programs are heterogeneous and depend critically on both climatic conditions

and the types of technologies (durables) in the home. For example, households in California’s

statewide pricing pilot were drawn from four distinct climatic zones across which the estimated

impact of CPP tariffs vary substantially – the observed reductions on critical peak days range

from 7.6 to 15.8 percent. Similar differences are observed in this pilot if one compares effects

across summer (a 14.4 percent reduction in use) and late spring/early fall months (8.1 percent

reductions in use).

       Second, the complementarity between enabling technology and dynamic pricing plans

underscores the uncertainty/difficulties most consumers face when attempting to adjust energy

use. It is thus not particularly surprising that the demand for electricity is found to be highly

inelastic and response to dynamic pricing plans lower than what some would expect – consumers

face an incredibly challenging programming problem and face frictions that limit the extent to

which they are willing and able to adjust consumption. Enabling technologies reduce such

frictions by making contemporaneous energy use salient and providing a low cost means for

households to identify and adjust use along numerous margins. Finally, the perverse impact

identified in Wolak (2006) – increased use on non-critical peak event days – highlights that

policy makers need to take care when designing and implementing dynamic pricing plans.

       Before proceeding, it is again worth noting that one should interpret the results of the

second wave of pilot studies with a degree of caution as each included a number of design

features that undoubtedly impacted observed behavior. First and foremost, the pilots were

conducted over a relatively short time horizon.       Observed impacts thus reflect short-run
substitution possibilities. As with the early TOU pilots, results from the second wave of pilots

therefore provide a lower bound of the effects one would expect should the pricing plan be made

permanent and households allowed to adjust the capital stock in their home. Second, many of

the pilots were based upon a small set of self-selected customers and are thus under-powered –

particularly for pilots/households that did not receive enabling technologies. Moreover, it is

unclear how one should think about selection effects and how it impacts external validity.

Finally, there are a number of exogenous factors that were shown to impact observed treatment

effects. Readers should thus take caution in attempting to project the impact of CPP tariffs or

related dynamic pricing plans to other customers/utilities. To do so, one would first want to

specify and estimate a structural model of residential energy demand that allows for endogenous

technical change and use the results from such models to construct out of sample counterfactual

policy simulations.

The Third Generation – Using Behavioral Economics to Improve Dynamic Pricing Plans

The initial waves of dynamic pricing pilots offer a somewhat cautionary tale. Although dynamic

plans provide a means for regulators to promote conservation efforts and a shift of use between

peak and off-peak hours, the ultimate impact of such programs is highly variable and depends

critically on a few important design features. The most recent wave of pricing experiments, has

set forth to explore the design of such programs and identify low cost ways to increase their

impact. Much of this work has drawn upon insights from the behavioral economics literature

and has focused on two primary themes; (i) framing and (ii) salience. The remainder of this

section summarizes the major lessons learned from the most recent set of pricing experiments

and how they have advanced our understanding of residential electricity demand.
        There is a growing body of work in behavioral economics suggesting the importance of

framing on the way in which individuals respond to incentives (see, e.g., Hossian and List, 2012;

Fryer et al., 2012; Levitt et al., 2012). In particular, this literature highlights the importance of

loss aversion for the design of performance contracts - incentives framed as losses (penalties)

loom larger than those framed as gains (rebates). For regulators, this distinction has practical

import for the design of critical peak pricing tariffs – ceteris paribus, the impact of such

programs should be greater when the incentive is framed as a penalty (increased prices for

energy consumed) rather than a reward (rebate for reductions in peak consumption).

        Wolak (2011) provides evidence from a pilot study in Washington, DC designed to speak

directly to this question. As part of this pilot, a representative sample of more than 1,200

residential consumers were randomly assigned into either a control group or one of three

treatment groups that faced either (i) TOU pricing, (ii) a CPP tariff, or (iii) a CPP tariff with

rebate.6 Results from the pilot confirm prior findings on the effective of dynamic pricing plans –

treated customers reduce electricity use during high-priced periods and peak events. However,

consonant with the broader behavioral literature, the average treatment effect for households in

the critical peak pricing treatment is significantly greater (13 versus 5.3 percent) than that for

counterparts in the critical peak pricing with rebate treatment.

        A related line of inquiry explores the importance of salience and incomplete information

on the effectiveness of prices as a means to regulate residential electricity demand. There is a

growing body of work highlighting how imperfect information about product attributes and

prices impacts choice across a variety of settings (see, e.g., Jin and Leslie, 2003; Gabaix and


6
  Households in the CPP treatment faced a reduced block schedule but paid an additional 78 cents/KWh during
critical peak events. Households in the CPP with rebate treatment faced the prevailing block schedule but received
rebates for reductions in consumption during CPP events. And those in the hourly pricing treatment were charged
according to prices that tracked the day-ahead wholesale market for the District of Columbia.
Laibson, 2006; Hossain and Morgan, 2006; Chetty et al., 2009). A similar issue arises in the

context of residential electricity consumption. Households rarely observe the amount of energy

consumed at any point in time and are thus uncertain about the associated marginal costs/benefits

of their actions. In fact, many scholars have argued that such uncertainty underlies the noted

tendency for residential electricity customers to adopt a crude heuristic whereby they respond to

average rather than marginal electricity prices (see, e.g., Shin, 1985; Borenstein, 2009; Ito,

2014).

         Despite these concerns, there is a growing body of work highlighting that policy-makers

can influence choice in such settings by providing decision-makers simple bits of information

(see, e.g., Duflo and Saez, 2003; Grubb and Osborne, 2015). Moreover, in the context of energy

consumption, the early dynamic pricing pilots made clear that enabling technologies led to

increased conservation efforts and a greater substitution of use between peak and off-peak

periods.    Yet these early studies were unable to disentangle the reason/s why enabling

technologies impacted behavior. Did they simply lower the costs of adjusting use or did they

provide information that made prices and use more salient?

         The most recent wave of pricing pilots includes a number of studies that set forth to

disentangle these channels and explore the extent to which salience (or the lack thereof)

underlies the inelastic nature of electricity demand. For example, Jessoe and Rapson (2014) use

data from a real time pricing experiment to explore the effect of information feedback on the

price elasticity of demand. In their study, a subset of households facing a critical peak-pricing

tariff were provided an in-home display that provided real-time feedback on both prevailing

prices and quantity consumed. Although households facing real-time prices reduced energy use

by up to seven percent, those provided real-time feedback realized substantially greater
reductions – the average treatment effect for such households was approximately three standard

deviations greater than that observed amongst counterparts who did not receive such feedback.7

Moreover, analysis of event notification receipts suggests that increased price sensitivity does

not reflect salience of prices, rather it reflects consumer learning and enhanced salience along

quantity dimension.

        Kahn and Wolak (2013) design a series of field experiments to explore the extent to

providing information detailing how a consumer’s energy use translates into monthly electricity

bills impacts how that household responds to nonlinear price schedules – a prevalent price

structure for residential households in the United States. Treated households were provided an

on-line educational program that detailed how their monthly electricity bill was determined given

the prevailing nonlinear price schedule they faced. In addition, each participant was given

information explaining how various changes in major electricity-consuming activities would

impact their monthly bill given historical patterns of consumption and the underlying nonlinear

price schedule.

        Empirical results provide evidence consonant with the view that incomplete information

leads residential consumers to base consumption decisions on crude heuristics based on average

(rather than marginal) electricity prices. Treated households consume less energy in the post-

intervention period than do counterparts in the control group. However, there is systematic

heterogeneity in such changes – customers who learn that they face higher marginal prices tend

to reduce monthly consumption following treatment whereas those who learn they face lower

marginal prices tend to increase their consumption.



7
  Similar findings are reported in Allcott (2011) who examines data from a real-time pricing experiment in Chicago
and shows that households who received a glowing plastic orb that changed colors to indicate current prices were
significantly more responsive to price changes
       Viewed in its totality, this body of literature highlights the importance of salience for

managing residential electricity consumption. Although dynamic pricing plans and nonlinear

price schedules provide a means to promote energy conservation and an associated reduction in

greenhouse gas emissions, such effects are dampened by incomplete information and the lack of

salience over both prices and quantity consumed. Thus, providing consumers real time feedback

on prices and use is an effective way to increase the sensitivity to prices. In this regard, policies

designed to promote the uptake of in-home electricity displays and/or disseminate information on

real-time energy use should be viewed as complements to pecuniary strategies that rely upon

financial incentives to influence demand.

III. The Adoption and Use of Energy-Saving Technologies

The traditional approach to technology adoption posits that both the purchase and dissemination

of new products is driven solely by the relative costs and benefits of adoption. Yet, over the past

thirty years, a growing body of literature has provided evidence that calls into question the

neoclassical model of technology adoption. Perhaps the most prominent example of behavior at

odds with the neoclassical approach arises in the context of electricity markets. Many residential

households eschew the purchase of energy-savings technology and, in doing so, leave significant

amounts of money on the table (see, e.g., Jaffe and Stavins, 1994; Allcott and Greenstone, 2012;

Gillingham and Palmer, 2013). Despite the empirical evidence suggesting the presence of an

energy-efficiency gap, there is little consensus as to the underlying reasons it arises.

       In this section, I first summarize findings from a series of field experiments designed to

disentangle the channels that underlie the adoption of energy-saving technologies and thus drive

the energy-efficiency gap. In doing so, I provide evidence highlighting the importance of three

factors on the adoption decision; (i) search costs and incomplete information about both the
availability and potential benefits of energy-saving technologies, (ii) moral costs and the desire

to do the right thing, and (iii) financial incentives and the up-front costs required to purchase and

install such technologies. I conclude the section by summarizing findings from a series of

experiments designed to measure the impact of enabling technologies and real-time feedback on

subsequent energy use. As with work exploring the relationship between dynamic pricing and

enabling technologies, results from these studies highlight how uncertainty and the coarse nature

of information on energy consumption (particularly at the appliance level) adversely impact

consumption decision and lead to inefficient patterns of energy use in the home. For policy-

makers, these pilots demonstrate the promise of such technologies and disaggregation as a

strategy to promote energy conservation.

Uncovering the Factors that Drive the Adoption of “Green” Technologies

A common refrain amongst policy-makers is that consumers do not understand energy efficiency

and are inattentive to energy costs. In fact, such “biases” are often invoked to justify minimum

efficiency standards and subsidies for the purchase of energy efficient goods. A recent body of

work (Allcott and Sweeney, 2014; Allcott and Taubinsky, 2014) sets forth to examine the extent

to which imperfect information and inattention to energy costs effect the demand for energy

saving durables – Energy Star water heaters and CFLs. Results from these studies suggest that

providing customers information on energy use and the associated reductions in energy

expenditures has no impact on the demand for energy-efficient durables. Taken jointly, this

evidence calls into question the common belief that consumers are confused about energy

efficiency and that the lack of hard information about such reflects a market failure which

reduces the demand for energy efficient durables.
         In what follows, I summarize the major lessons learned from a burgeoning literature that

implements randomized field experiments to uncover the drivers of the adoption decision and

inform policies to increase the uptake of energy-saving technologies. In doing so, I provide

evidence highlighting the importance of both neo-classical (search and up-front costs) and

behavioral (moral costs) channels on the adoption decision.

         A growing body of literature suggests that normative appeals – particularly those that

provide social comparisons – provide an effective strategy to promote the conservation of both

energy (see, e.g., Allcott, 2011; Ayres et al., 2013) and water (see, e.g., Ferraro and Price, 2013)

resources. As noted in Ferraro and Price (2013), such messages serve to frame conservation

efforts as a social norm and thus increase the “moral” cost of any given level of consumption.

As such, one would expect households that receive such messages to reduce consumption to

offset the increased costs.

         A more recent strand of this literature has set forth to explore whether and to what extent

social comparisons and related normative appeals can be used to promote the adoption of energy-

saving technologies. Allcott and Rogers (2014) use data provided by Opower to explore how

normative comparisons influence enrollment in utility sponsored energy efficiency programs.

Across two distinct sites, participation rates in the post-intervention period amongst households

receiving Opower’s “home energy report” were approximately 0.35 to 0.42 percentage points

greater than that observed for counterparts in the control group.8 Similar effects are noted in

Herberich et al. (2012) and Toledo (2013) who explore the impact of normative appeals on the

purchase of energy-efficient lighting and find that households receiving information on the



8
 The HER is a multiple-page letter that includes a social comparison module detailing the household’s electricity consumption
over the past twelve months to both the mean and 20th percentile of its comparison group, and an ‘action steps module’ that
suggests ways in which the household could conserve energy.
ownership decisions of others are more likely to purchase efficient lighting than counterparts in

the control group who observe no such message.

         Brandon et al. (2014) extend this basic line of inquiry by exploiting a unique feature of

Opower’s home energy report – in certain months, a random subset of households observe an

augmented action steps module that provides information on a specific energy efficiency

program available through the recipient’s utility. Intuitively, such inserts serve to reduce search

costs by making salient both the availability and benefits of enrolling in the given program.

Results from this study highlight the importance of search costs and/or related frictions on the

adoption decision – households that observe the augmented action steps module are significantly

more likely to enroll in a utility sponsored EE program than are counterparts in both the control

group and treated households that do not observe such advertisements. Moreover, Brandon et al.

(2014) find important heterogeneity in the impact of social comparisons on the adoption decision

– such messages are more effective amongst high use households.

         LaRiviere et al. (2014) extend this body of work to examine whether and how the

framing of social comparisons (monthly energy use, monthly energy expenditures, or annual

CO2 emissions) impacts the uptake of in-home energy audits and subsequent energy use.

Results from their experiment highlight a fundamental difference in the effect of a social

comparison that is privately framed (kWhs or expenditures) and opposed to those that frame

behavior in terms of a public good (CO2 emissions). Whereas privately framed comparisons

serve to induce audits, comparisons that focus on CO2 emissions affect use but have no impact

on the uptake of audits.9 Such differences are noteworthy and suggest that policy-makers may be


9
  LaRivere et al (2014) also vary the price of the in-home audit by offering households a rebate should they sign-up
for an audit. Although such subsidies have little impact on audit rates, LaRiviere et al (2014) estimate that providing
households a privately framed social comparison is equivalent to offering the household an approximate $40
reduction in the price of the audit.
able to influence behavior along different margins simply by changing the way in which social

comparisons are framed.

        A related line of inquiry, explores the role of up-front costs on the adoption decision and

how subsidies that lower such costs interact with other policy options such as normative appeals.

For example, Herberich et al. (2012) sets forth to compare the relative impact of price reductions

and normative appeals on the decision to purchase compact fluorescent light bulbs. Results from

this study suggest that, in isolation, such policies work along different margins – whereas social

comparisons impact behavior exclusively along the extensive margin, price changes impact both

whether or not the consumer buys a CFL and the corresponding number of bulbs purchased.

However, Herberich et al (2012) identify an important complementarity between normative

messages and prices suggesting that consumers are trying to “buy” morality. 10

        Taken in its totality, evidence from these studies highlight the importance of both neo-

classical (search and up-front costs) and behavioral (moral costs) channels on the adoption

decision.    For academicians, such results are of note in that they elucidate the various factors

underlying the adoption decision and outline directions for new theories. For policy makers,

results from this line of work highlight that there is no one-size fits all approach to stimulate the

adoption of energy-efficient technologies.            Rather policies designed to address the energy-

efficiency gap should target a variety of channels and exploit the observed complementarity

between prices and norms.

Identifying the Link between Real-Time Feedback and Energy Consumption




10
  Allcott and Sweeney (2014) examine a similar question – the interaction between policies that lower up-front
costs and those that incentivize sales agents. Results from their study suggest an important complementarity
between sales incentives and rebates. While rebates in and of themselves lead to increased purchases of Energy Star
water heaters, such effects are significantly enhanced when the sales agent is incentivized.
It is well documented that residential consumers have difficulty keeping track of current

electricity use and predicting future energy demand (see, e.g., Borenstein, 2009). As such, a

number of scholars and practitioners alike have argued that providing information and feedback

on consumption would promote more efficient patterns of energy use and thus promote

conservation efforts. As noted in Faruqui et al. (2010), “…In-home Displays (IHDs) provide

consumers with direct feedback…and turn a once opaque and static electric bill into a

transparent, dynamic, and controllable process.”

        In what follows, I summarize findings from a series of experiments designed to measure

the impact of enabling technologies and real-time feedback on subsequent energy use. As with

work exploring the relationship between dynamic pricing and enabling technologies, results from

these studies highlight how uncertainty and the coarse nature of information on energy

consumption (particularly at the appliance level) adversely impact consumption decision and

lead to inefficient patterns of energy use in the home.

        Faruqui et al. (2010) review evidence from a dozen utility sponsored pilot programs to

explore the extent to which consumers respond to the direct feedback provided by IHDs.

Although the design of the pilots varied along several dimensions, direct feedback provided by

IHDs was found to encourage households to rethink the consumption decision and use energy

more efficiently. Such households reduced consumption by an average of approximately seven

percent with observed reductions in energy use ranging from three to thirteen percent across the

various pilots with even greater reductions noted amongst households that pre-pay for

electricity.11 Exploring the nature of such adjustments, Farugui et al (2010) provide survey

evidence from a pilot study in Massachusetts that almost all of the observed conservation came

11
   Similar findings are noted in Gans et al (2013) who explore data from an advanced metering project in Northern
Ireland that provided households who pre-pay for their electricity real-time feedback on energy use. Receipt of the
advanced meter caused households to reduce electricity use somewhere between 11 and 17 percent.
through behavioral changes – e.g., turning off lights when leaving a room, turning off

TVs/computers when not in use, etc. – rather than purchases of new capital.

        Before proceeding, it is worth noting that one should interpret the results of these pilot

studies with a degree of caution. Many of the studies infer the impact of the IHD on energy use

via non-experimental methods while others rely upon self-reported use data. Moreover, many of

the pilots included a small-number of households that self-selected into the experiment. Further,

consumer demographics and the underlying tariff schedules vary widely across pilots. Finally,

the duration of the pilots varied dramatically with some of the pilots exploring use over the

course of a few months while others explored use of the course of a few years. Readers should

thus take caution in attempting to project the impact of providing consumers IHDs and real-time

feedback on energy use to other customers/utilities.

        Ivanov et al. (2013) examine data from a smart meter pilot conducted by Connexus

Energy whereby treated households were provided a programmable thermostat and an in-home

display.    Unlike early pilot studies that focused on energy efficiency and overall conservation

efforts, the Connexus pilot set forth to explore the promise of IHDs and associated information

as a way to manage peak demand on “red-alert” (critical peak) days.12                      The experimental

evidence suggest the promise of such technologies as a tool to promote demand response; treated

households consumed approximately 0.47 kWh less per hour on “red alert” days than did

counterparts in the control group. This reflects an approximate 15 percent reduction in peak

energy use on such days. However, much of the reductions over peak periods reflect little more

than load shifting. Invanov et al. (2013) document significant increases in use over the early


12
  In addition to providing real-time feedback on energy use and its costs, the IHDs displayed a message each
morning indicating projected peak hours for the day and if there were any “red alerts” during which time the
household should avoid running energy intensive durables.. Moreover, during peak periods of event days, Connexus
remotely increased the temperature setting for air conditioners in treated households by 3 degrees.
morning and late evening hours of event days and increased use during peak periods on non-

event days. Hence, the IHDs appear to have little impact on overall energy use but do provide a

viable strategy for demand response.

       Viewed in its totality, this literature highlights the importance of salience for managing

residential electricity use. The coarse nature of information on energy consumption (particularly

at the appliance level) adversely impact consumption decision and lead to inefficient patterns of

energy use in the home. Providing real time feedback on energy use allows households to

overcome this friction and serves to promote more efficient consumption patterns.

IV. Lessons Learned and Next Steps

Before outlining what I view as fruitful avenues for future research, I would like to summarize

the important lessons learned from the extant literature. Within the context of real-time pricing

and resource demand, the extant literature provides mixed evidence on the effectiveness of

dynamic pricing plans as a means to promote energy conservation. Time-of-use rates produce

but modest reductions in energy use during peak periods. Yet, overall price sensitivity depends

on the capital stock of the home with much greater responsiveness observed amongst those with

some form of air conditioning system in the home. Critical-peak pricing tariffs induce greater

reductions in use during peak periods. Finally, the literature is ubiquitous in demonstrating a

strong complementarity between dynamic pricing plans and enabling technologies that provide

the household real-time feedback on energy consumption and the prevailing price of electricity.

       Within the context of energy efficiency and the adoption of energy-saving durables, I

identify three factors that are important drivers of the adoption decision; (i) search costs and

incomplete information about the availability of energy-saving technologies, (ii) moral costs and

the desire to do the right thing, and (iii) financial incentives and the up-front costs required to
purchase and install such technologies. This suggests that there is no one-size fits all approach to

stimulate the adoption of energy-efficient technologies. Rather policies designed to address the

energy-efficiency gap should target a variety of channels and exploit the observed

complementarity between prices and norms.

       Given these lessons learned, what do I view as fruitful avenues for future research? To

date, almost all of the literature on energy efficiency and demand response has focused on a

single outcome – changes in energy use. Yet, from a policy perspective, one should be equally

interested in how various policy options affect social welfare. To address this question, it is

important for researchers to take a step back and design experiments which aim to disentangle

competing theories and identify policies that directly target the underlying cause of observed

market failure. In this regard, studies such as Allcott and Taubinsky (2014) hold promise and

provide a blueprint for future research.

       Another important area of future research is making better use of behavioral economics

to promote our policy goals and offset the external costs of our consumption decisions. For

example, consider the power of defaults.     Economists have found dramatic effects of using a

default option: most people stick to the default rather than choosing other available options.

Lofgren et al (2009) use an arefactual field experiment to explore the power of defaults within

the context of an important question for environmental economists – whether or not to offset the

CO2 emissions from air travel. I thus see incredible promise in work exploring how

policymakers can use insights from behavioral economics to prompt compensatory actions such

as the purchase of green energy blocks or carbon offsets.

       A related use of behavioral economics as a means to promote our policy objectives is to

explore the use of goal setting as a way to reduce energy consumption amongst present-biased
consumers with reference-dependent preferences.       In this regard, I view the natural field

experiment of Harding and Hsiaw (2012) an important foundation upon which to build.

Similarly, I see great potential for work that explores other mechanisms which target loss

aversion and reference-dependence as a means to promote energy efficiency and more efficient

resource use.

       Within the realm of real-time pricing, I see tremendous opportunity for researchers to

compare TOU and CPP plans which restrain peak prices to an alternative scheme whereby

consumers face prices determined via the wholesale market. Similarly, I see significant promise

for work exploring the effect of such pricing plans on the long-run demand for electricity and

whether the introduction of such programs prompts households to adjust its stock of energy-

intensive durables. Finally, I see great promise for studies that explore the use of normative

comparisons and targeted messages as a means to manage peak demand. Although such policies

have proven an effective way to promote energy efficiency, it is unclear whether they can also be

used as a tool for demand response.
                                          References

Aigner, Dennis. (1985) “The Residential Electricity Time-of-Use Pricing Experiments: What
       Have We Learned?”, in Social Experiments, ed. Jerry Hausman and David Wise,
       University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL.

Allcott, Hunt. (2011a) “Rethinking Real-Time Electricity Pricing,” Resource and Energy
        Economics, 33(4), 820-842.

Allcott, Hunt. (2011b). “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,” Journal of Public Economics,
        95(9), 1082-1095.

Allcott, Hunt. (2014) “Paternalism and Energy Efficiency: An Overview,” NBER Working Paper
        20363.

Allcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone. (2012) “Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives, 26(1), 3-28.

Allcott, Hunt, Sendhil Mullanaithan, and Dmitry Taubinsky. (2014) “Energy Policy with
        Externalities and Internalities,” Journal of Public Economics, 112(April), 72-88.

Allcott, Hunt and Todd Rogers. (2014) “The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Behavioral
        Interventions: Experimental Evidence from Energy Conservation,” American Economic
        Review, 104(10), 3003-3037.

Allcott, Hunt and Richard Sweeney. (2014) “Can Retailers Inform Consumers about Energy
        Costs? Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Working Paper. New York University.

Allcott, Hunt and Dmitry Taubinsky. (2014) “Evaluating Behaviorally-Motivated Policy:
        Experimental Evidence from the Lightbulb Market,” Working Paper, New York
        University.

Andreoni, James. (1988) “Privately Provided Public Goods in a Large Economy: The Limits of
      Altruism,” Journal of Public Economics, 35(1), 57-73,

Atarri, Shahneez, Michael DeKay, Cliff Davidson, and Wandi Bruine de Bruin. (2010) “Public
        Perceptions of Energy Consumption Savings,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
        Sciences, 107(37), 16054-16059.

Atkinson, Scott. (1979) “Responsiveness to Time-of-Day Electricity Pricing: First Empirical
       Results,” Journal of Econometrics, 9(1-2), 79-95.

Ayres, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih. (2013) “Evidence from Two Large Field
       Experiments that Peer Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy Usage,”
       Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 29(5), 992-1022.
Becker, Gary. (1974) “A Theory of Social Interactions,” Journal of Political Economy, 82(6),
       1063-1093.

Bergstrom, Theodore, Lawrence Blume, and Hal Varian. (1986) “On the Private Provision of
       Public Goods,” Journal of Public Economics, 29(1), 25-49.

Borenstein, Severin. (2009) “To What Electricity Price Do Consumers Respond? Residential
       Demand for Electricity Under Increasing-Block Pricing,” Working Paper, University of
       California at Berkeley.

Brandon, Alec, John A. List, Robert Metcalfe and Michael K. Price. (2014) “What Drives the
      Adoption of Energy Efficient Technologies? The Role of Social Information and
      Advertisements,” Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Brown, Alexander, Zhikang Eric Chua, and Colin F. Camerer. (2009) “Learning and Visceral
      Temptation in Dynamic Savings Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1),
      197-231.

Caves, Douglas and Lauritis Christensen. (1980) “Econometric Analysis of Time-of-Use
       Electricity Pricing Experiments,” Journal of Econometrics, 14(3), 287-306.

Caves, Douglas, Lauritis Christiansen, and Joseph Herriges. (1984) “Consistency of Residential
       Customer Response in Time-of-Use Electricity Pricing Experiments,” Journal of
       Econometrics, 26(1-2), 179-203.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. (2009) “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
       Evidence,” American Economic Review, 99(4), 1145-1177.

Cho, Sungjin and John Rust. (2010) “The Flat Rental Puzzle,” Review of Economic Studies,
       77(2), 534-559.

Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez. (2003) “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
       Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 118(3), 815-842.

Faruqui, Ahmad and Stephen George. (2005) “Quantifying Customer Response to Dynamic
       Pricing,” The Electricity Journal,

Faruqui, Ahmad and Sanem Sergici. (2010) “Household Response to Dynamic Pricing of
       Electricity: A Survey of 15 Experiments,” Journal of Regulatory Economics, 38(2), 193-
       225.

Faruqui, Ahmad, Sanem Sergici, and Ahmed Sharif. (2010) “The Impact of Informational
       Feedback on Energy Consumption – A Survey of the Experimental Evidence,” Energy,
       35(4), 1598-1608.
Ferraro, Paul and Michael K. Price. (2013) “Using Pecuniary and Non-Pecuniary Strategies to
       Influence Behavior: Evidence from a Large Scale Field Experiment,” Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 95(1), 64-73.

Fryer, Roland G., Steven D. Levitt, John A. List, and Sally Sadoff. (2012) “Enhancing the
        Efficacy of Teacher Incentive through Loss Aversion: A Field Experiment,” NBER
        Working Paper No. 18237.

Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson. (2006) “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia and
      Information Suppression in Competitive Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      121(2), 505-540.

Gans, Will, Anna Alberini, and Alberto Longo. (2013) “Smart Meter Devices and the Effect of
      Feedback on Residential Electricity Consumption: Evidence from a Natural Experiment
      in Northern Ireland,” Energy Economics, 36, 729-743.

Gilbert, Ben and Joshua Graff-Zivin. (2014) “Dynamic Salience with Intermittent Billing:
        Evidence from Smart Electricity Meters,” Journal of Economic Behavior and
        Organization, 107(Part A), 176-190.

Gillingham, Kenneth and Karen Palmer. (2013) “Bridging the Energy Efficiency Gap,”
       Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 13-02.

Granger, Clive, Robert Engle, Ramu Ramanathan, Allan Andersen. (1979) “Residential Load
      Curves and Time-of-Day Pricing: An Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Econometrics,
      9(1-2), 13-32.

Grubb, Michael and Matthew Osborne. (2015) “Cellular Service Demand, Biased Beliefs,
       Learning and Bill Shock,” American Economic Review, 105(1), 234-271.

Harding, Matthew and Alice Hsiaw. (2012) “Goal Setting and Energy Conservation,” Working
      Paper, Stanford University.

Hendricks, Wallace, Roger Koenker, and Dale Poirier. (1979) “Residential Demand for
       Electricity: An Econometric Approach,” Journal of Econometrics, 9(1-2), 33-57.

Herberich, David, John A. List, and Michael K. Price. (2012) “How Many Economists Does it
       Take to Change a Lightbulb? A Natural Field Experiment on Technology Adoption,”
       Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Herter, Karen, Patrick McAuliffe, and Arthur Rosenfeld. (2007) “An Exploratory Analysis of
        California Residential Response to Critical Peak Pricing of Electricity,” Energy, 32(1),
        25-34.

Heutel, Garth. (2011) “Optimal Policy Instruments for Externality-Producing Durable Goods
       under Time Inconsistency,” NBER Working Paper No. 17083.
Hossian, Tanjim and John A. List. (2012) “The Behavioralist Visits the Factory: Increasing
       Productivity Using Simple Framing Manipulations,” Management Science, 58(12), 2151-
       2167.

Hossain, Tamjim and John Morgan. (2006) “…Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue
       (Non)Equivalence in Field Experiments on eBay,” Advances in Economic Analysis &
       Policy, 6(2), Article 3.

Houser, Daniel, Michael Keane, and Kevin McCabe. (2004) “Behavior in a Dynamic Decision
      Problem: An Analysis of Experimental Bayesian Type Classification Algorithm,”
      Econometrica, 72(3), 781-822.

Ito, Koichiro. (2014) “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from
        Nonlinear Electricity Pricing,” American Economic Review, 104(2), 537---563.

Ivanov, Chris, Lullit Getachew, Steve Fenrick, and Bethany Vittetoe. (2013) “Enabling
       Technologies and Energy Savings: The Case of EnergyWise Smart Meter Pilot of
       Connexus Energy,” Utilities Policy, 26, 76-84.

Jacobsen, Grant D., Matthew Kotchen, and Michael Vanderbergh. (2012) “The Behavioral
       Response to Voluntary Provision of an Environmental Public Good: Evidence from
       Residential Electricity Demand,” European Economic Review, 56(5), 946-960.

Jacobsen, Mark, Jacob LaRiviere, and Michael K. Price. (2014) “Public Good Provision in the
       Presence of Heterogeneous Green Preferences,” NBER Working Paper No. 20266.

Jaffee, Adam and Robert Stavins. (1994) “The Energy Paradox and the Diffusion of
        Conservation Technology,” Resource and Energy Economics, 16, 91-122.

Jessoe, Katrina and David Rapson. (2014) “Knowledge Is (Less) Power: Experimental Evidence
        from Residential Energy Use,” American Economic Review, 104(4), 1417-1438.

Jin, Ginger and Phillip Leslie. (2003) “The Effect of Information on Product Quality: Evidence
        from Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 409-
        451.

Kahn, Matthew E. and Frank Wolak. (2013) “Do Residential Electricity Consumers Respond to
      Marginal Prices? Evidence from an Information Provision Experiment,” Working Paper,
      Stanford University.

Kotchen, Matthew. (2006) “Green Markets and Private Provision of Public Goods,” Journal of
      Political Economy, 114(4), 816-834.

Kotchen, Matthew and Michael Moore. (2007) “Private Provision of Environmental Public
      Goods: Household Participation in Green-Electricity Programs,” Journal of
      Environmental Economics and Management, 53(1), 1-16.
LaRiviere, Jacob, Scott Holladay, David Novgorodsky, and Michael Price. (2014) “Prices vs.
       Nudges: A Large Field Experiment on Energy Efficiency Fixed Cost Investments.”
       Working Paper University of Tennessee.

Lawrence, Anthony and Steven Braithwait. (1979) “The Residential Demand for Electricity with
      Time-of-Day Pricing,” Journal of Econometrics, 9(1-2), 59-77.

Levitt, Steven D., John A. List, Susanne Neckermann, and Sally Sadoff. (2012) “The
        Behavioralist Goes to School: Leveraging Behavioral Economics to Improve Educational
        Performance,” NBER Working Paper No. 18165.

Li, Shanjun, Matthew E. Kahn, and Jerry Nickelsburg. (2014) “Public Transit Bus Procurement:
       The Role of Energy Prices, Regulation and Federal Subsidies,” NBER Working Paper
       No. 19964.

Lofgren, A. P. Martinsson, M. Hennlock, and T. Sterner. (2009) “Does Experience Eliminate the
       Effect of a Default Option? A Field Experiment on CO2-offsetting for Air Transport,”
       Working Paper in Economics 391, Goteborg University, Department of Economics.

Sallee, James. (2014) “Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency,” forthcoming Journal of Law
        and Economics.

Sexton, Steven. (2014) “Automatic Bill Payment and Salience Effects: Evidence from Electricity
       Consumption,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Shin, Jeong-Shik. (1985) “Perception of Price When Price Information is Costly: Evidence from
        Residential Electricity Demand,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 67(4), 591-598.

Toledo, Chantal. (2013) “Do Environmental Messages Work for the Poor? Experimental
       Evidence from Brazilian Favelas,” Working Paper, University of California at Berkeley.

Tsvetanov, Tsvetan and Kathleen Segerson. (2013) “Re-Evaluating the Role of Energy
       Efficiency Standards: A Behavioral Economics Approach,” Journal of Environmental
       Economics and Management, 66(2), 347-363.

Wolak, Frank. (2006) “Residential Customer Response to Real-time Pricing: The Anaheim
      Critical Peak Pricing Experiment,” Working Paper, Stanford University.

Wolak, Frank. (2011) “Do Residential Customers Respond to Hourly Price? Evidence from a
      Dynamic Pricing Experiment,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings,
      101(3), 83-87.
