NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POWER OF FORWARD GUIDANCE REVISITED
Alisdair McKay
Emi Nakamura
Jón Steinsson
Working Paper 20882
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20882
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015

We thank Susanto Basu, Gauti Eggertsson, Marc Giannoni, Fatih Guvenen, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Benjamin
Moll, Michael Peters, Oistein Roisland, Greg Thwaites, Aleh Tsyvinski, NicolasWerquin and seminar
participants at various institutions for valuable comments and discussions. We thank the National Science
Foundation (grant SES-1056107) for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Power of Forward Guidance Revisited
Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson
NBER Working Paper No. 20882
January 2015, Revised July 2015
JEL No. E21,E40,E50
ABSTRACT
In recent years, central banks have increasingly turned to “forward guidance” as a central tool of monetary
policy, especially as interest rates around the world have hit the zero lower bound. Standard monetary
models imply that far future forward guidance is extremely powerful: promises about far future interest
rates have huge effects on current economic outcomes, and these effects grow with the horizon of
the forward guidance. We show that the power of forward guidance is highly sensitive to the assumption
of complete markets. If agents face uninsurable income risk and borrowing constraints, a precautionary
savings effect tempers their responses to changes in future interest rates. As a consequence, forward
guidance has substantially less power to stimulate the economy. In addition, we show that the
business cycle dynamics of our incomplete markets model differ substantially from its complete
market counterpart. This contrasts with the well-known results of Krusell and Smith (1998). We
present approximate representations that can easily be incorporated into standard business cycle
models.
Alisdair McKay
Boston University
Dept. of Economics
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
amckay@bu.edu
Emi Nakamura
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 820
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
enakamura@columbia.edu

Jón Steinsson
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1026 International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jsteinsson@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

Forward guidance has become an increasingly important tool of monetary policy in recent years.
Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) show that much of the surprise news about monetary policy
at the time of FOMC announcements arises from signals about the central bank’s intentions about
future monetary policy. In many cases, changes in the current Federal Funds rate are fully expected,
and all of the news about monetary policy has to do with how the central bank is expected to set
interest rates in the future.1
Promises about future interest rates have been shown to have a powerful effect on the economy
in standard monetary models. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) show that a shock to the natural
rate of interest that causes the economy to hit the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates
induces a powerful deflationary spiral and a crippling recession. However, the recession can be
entirely abated if the central bank commits from the outset to holding interest rates at the zero
lower bound for a few additional quarters beyond what is justified by contemporaneous economic
conditions.
Recent work argues that the magnitude of the effects of forward guidance in New Keynesian
models stretches the limits of credibility. Carlstrom, Fuerst, and Paustian (2012) show that a
promise by the central bank to peg interest rates below the natural rate of interest for roughly two
years generates explosive dynamics for inflation and output in a workhorse New Keynesian model
(the Smets and Wouters (2007) model). Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson (2013) refer to this
phenomenon as the forward guidance puzzle. Along the same lines, consider an experiment whereby
the central bank promises a 1 percentage point lower real interest rate for a single quarter at some
point in the future. We show that in the plain vanilla New Keynesian model, this promise has an
eighteen times greater impact on inflation when the promise pertains to interest rates 5 years in
the future than when it pertains to the current interest rate.
It may seem unintuitive that an interest rate cut far in the future has a greater effect than a
near-term one. To see why this arises in standard models, consider the response of consumption
to a decrease in the real interest rate for a single quarter 5 years in the future. The consumption
Euler equation dictates that consumption will rise immediately to a higher level and stay constant
at that higher level for 5 years before returning to its normal level.2 The cumulative response
1
2

Campbell et al. (2012) reinforce these results using a longer sample period spanning the Great Recession.
The response is a step function because consumption growth only deviates from normal when the real interest

1

of consumption to the shock is therefore quite large and gets larger the further in the future the
interest rate shocks occurs. It is the cumulative response of consumption (with some discounting)
that determines the response of current inflation in the basic New Keynesian model. So, the further
in the future is the interest rate that the monetary authority announces it will change, the larger is
the current response of inflation. At the zero lower bound, this large effect on inflation will lower
real rates and thus create a powerful feedback loop on output.
But is it a realistic prediction of the standard model that agents increase their consumption by
the same amount in response to an interest rate cut 5 years in the future as they do to a cut in the
current interest rate? Many people face some risk of hitting a borrowing constraint over the next
five years. This effectively shortens their planning horizon since interest rate changes in states of the
world that occur after they hit a borrowing constraint are irrelevant for their current consumption
plan. In addition to this, people’s desire to maintain a buffer stock of saving for precautionary
reasons will temper their response to future interest rate shocks. Taking full advantage of the
opportunity for intertemporal substitution presented by the future interest rate change requires
people to run down their assets. This is costly since it leaves them more exposed to future income
shocks. As a consequence, people will trade off the gains from intertemporal substitution and
the costs of running down their buffer stock of savings. As the low interest rate is further in the
future, the change in assets needed to take full advantage of intertemporal substitution grows and
the countervailing precautionary savings effect therefore grows stronger, tempering the effects of
forward guidance.
To investigate the quantitative magnitude of these effects, we consider a general equilibrium
model in which agents face uninsurable, idiosyncratic income risk and borrowing constraints. In
this model, the effect of forward guidance about future interest rates on current output falls the
further out in the future the interest rate change is. For forward guidance about the interest rate
5 years in the future, the effect on output and inflation is roughly 40% as large as in the standard
model. For forward guidance about the interest rate 10 years in the future, the effect on current
output is essentially zero.
rate deviates from normal and this only occurs in the single quarter in our experiment. Another way to see this is
that the the forward guidance does not change the relative price of consumption for any two dates before the date
of the interest rate change. All these dates must therefore have the same level of consumption. The end-point of
consumption is pinned down at the old steady state by the fact that monetary shocks have no effect on real outcomes
in the long run.

2

Our results indicate that forward guidance is a much less effective policy tool at the zero lower
bound in a model with a realistic degree of precautionary savings than it is in standard macro
models. We consider a shock that lowers the natural rate of interest enough that the zero lower
bound binds for 5 years and the initial fall in output is -4% in the absence of forward guidance. If
we assume markets are complete (and precautionary savings thus absent), a policy of maintaining
interest rates at zero for a little more than three quarters beyond what a strict inflation targeting
central bank would do completely eliminates the fall in output. In contrast, in our incomplete
markets model with idiosynctratic risk and borrowing constraints, the effect of this amount of
forward guidance is substantially smaller and a significant recession remains.
Movements in real interest rates play an important role in the response of the economy to a wide
variety of shocks. Moreover, forward guidance has been an important part of monetary policy in
“normal times” (i.e., away from the zero lower bound). We next explore how the reduced sensitivity
of output to real interest rates in the incomplete markets model alters the response of the economy to
a number of different business cycle shocks. Specifically, we consider productivity shocks, preference
shocks, and markup shocks, in addition to monetary shocks. We extend our model to include
these aggregate shocks and several features typically included in monetary business cycle models.
We parameterize the monetary policy rule and monetary shocks to match recent evidence from
Nakamura and Steinsson (2015).
To analyze this more complex model, we consider two approximations of the model, both
of which allow the model to be analyzed using standard techniques for solving linear rational
expectations models (e.g., Sims, 2002). First, we use the method proposed by Reiter (2009) to
create a linear representation of the model. Second, we develop a simpler version of the model in
which consumption-savings decisions of households can be represented by an Euler equation with
discounting. We refer to this version of the model as the “discounted Euler equation model.”3
We show that the business cycle dynamics in our incomplete markets model are substantially
different from those of its complete markets counterpart in response to all four of the different
shocks we consider. Our result regarding the response to productivity shocks contrasts sharply
with the results of Krusell and Smith (1998). They compare the response of an incomplete markets
3

Interestingly, such a formulation of the consumption Euler equation has actually been used in policy calculations
by the Central Bank of Norway, to combat the forward guidance puzzle. We thank Oistein Roisland for pointing this
out to us.

3

model with flexible prices and its complete markets counterpart to productivity shocks and find
that the two models have very similar responses. We show that the difference between our result
and theirs arises because of the New Keynesian features we incorporate into the incomplete markets
model.
One might ask how our mechanism relates to a model with hand-to-mouth consumers. Including
such consumers also reduces the response of output to interest rates. However, this set-up reduces
the sensitivity of output to interest rates by the same amount at all horizons—in this respect, it
is equivalent to reducing the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. In contrast to the hand-tomouth model, our incomplete markets model and the discounted Euler equation model reduce the
effect of far future interest rate changes relative interest rate changes closer to the present.
Our work builds on recent papers that incorporate market incompleteness and idiosyncratic uncertainty into New Keynesian models starting with Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011) and Oh and Reis
(2012). The papers closest in spirit to ours are McKay and Reis (2014) who investigate the power of
automatic stabilizers at the zero lower bound and Gornemann, Kuester, and Nakajima (2014) who
investigate the distributional implications of monetary policy shocks. Several other recent papers
suggest “solutions” to the forward guidance puzzle. Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson (2013)
argue that the experiment that gives rise to the puzzle is, itself, unreasonable. They argue that it is
unreasonable to assume that the central bank really can engender substantial changes in long-term
interest rates, which are at the core of why the forward guidance puzzle arises. Carlstrom, Fuerst,
and Paustian (2012) and Kiley (2014) show that the magnitude of the forward guidance puzzle is
substantially reduced in a sticky information (as opposed to a sticky price) model. This is because
the sticky information Phillips curve is less forward looking. Our solution instead yields an Euler
equation that is less forward looking than in the standard model. Caballero and Farhi (2014) argue
that forward guidance is less effective if the reason why the zero lower bound binds is a shortage
of safe assets in the economy—a safety trap—as opposed to a deleveraging or patience shock.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 explains why forward guidance is so powerful in
standard New Keynesian models. Section 3 presents our incomplete markets model featuring uninsurable idiosyncratic income risk and borrowing constraints. Section 4 describes our results about
the reduced power of forward guidance in our incomplete markets model relative to the standard
complete markets models. Section 5 extends the model and analyzes business cycle dynamics. It

4

also explains the two methods we employ to make the model tractable enough to be analyzed using
standard techniques for solving linear rational expectations models. Section 6 concludes.

2

Why Is Forward Guidance So Powerful?

It is useful to start with an explanation for why forward guidance is so powerful in standard
monetary models. Consider the basic New Keynesian model as developed, e.g., in Woodford (2003)
and Gali (2008). The implications of private sector behavior for output and inflation in this model
can be described up to a linear approximation by an intertemporal “IS” equation of the form
xt = Et xt+1 − σ(it − Et πt+1 − rtn ),

(1)

and a Phillips curve of the form
πt = βEt πt+1 + κxt .

(2)

Here, xt denotes the output gap—i.e., the percentage difference between actual output and the
natural rate of output that would prevail if prices were fully flexible—πt denotes inflation, it denotes
the nominal, short-term, risk-free interest rate, rtn denotes the natural real rate of interest—i.e.,
the real interest rate that would prevail if prices were fully flexible—σ denotes the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, β denotes the subjective discount factor of households, and κ is the slope
of the Phillips curve which is determined by the degree of nominal and real rigidities in the economy.
All variables are denoted as percentage deviations from their steady state values.
Suppose for simplicity that the monetary policy of the central bank is given by an exogenous
rule for the real interest rate where the real interest rate tracks the natural real rate with some
error: rt = it − Et πt+1 = rtn + t,t−j . Here t,t−j denotes the shock to the short term real rate
in period t that becomes known in period t − j.4 Absent any monetary shocks, the real interest
rate will perfectly track the natural real rate and both the output gap and inflation will be zero.
Suppose we start in such a state, but then the monetary authority announces that the real interest
rate will be lower by 1% for a single quarter 5 years in the future, but maintained at the natural
4

Given this specification of monetary policy, the model has a unique solution for which limj→∞ Et xt+j = 0 and
inflation is bounded. We could alternatively assume that the monetary authority sets the nominal rate according to
the following rule it = rtn + φπt + ˜t,t−j and φ > 1. In this case, the model has a unique bounded solution (without
the additional restriction that limj→∞ Et xt+j = 0) and there exists a path for ˜t,t−j that gives the same solution as
the model with monetary policy given by the exogenous path for the real rate we assume. We prefer to describe the
monetary policy as an exogenous rule for the real interest rate because this simplifies our exposition substantially.

5

real rate of interest in all other quarters (i.e., t+20,t = −0.01).5
Figure 1 plots the response of output to this shock (assuming for simplicity that σ = 1). Even
though the real interest rate does not change until 20 quarters later, output jumps up by a full 1%
immediately. Output then stays at this higher level for 20 quarters before falling back to steady
state in quarter 21. To understand why output responds in this way, it is important to consider
that the shock changes the relative price of consumption between quarters 20 and 21 (since it is
the real interest rate in quarter 20 that changes), but leaves the relative price of consumption for
any two dates before quarter 20 and any two dates after quarter 20 unchanged. This implies that
consumption growth can only deviate from normal in quarter 20. In other words, the response of
consumption must be a step function. In addition to this, the level of consumption (and output)
is pinned down in the long-run by the fact that monetary shocks have no effect on real outcomes
in the long run. This implies that consumption (and output) must rise by 1% immediately, so that
they can fall back to steady state in quarter 21.6
The step-function shape of the output response in Figure 1 is determined solely by the Euler
equation. The level of consumption, and therefore output, is however determined by the intertemporal budget constraint. In general equilibrium, income rises in response to this type of shock
because the level of production increases in response to the increase in demand. This increase in
income allows households to consume more initially without reducing consumption after period
20. We can compare this general equilibrium case to the response of a single household holding
its own income fixed and also holding the actions of all other agents in the economy fixed (call
this the partial equilibrium response). Figure A.2 in the appendix plots the partial equilibrium
response. The partial equilibrium response is also a step function, since the same Euler equation
applies. The difference is that the increase in consumption over the first 20 quarters will cause the
household to run down its wealth and imply that consumption going forward after period 20 will
be permanently lower (this effect does not occur in general equilibrium due to the offsetting income
rise). However, this difference is relatively small, even for a shock 20 quarters out. For this case,
5

Conventional specifications of monetary shocks affect real rates in more than a single quarter. But in a linear
model the effects of such monetary shocks can be “decomposed” into a simple sum of the effects of changes in real
rates at each horizon. In this sense one can think of our 20-quarter experiment as one component of a more complex
monetary shock that affects real rates in many quarters.
6
An alternative way to see this is to solve the intertemporal IS equation—equation (1)—forward to get xt =
P
n
−σ ∞
j=0 Et (it+j − Et+j πt+j+1 − rt+j ). Notice, that there is no discounting in the sum on the right hand side of this
equation. This implies that the output gap will rise immediately by 1% and will stay at that higher level for the next
five years and then fall back to zero all at once when the low interest rate period passes.

6

1.5
Output
Consumption
Real Interest Rate
1

Percentage Points

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

−1.5
0

5

10

15
20
25
Horizon in Quarters

30

35

40

Figure 1: Response of output to a one-quarter drop in the real interest rate 20 quarters in the
future.
the partial equilibrium response of output is 91 basis points rather than the full 100 basis points
in general equilibrium (see Figure A.2).
The logic described above for forward guidance 20 quarters in the future, applies for forward
guidance at any horizon. As a consequence, the further out in the future the forward guidance is,
the larger is the cumulative response of output. In the New Keynesian model, it is the the entire
cumulative response of the output gap (albeit with some discounting) that determines the current
response of inflation to forward guidance. To see this, it is useful to solve the Phillips curve forward
to get
πt = κ

∞
X

β j Et xt+j .

(3)

j=0

This equation makes clear that the further in the future is the interest rate that the monetary
authority announces it will change, the larger is the current response of inflation. While the
response of inflation to a 1% change in the current real rate is κσ, the response of inflation to a
1% change in the real rate for one quarter in the infinite future is κσ/(1 − β). If β = 0.99, the
current response of inflation to forward guidance about a single quarter in the infinite future is 100
times larger than the response of inflation to an equally large change in the current real interest
rate. Figure 2 plots the response of inflation to forward guidance about interest rates at different
7

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

5

10
15
Horizon of Forward Guidance in Years

20

25

Figure 2: Response of current inflation to forward guidance about interest rates at different horizons
relative to response to equally large change in current real interest rate.
horizons relative to the response of inflation to an equally large change in the current real interest
rate. We see that the response of inflation to forward guidance about interest rates five years in
the future is roughly 18 times larger than the response of inflation to an equally sized change in
the current real interest rate.
To build intuition, we have assumed that there is no endogenous feedback from changes in
output and inflation back onto real interest rates. Actual monetary policies are more complicated.
In normal times, forward guidance about lower real interest rates in the future may be partly
undone by higher real interest rates in the intervening period. On the other hand, when monetary
policy is constrained by the zero lower bound on short-term nominal interest rates, the higher
inflation associated with forward guidance about future interest rates will actually lower current
real interest rates and this will in turn raise current output and inflation further. In this case,
the outsized effects of forward guidance we describe above will be further reinforced by subsequent
endogenous interest rate movements.

8

3

An Incomplete Markets Model with Nominal Rigidities

Section 2 shows that the huge power of far future forward guidance in standard monetary models
depends crucially on the prediction of the model that the current response of output to an expected
change in real interest rates in the far future (say 5 years in the future) is equally large as the
response of output to a change in the current real interest rate. But is this realistic? With
some probability one will hit a borrowing constraint in the next 5 years. This effectively shortens
one’s planning horizon. Also, increasing consumption today by 1% in anticipation of a 1% change
in real interest rates 5 years from today would entail a sizable run down of assets over the 5
years until the interest rate changes. Agents that face uninsurable idiosyncratic income risk and
borrowing constraints will trade off the benefits of intertemporal substitution and the costs in terms
of reduced ability to smooth consumption over time of having lower buffer stock savings. To analyze
these effects we develop a model with uninsurable idiosyncratic shocks to household productivity,
borrowing constraints, and nominal rigidities.

3.1

The Environment

The economy is populated by a unit continuum of ex ante identical households with preferences
given by
E0

∞
X

"
β

t=0

t

c1−γ
h,t
1−γ

−

`1+ψ
h,t
1+ψ

#
,

where ch,t is consumption of household h at time t and `h,t is labor supply of household h at time t.
Households are endowed with stochastic idiosyncratic productivity zh,t that generates pre-tax labor
income Wt zh,t `h,t , where Wt is the aggregate real wage. Each household’s productivity zh,t follows a
Markov chain with transition probabilities Pr(zh,t+1 |zh,t ). We assume that the initial cross-sectional
distribution of idiosyncratic productivities is equal to the ergodic distribution of this Markov chain.
As the the Markov chain transition matrix is constant over time, it follows that the cross-sectional
distribution of productivities is constant. We use Γz (z) to denote this distribution.
In this economy, a final good is produced from intermediate inputs according to the production
function
Z
Yt =
0

1

1/µ

yj,t dj

µ
,

where Yt denotes the quantity of the final good produced at time t and yj,t denotes the quantity of
9

the intermediate good produced by firm j in period t. The intermediate goods are produced using
labor as an input according to the production function
yj,t = nj,t ,
where nj,t denotes the amount of labor hired by firm j in period t.
The market structure of this model economy combines elements that are familiar from the
standard New Keynesian model with elements that are familiar from the standard incomplete
markets model (Bewley, undated; Huggett, 1993; Aiyagari, 1994). While the final good is produced
by a representative competitive firm, the intermediate goods are produced by monopolistically
competitive firms. The intermediate goods firms face frictions in adjusting their prices that imply
that they can only update their prices with probability θ per period as in Calvo (1983). These
firms are controlled by a risk-neutral manager who discounts future profits at rate β. Whatever
profits are produced are paid out immediately to the households with each household receiving an
equal share Dt . Households cannot trade their stakes in the firms.
Households trade a risk-free real bond with real interest rt between periods t and t+1. Borrowing
constraints prevent these households from taking negative bond positions. There is a stock of
government debt outstanding with real face value B. The government raises tax revenue to finance
interest payments on this debt. These taxes are collected by taxing households according to their
labor productivity zh,t . Let τt τ̄ (zh,t ) be the tax paid by a household h in period t. By levying the
taxes on labor productivity, which is exogenous, the tax does not distort household decisions in
the same way that a lump-sum tax does not. At the same time, the dependence of the tax on zh,t
allows us to manipulate the cross-sectional correlation of tax payments and earnings.
We assume that the government runs a balanced budget so as to maintain a stable level of debt
in each period. The government budget constraint is
X
B
+
Γz (z)τt τ̄ (z) = B.
1 + rt
z

(4)

To illustrate our main results about the power of forward guidance, we will consider several monetary policy experiments involving somewhat different specifications of monetary policy. These are
described in Section 4. The relationship between the real interest rate, the nominal interest rate
it , and inflation πt is given by the Fisher relation in the usual way
1 + rt =

1 + it
1 + πt+1

10

(5)

where πt+1 ≡ Pt+1 /Pt − 1 and Pt is the aggregate price level.

3.2

Decision Problems

The decision problem faced by the households in the economy is


1+ψ
 c1−γ

X
`h,t
h,t
Vt (bh,t , zh,t ) =
max
Pr(zh,t+1 |zh,t )Vt+1 (bh,t+1 , zh,t+1 )
−
+β

ch,t ,bh,t+1 ,`h,t  1 − γ
1+ψ
z
h,t+1

subject to
ch,t +

bh,t+1
= bh,t + Wt zh,t `h,t − τt τ̄ (zh,t ) + Dt
1 + rt
bh,t+1 ≥ 0.

Let ct (b, z) be the decision rule for ch,t , gt (b, z) be the decision rule for household bond holdings
bh,t+1 , and `t (b, z) be the decision rule for `h,t . These policy rules vary over time in response to
aggregate events that affect current or future prices, taxes, or dividends.
The final goods producer’s cost minimization problem implies that


pj,t µ/(1−µ)
Yt ,
yj,t =
Pt

(6)

where pj,t is the price charged by firm j in period t and the aggregate price index is given by
Z 1
1−µ
1/(1−µ)
Pt =
pj,t
dj
.
0

When an intermediate goods producer updates its price it solves
 ∗

∞
X
pt
s−t
s−t
max
β (1 − θ)
yj,s − Ws nj,s
Ps
p∗t ,{yj,s ,nj,s }∞
s=t s=t
subject to

yj,s =

p∗t
Ps

µ/(1−µ)
Ys ,

yj,s = nj,s ,
where p∗t is the price set by firms who are able to update their price at date t.
The solution to this problem satisfies
p∗t
Pt

P∞
=

s−t (1 − θ)s−t
s=t β

P∞

s=t

β s−t (1

−



Pt
Ps

θ)s−t

11



µ/(1−µ)
Pt
Ps

Ys µWs

1/(1−µ)

.
Ys

(7)

3.3

Equilibrium

Let Γt (b, z) be the distribution of households over idiosyncratic states at date t. This distribution
evolves according to
Z

0

Pr(z 0 |z)dΓt (b, z)

Γt+1 (B, z ) =

(8)

{(b,z):gt (b,z)∈B}

for all sets B ⊂ R.
As a result of nominal rigidities, price dispersion will result in some loss of efficiency. Integrating
both sides of (6) across firms and using yj,t = nj,t yields an aggregate production function
Z
nj,t dj ≡ Nt ,

St Yt =
where Nt is aggregate labor demand and St ≡

(9)

R 1  pj,t µ/(1−µ)
Pt

0

dj reflects the efficiency loss due to

price dispersion. St evolves according to
−µ/(1−µ)

St+1 = (1 − θ)St (1 + πt+1 )


+θ

p∗t+1
Pt+1

µ/(1−µ)
.

(10)

Inflation can be written as a function of the relative price selected by firms that update their prices
1−µ



1 + πt = 

1−θ

1−θ

 ∗ 1/(1−µ) 

.

(11)

pt
Pt

Aggregate labor supply is given by
Z
Lt ≡

z`t (b, z)dΓ(b, z).

(12)

Lt = Nt .

(13)

gt (b, z)dΓt (b, z).

(14)

and labor market clearing requires

Bond market clearing requires
Z
B=

The aggregate dividend paid by the intermediate goods firms is
Dt = Yt − Wt Nt .
12

(15)

Table 1: Baseline Calibration
Parameter

Description

Value

Target

β

discount factor

0.986

2% annual interest rate

γ

risk aversion

2

1/ψ

Frisch elasticity

1/2

Chetty (2012)

B

supply of assets

1.4 × annual GDP

µ

markup

1.2

Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011)

θ

price revision rate

0.15

Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011)

aggregate liquid assets (see text)

Finally, integrating across the household budget constraints and using the government budget
constraint and equation (15) gives
C t = Yt
as the aggregate resource constraint, where Ct ≡

R

(16)

ct (b, z)dΓt (b, z).

An equilibrium of this economy consists of decision rules and value functions {gt (b, z), `t (b, z),
∞
Vt (b, z)}∞
t=0 that solve the household’s problem, distributions {Γt (b, z)}t=0 that evolve according to

(8). In addition, an equilibrium involves sequences {Ct , Lt , Nt , Yt , Dt , it , Wt , πt , rt , p∗t /Pt , St ,
τt }∞
t=0 , that satisfy the definitions of Ct and Lt and equations (4), (5), (7), (9), (10), (11), (13),
(15), (16), and a monetary policy rule as described in section 4.
The main difference between this model and the model discussed in section 2 is the fact that
markets are incomplete. If we modified this model to have complete markets and then linearized
the equilibrium conditions, we would get the model in section 2. The introduction of incomplete
markets yields a role for precautionary savings and it implies that redistribution of wealth across
agents can affect the evolution of aggregate output. The fact that the present model is not linearized
also implies that price dispersion affects equilibrium outcomes.

13

3.4

Calibration

Our model period is one quarter and our calibration is summarized in Table 1. We fix the steady
state real interest rate at 2% annually and adjust the discount factor to match this.7 We set the
coefficient of risk aversion to 2. We set the Frisch elasticity of labor supply to 1/2, which is in line
with the findings of Chetty (2012). In our baseline calibration we set the supply of government
bonds, B, to match the ratio of aggregate liquid assets to GDP. We calculate liquid assets from
aggregate household balance sheets reported in the Flow of Funds Accounts and take the average
ratio over the period 1970 to 2013.8 Our choice to calibrate the aggregate supply of assets to match
liquid assets is motivated by the view that much of household net worth is illiquid and therefore not
easily used for consumption smoothing and intertemporal substitution.9 In a sensitivity analysis
we also consider a calibration in which we match aggregate household net worth, which we also
calculate from the Flow of Funds Accounts (described below).
For our choices of the desired markup of intermediate firms, µ, and probability of maintaining a
fixed price, θ, we follow Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011) and set µ = 1.2 and θ = 0.15.
The implied degree of price stickiness is on the high side of values used in the business cycle
literature. This tends to reduce the size of the effects we find on inflation since it makes inflation
less sensitive to changes in current marginal costs. In the exercises we do where the zero lower
bound on nominal interest rates binds, this also tends to reduce the size of the effects on output
since the smaller effects on inflation translate into smaller effects on real interest rates (Werning,
2012).
We calibrate the idiosyncratic wage risk to the persistent component of the estimated wage
process in Floden and Lindé (2001).10 The estimates of Floden and Lindé are for an AR(1) with
annual observations of log residual wages after the effects of age, education, and occupation have
been removed. Floden and Lindé find an autoregressive coefficient of 0.9136 and an innovation
7

We use the term “steady state” to refer to the stationary equilibrium in which aggregate quantities and prices
are constant and inflation is zero.
8
We use the same definition of liquid assets as Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011). Flow of Funds Table B.100 Lines
10 (deposits), 17 (treasury securities), 18 (agency and GSE securities), 19 (municipal securities), 20 (corporate and
foreign bonds), 24 (corporate equities), 25 (mutual fund shares).
9
Kaplan and Violante (2014) present a lifecycle savings model with liquid and illiquid assets and show that the
illiquidity of household net worth leads to stronger and more realistic consumption responses to transitory income
fluctuations.
10
While it is common to include a transitory income shock in empirical models of wage dynamics we do not include
such transitory shocks in our analysis because their impact on the quantitative results will be small as these shocks
are easily smoothed be virtue of being transitory.

14

variance of 0.0426. We convert these estimates to parameters of a quarterly AR(1) process for log
wages by simulating the quarterly process and aggregating to annual observations. We find the
parameters of the quarterly process such that estimating an AR(1) on the simulated annual data
reproduces the Floden and Lindé estimates, which results in an autoregressive coefficient of 0.966
and an innovation variance of 0.017. We discretize the resulting AR(1) process for log wages to a
three-point Markov chain using the Rouwenhorst (1995) method.11
Finally, to capture the fact that the bulk of tax payments are made by those with high earnings
we set τ̄ (z) to be positive only for the highest z. Since households are hetergeneous in the incomplete markets model, their MPCs differ widely. Households with little wealth have high MPCs,
while households with a great deal of wealth have much lower MPCs. As a consequence, wealth
redistribution matters for aggregate consumption dynamics. For example, a reallocation of income
from high to low net worth households leads to higher consumption demand, all else equal. One
way in which this shows up in our model is that the government levies taxes to finance interest
payments on debt. A fall in interest rates, therefore, may lead to a redistribution of wealth due
to variation across households in holdings of government debt as well as tax obligations. Our (realistic) assumption that taxes are paid mostly by the rich leads these tax effects to be relatively
small.

3.5

Alternative Calibrations

Our baseline calibration potentially implies too little volatility in household earnings. Guvenen,
Ozkan, and Song (2014) report the standard deviation of the distribution of five-year earnings
growth rates to be 0.73.12 Our model calibrated as described above implies this standard deviation
is only 0.53.
We therefore consider an alternative calibration in which we raise the variance of the productivity shocks in the model so that our model matches this moment of the five-year earnings growth
rate distribution. Doing so requires raising the variance of the idiosyncratic productivity innovation from 0.017 to 0.033. With more risk, the larger precautionary savings motive raises the total
demand for assets by households. In this calibration we, thus, reduce the discount factor so that
11

Kopecky and Suen (2010) prove that the Rouwenhorst method can match the conditional and unconditional
mean and variance, and the first-order autocorrelation of any stationary AR(1) process.
12
This value is the average across years of the values reported in Table A8 of Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014).

15

the model is again consistent with the total supply of assets and a 2% annual interest rate. This
requires a discount factor of 0.978. We refer to this as the High Risk calibration.
We also explore the extent to which our results depend on the average level of assets in the
economy. With more assets, households will generally have more self-insurance and therefore will be
less concerned with running down their assets. To explore this possibility we consider an alternative
calibration in which we raise the supply of government debt, B, so that the average wealth in the
economy is equal to the aggregate net worth of the household sector from the Flow of Funds,
including both liquid and illiquid wealth.13 This yields a ratio of assets to annual GDP of 3.79.
With a larger supply of assets, bond market clearing requires that households are more patient so
as to increase the demand for assets at a given interest rate. In this calibration, we set the discount
factor to 0.992 to be able to match a 2% annual interest rate. We refer to this as the High Asset
calibration.
Finally we consider a case where we increase both the supply of assets and the extent of risk
that households face. In this case we match a ratio of assets to GDP of 3.79 and the standard
deviation of five-year earnings growth rates of 0.73. The discount factor needed to match a 2%
annual interest rate is 0.990. We refer to this as the High Risk and Asset calibration.

3.6

Computation

In Section 4, we compute the perfect foresight transition paths of the economy in response to
monetary policy and demand shocks. We assume that the economy begins in the steady state and
returns to steady state after 250 quarters. We begin by guessing paths for all aggregate quantities
and prices. We can then verify whether this guess is an equilibrium by checking that the definition
of an equilibrium given above is satisfied. Part of this step involves solving and simulating the
households problem at the guessed prices. We solve the household’s problem by iterating on the
Euler equation backwards through time using the endogenous gridpoint method of Carroll (2006)
to compute the policy rules for each period of the transition. We then simulate the population
of households forwards through time using a non-stochastic simulation algorithm to compute the
distribution of wealth at each date. We can then compute aggregate consumption, labor supply,
and bond holdings using the policy rules and distribution of wealth for each date. If our guess is not
13
Here we use the ratio of household net worth to GDP averaged over 1970 to 2013. Household net worth is taken
from Table B.100 Line 42.

16

an equilibrium we update it to a new guess that is closer to an equilibrium. We generate the new
guess of prices and aggregate quantities by making use of an auxiliary model that approximates
the aggregate behavior of the incomplete markets households and then solving for an equilibrium
under this approximating model. We perform this step using a version of Newton’s method. We
provide additional details of the computational methods in Appendix A.

4

Results

Our main result is that the power of forward guidance is substantially muted in the incomplete
markets model we present in Section 3 relative to the standard complete-markets New Keynesian
model. To illustrate this, we first consider a simple policy experiment: suppose the central bank
promises a 50 basis point (i.e., 2% annualized) decrease in the real interest rate for a single quarter
5 years in the future.14
Figure 3 plots the response of output to this shock in our incomplete markets model and, for
comparison, in the complete markets version of this model. As we discuss in section 2, the response
of output under complete markets is a step function: Output immediately jumps up by 25 basis
points and remains at that elevated level for 20 quarters before returning to steady state (recall
that the IES is 1/2). In contrast, in the incomplete markets model the initial increase in output is
only about 40% as large. Output then gradually rises as the interest rate decrease gets closer. But
even in the period right before the interest rate decrease, the increase in output is substantially
smaller than under complete markets.
There are two main reasons why the response of output is muted under incomplete markets.
First, households anticipate that with some probability they will face a sequence of idiosyncratic
shocks that leads them to hit the borrowing constraint over the next 20 quarters. Each future state
of the world in which they hit the borrowing constraint chops off a branch of their future event tree
when it comes to their current intertemporal optimization problem. The possibility of hitting the
borrowing constraint therefore shortens the households’ planning horizon and makes them respond
less strongly to opportunities to intertemporally substitute that are far in the future. Since the
probability that a household will hit the borrowing constraint grows the further they look into the
future, households respond less to far future changes in interest rates than to changes in interest
14

As in Section 2, we assume here that the monetary authority sets an exogenous path for the real interest rate.

17

Output

0.25

Percentage Points

0.2

0.15

0.1
Incomplete Markets
Complete Markets
0.05

0

−0.05
0

5

10

15

20
Quarter

25

30

35

40

Figure 3: Response of output to 50 basis point forward guidance about the real interest rate in
quarter 20 (with real interest rates in all other quarters unchanged).
rates that will occur sooner.
Second, households are loath to run down their assets for precautionary reasons. Suppose
a single household contemplates deviating from the path of consumption (and output) shown in
Figure 3 and instead consumes more before quarter 20 and less after quarter 20 so as to take
advantage of the opportunity for intertemporal substitution offered by the low future interest rate.
This deviation would require the household to run down its wealth, which is costly as it leaves
the household more exposed to future idiosyncratic shocks to income. At the equilibrium, such
a deviation is not desirable because the marginal benefits of taking advantage of the opportunity
for intertemporal substitution exactly equal the marginal cost of having a smaller buffer stock of
savings and being more exposed to idiosyncratic shocks.
Under complete markets, it poses no concern for households to run down their wealth, since they
are fully insured against all shocks. As a consequence they take full advantage of opportunities to
intertemporally substitute. Under incomplete markets, however, households face a trade-off due to
the precautionary benefits of maintaining a sizable buffer stock of assets. This precautionary motive
leads the incomplete markets household to choose a more conservative consumption response to
the change in the interest rate.
18

Another difference between the complete markets response and the incomplete markets response
in Figure 3 is that, after the interest rate change passes, output falls below steady state for some
time in the incomplete markets case. The reason for this is that the interest rate shock leads to
a redistribution of wealth away from households with high marginal propensities to consume and
towards households with low marginal propensities to consume (MPC). This wealth redistribution
lowers aggregate demand (and therefore output) for some time until the distribution of wealth has
had time to converge back to steady state.15
Figure 4 plots the response of inflation to this same shock. The five year output boom induced
by the forward guidance about real interest rates leads to a large inflation response in the complete
markets case. Since the output boom is much smaller in the incomplete markets model, the rise in
inflation is also much smaller. The initial response of inflation in the incomplete markets model is
again only about 40% as large as in the complete markets model.
Are these responses symmetric for interest rate increases versus decreases? Above, we consider
the response of the economy to a decrease in interest rates five years in the future. We get very
similar results if we instead consider an equally large increase in interest rates five years in the
future. The immediate effect on output is a drop of 12 basis points, while output rises by about 10
basis points in the case of a decrease (Figure 3). The immediate effect on inflation is a drop of 28
basis points, while inflation rises by about 30 basis points in the case of decrease (Figure 4).16

4.1

Dependence on Horizon of Forward Guidance

The difference between the complete and incomplete markets models grows with the horizon of the
interest rate shock. Figure 5 plots the initial response of output to 50 basis point forward guidance
about the real interest rate in a single quarter as the horizon of that single quarter changes from
15
There are two reasons why the interest rate shock leads to a redistribution towards households with low MPCs
(which tend to be the high productivity households). First, the fall in interest rates implies that the the government
needs less tax revenue in period 20 to pay the interest on the debt. Since the high productivity households pay the
tax, they benefit from this fall in taxes. If these same households owned all the assets, their asset income would fall
by an equal amount. The high productivity households own most of the assets but not all. So, on net, they benefit
from the fall in interest rates. Second, the boom in output that the fall in interest rates causes leads wages to rise
more than firm dividends. Since a larger fraction of the income of high productivity households is wage income, this
also disproportionately benefits the high productivity households.
16
It may seem puzzling that the absolute size of the output response is larger for the interest rate increase, but the
ranking is reversed for the inflation response. Both interest rate increases and decreases yield an increase in price
dispersion (because they both yield non-zero inflation). This implies that more labor is needed to produce the amount
of output demanded, which raises wages in both cases and pushes inflation up, reversing the relative rankings.

19

Inflation
0.8
0.7
Incomplete Markets
Complete Markets

0.6

Percentage Points

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
0

5

10

15

20
Quarter

25

30

35

40

Figure 4: Response of inflation to 50 basis point forward guidance about the real interest rate in
quarter 20 (with real interest rates in all other quarters unchanged).
one to 40 quarters.17
In the complete markets model, output always rises by 25 basis points, regardless of the horizon
of the forward guidance. In contrast, in the incomplete markets model, the effect is only about 20
basis points for an announcement about the real interest rate next quarter and falls monotonically
thereafter. It is roughly 10 basis points for an announcement about the real interest rate 5 years
ahead; and essentially zero for an announcement about the real interest rate 10 years ahead.
Intuitively, the probability of hitting a borrowing constraint before the interest rate change
occurs rises with the length of time until the interest rate change occurs. For this reason, the
benefit of responding falls. In addition, the cost of responding rises since the amount the household
would need to run down its assets to take full advantage of the opportunity to intertemporally
substitute gets larger and larger. Together, these forces imply that eventually the benefits from
intertemporal substitution are simply too small to make it worth it for households to incur the
costs associated with running down their buffer-stock savings.
The results for inflation are even starker. Figure 6 plots the initial response of inflation to
17

For example, the points at horizon 20 in Figure 5 are the first points on each line in Figure 3. And the points at
horizon 10 in Figure 5 are the initial response of output in the two models if the central bank announces that it will
lower the real interest rate by 50 basis points for a single quarter 10 quarters in the future.

20

Output

0.25

Percentage Points

0.2

Complete Markets
Incomplete Markets

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0

5

10

15
20
25
Horizon in Quarters

30

35

40

Figure 5: Initial response of output to 50 basis point forward guidance about the real interest rate
for a single quarter at different horizons.
forward guidance about the real interest rate at different horizons. In the complete markets model,
the response of inflation rises explosively with the horizon of the forward guidance.18 In the
incomplete markets model, in contrast, the inflation response is smaller to start out with, grows
more slowly, and therefore generates very different results at long horizons.

4.2

Results for Alternative Calibrations

Table 2 presents the results of the forward guidance experiment described above for our baseline
incomplete markets model as well as for several alternative calibrations of our incomplete markets
model. We also present the results for the the complete markets version of our model, for comparison. In each case, we present the initial response of output and inflation to 50 basis point forward
guidance about the real interest rate for a single quarter 5 years in the future.
18
There is a powerful feedback loop in our non-linear model. High inflation leads to an increase in price dispersion,
which results in loss of efficiency. Workers must then work harder to produce the output that households demand.
To induce workers to work more, wages must rise leading to more inflation. For small amounts of inflation these
forces are not important, but if inflation remains elevated for long enough these dynamics lead to a sharp enough
increase in wages and relative prices that the model solution can no longer be computed accurately. Interestingly,
inflation itself asymptotes to a finite value because, in the non-linear New Keynesian model, no matter how high the
current desired price of adjusting firms is, inflation can only asymptote to a certain level, because demand (and the
products weight in the price index) falls with the relative price of adjusting firms. See Ascari (2004) for a very related
discussion.

21

Inflation

0.8

0.7

Complete Markets
Incomplete Markets

Percentage Points

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Horizon in Quarters

Figure 6: Initial response of inflation to 50 basis point forward guidance about the real interest
rate for a single quarter at different horizons.
The High Risk calibration features greater uninsurable risk than our baseline calibration. We
roughly double the volatility of idiosyncratic productivity shocks relative to our baseline calibration,
allowing us to match recent evidence on the volatility of earnings growth from Guvenen, Ozkan,
and Song (2014). This boosts the precautionary savings motive and further reduces the power of
forward guidance relative to the complete markets benchmark. The response of output in this case
is only about 20% of the complete markets benchmark and the response of inflation only about
32% of the complete markets benchmark.
In the High Asset calibration, we set the ratio of assets to GDP in the model to be almost
three times higher than in our baseline calibration (3.79 versus 1.4). We do this to match the ratio
of total net worth in the economy to GDP (as opposed to total liquid assets as in our baseline
calibration). Increasing the quantity of available assets in the economy increases the size of the
precautionary savings buffers available to households and thus reduces their reluctance to engage
in intertemporal substitution. This change therefore moves the incomplete markets model closer
to the complete markets benchmark. The output response rises to 58% of the complete markets
benchmark, while the inflation effect rises to 49%.19
19

One might ask how adding unsecured debt would affect our results. We have considered a case in which the

22

Table 2: Power of 20 Quarter Ahead Forward Guidance
Initial Responses of
Output

Inflation

Baseline

10.3

29.8

High Risk

4.8

23.8

High Asset

14.5

36.2

High Risk and Asset

11.6

33.8

Complete Markets

25.0

74.3

Initial response of output and inflation (in basis points) to forward guidance that reduces the expected real interest rate 20 quarters ahead by 50
basis point for four different calibrations of our incomplete markets model.

We also consider a High Risk and Asset calibration with both of the above-mentioned alternative
parameter values. These two modifications largely offset each other. As a consequence, the results
lie between the two calibrations described above and close to the baseline calibration. The response
of output in this calibration is 46% of the complete markets benchmark, while the response of
inflation is 45% of the complete markets benchmark.
These alternative calibrations demonstrate that, with more risk and less self-insurance, the effects of precautionary savings and credit constraints become more pronounced. There are several
reasons to believe that our baseline calibration understates the importance of these forces. In our
baseline calibration, the fraction of agents that are constrained in steady state is 13% implying
that 87% of households have positive liquid assets. Kaplan, Violante, and Weidner (2014) present
estimates from the U.S. Survey of Consumer Finances that 75% of U.S. households have positive
liquid assets. On this metric, therefore, our baseline calibration understates the fraction of households with low liquid assets relative to the U.S. data. A related statistic is the average marginal
propensity to consume (MPC). In our baseline calibration the average MPC is only 12%, and even
in our High Risk calibration it rises only to 14%. In contrast, a substantial amount of empirical
amount of assets in the model is calibrated as in our baseline case but we relax the borrowing constraint by allowing
households to borrow up to five times average monthly labor income. Figure 2 of Kaplan, Violante, and Weidner
(2014) indicates that very few households have unsecured debt that is larger than five times monthly income. This
calibration yields results that are very similar to our baseline case (an initial output response of 10.9bp versus 10.3bp
in our baseline case).

23

evidence suggests larger values for the average MPC, with many studies estimating values close
to 20%.20 On the basis of these statistics, one might argue for calibrations in which households
are more credit constrained than in the calibrations we have considered. Such a calibration would
likely further amplify the effects we emphasize regarding the differences between the complete and
incomplete markets models.

4.3

Zero Lower Bound Analysis

In recent years, risk-free nominal interest rates around the world have hit zero. At the zero lower
bound (ZLB), forward guidance has become an indispensable policy tool, since it is no longer
possible to implement monetary policy via the current policy rate. Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003) show how a persistent shock to the natural interest rate that causes the economy to hit
the ZLB can provoke a massive recession if the central bank does not engage in unconventional
monetary policy. They show, however, that the recession can be fully abated by a relatively modest
amount of forward guidance about future interest rates.
Our conclusions above suggest that forward guidance may not be as powerful at the ZLB in our
incomplete markets model. To investigate this question, we follow Eggertsson and Woodford (2003)
in assuming that the ZLB is brought on by a temporary shock to the subjective discount factor of
households in the economy that depresses the natural rate of interest below zero. In other words,
we now consider a case were the discount factor can vary over time. The specific shock we consider
is an increase in the discount factor that lasts for a known number of quarters and then reverts to
normal.21 We choose the size and persistence of the shock so that the initial output decline is 4%
and the ZLB binds for 20 quarters under a naive monetary policy (described below).22
20

Parker (1999) estimates that household spend 20% of increases in disposable income when they hit the Social
Security tax cap. Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2006) estimate that households spent 20-40% of tax rebate checks
they received in 2001, and Parker et al. (2013) estimate that households spent 12-30% of tax rebate checks they
received in 2008. These studies as well as most others on this topic consider anticipated changes in income. They
therefore provide a lower bound for responses to unanticipated changes in income. See Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010)
for an excellent recent survey of the literature on the response of consumption to changes in income.
21
Our shock differs from the shock considered in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) in that its persistence is known,
implying that agents have perfect foresight about the evolution of the aggregate economy. Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003) consider a shock that reverts back to normal with constant probability each period. Clearly, both formulations
are approximations. Eggertsson and Woodford’s formulation abstracts from time-variation in the probability of the
ZLB period ending, while our framework abstracts from uncertainty about when it will end. However, the incomplete
markets model is more difficult to solve computationally without the assumption of perfect foresight for aggregate
shocks.
22
Hitting these targets requires slightly different calibrations of the discount factor shock in the complete versus
the incomplete markets model: it corresponds to a decline in the natural rate of 16.4 basis points in the incomplete
markets model, but only 14.8 basis points in the complete markets model. In each case, the duration of the shock is

24

Output
0.5
0
−0.5
Incom. Mkts. Naive
Incom. Mkts. Extended
Com. Mkts. Naive
Com. Mkts. Extended

Percentage Points

−1
−1.5
−2
−2.5
−3
−3.5
−4
0

5

10

15

20
Quarter

25

30

35

40

Figure 7: Response of output to the ZLB shock.
We consider two alternative monetary policies. First, we consider a policy where the central
bank sets the nominal interest rate equal to a simplified Taylor rule whenever this yields an interest
rate greater than zero, and, otherwise, sets the nominal rate to zero: it = max[0, r̄ + φπt ], where
φ = 1.5 and r̄ is the steady state real interest rate. We refer to this policy as the “naive” policy.
We also consider an “extended” policy whereby the central bank sets the nominal rate to zero for
several additional quarters beyond what is implied by the naive policy and then reverts back to the
policy rule. We choose the length of the additional monetary stimulus to fully eliminate the initial
fall in output in the complete markets model.
Figure 7 shows that forward guidance is substantially less powerful at the ZLB in the incomplete
markets model than in the standard New Keynesian model. The bottom two lines show the path
of output under the naive monetary policy for the complete and incomplete markets cases; while
the top two lines show the effects of the extended monetary policy in these two cases. While the
extended monetary policy fully eliminates the recession in the complete markets case, a substantial
recession remains in the incomplete markets model. Figure 8 shows the implications for inflation:
the extended policy is much more successful in preventing deflation in the complete markets model
33 quarters.

25

Inflation
0.5

0

Percentage Points

−0.5
Incom. Mkts. Naive
Incom. Mkts. Extended
Com. Mkts. Naive
Com. Mkts. Extended

−1

−1.5

−2

−2.5

−3

−3.5
0

5

10

15

20
Quarter

25

30

35

40

Figure 8: Response of inflation to the ZLB shock.
versus the incomplete markets model. While the initial deflation is only about 30 basis points in
the complete markets case, it is more than 100 basis points in the incomplete markets case. The
fact that inflation is lower in the incomplete markets case implies that real interest rates are higher
(since nominal rates are stuck at zero). This contributes to the larger fall in output.
Figure 9 plots the implications of the naive and extended monetary policies for the nominal
interest rate. Under the naive policy the ZLB binds for 20 quarters and then rises gradually to its
steady state value of 50 basis points. Under the extended policy, the nominal interest rate remains
at zero for 23 quarters (an additional 3 quarters), and interest rates are somewhat lower in quarter
24 than the naive policy implies (this partial stimulus in the 24th quarter is what is needed to
exactly eliminate the initial fall in output due to the shock). The difference between the dashed
and solid lines, thus, indicates the amount of additional stimulus provided by the extended policy.

5

Business Cycle Analysis

We have argued that market incompleteness affects the response of the economy to changes in real
interest rates especially when those changes occur in the future. As the real interest rate is an
important price in most macro models, we now explore how these effects of market incompleteness
26

Nominal Interest Rate
60

50

Basis Points

40

30

20

Incom. Mkts. Naive
Incom. Mkts. Extended
Com. Mkts. Naive
Com. Mkts. Extended

10

0
15

20

25
Quarter

30

35

Figure 9: Response of nominal interest rate to the ZLB shock.
alter the dynamics of the business cycle for a variety of alternative shocks. This analysis is related
to the influential work of Krusell and Smith (1998) who ask a related question in the context of
a flexible price economy. As we will show, their findings on the limited importance of market
incompleteness for aggregate dynamics do not carry over to our New Keynesian environment. We
also consider an empirically estimated specification of the monetary policy shock—which illustrates
that forward guidance is important even away from the zero lower bound.

5.1

An Extended Model for Business Cycle Analysis

We now extend our model to include a set of aggregate shocks and several features typically included
in monetary business cycle models. These features modify the Phillips curve and monetary policy
rule of the model to generate more empirically realistic responses to shocks. It is important to note,
however, that none of these modifications affect the response of consumers to a shock to the real
interest rate—hence, the results of the main experiment in section 4 for output are unchanged.
Specifically, we make the following four changes to the “supply side” of the model presented in
section 3. First, we follow Kimball (1995) in adopting a production function for final goods that
implies that the elasticity of demand for each intermediate good falls as the relative quantity used
27

of that intermediate good rises. This makes the pricing decisions of the intermediate goods firms
strategic complements. Second, we follow Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) in assuming
that intermediate goods prices that are not re-optimized in a particular period are indexed to
lagged inflation. This generates inflation inertia, which is needed to fit the empirical response of
inflation to monetary shocks. Third, we assume that the production function of intermediate goods
is subject to aggregate productivity shocks and therefore given by yj,t = At nj,t , where log At follows
an AR(1) process. Fourth, we assume that the production function for final goods is subject to
shocks that lead to variation in the elasticity of demand for each intermediate good even conditional
on the relative price of these goods. We refer to these shocks as “markup shocks” and assume that
they follow and AR(1) process.
Under these assumptions, we derive the following log-linearized Phillips curve


πt − πt−1 = βEt [πt+1 − πt ] + κξ Ŵt − Ât + µ̂t ,

(17)

where hats denote log deviations from steady state. The parameter κ = (θ(1 − β(1 − θ)))/(1 − θ)
governs the degree of nominal rigidity, while the parameter ξ = 1/(1 + µΩ/(µ − 1)) governs the
degree of “real rigidity” (i.e., strategic complementarity in price setting). The parameter Ω governs
the rate at which the elasticity of demand for a particular intermediate good changes with the
relative price of that good. See appendix B for a detailed derivation of equation (17).
The only change we make to the household’s problem relative to the model presented in section
3 is that we assume that households are affected by an aggregate shock to their time-preference.
Specifically, we assume that the discount rate between period t and t + 1 is β × exp{qt } where qt
follows an AR(1) process.
In earlier sections of the paper, we considered rather stylized representations of monetary shocks.
We did so for illustrative purposes. A natural question, though, is how incomplete markets affect
the response of the economy to the types of monetary shocks that have been estimated in the
literature. To answer this question, we now assume that the monetary authority varies the nominal
interest rates according to the following relatively standard feedback rule
it = ρi it−1 + (1 − ρi )(r̄ + φπt ) + t ,

(18)

where ρi is the degree of interest rate smoothing and t is a monetary policy shock that follows and
AR(1) process.
28

100

Model
Nakamura-Steinsson (2015)

90

80

Basis points

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Quarters

Figure 10: Response of the real interest rate to a monetary shock.
The calibration of the parameters of the monetary policy rule as well as the degree of real rigidity
is designed to match estimates of the response of real interest rates and inflation to monetary policy
shocks from Nakamura and Steinsson (2015). Specifically, the autocorrelation of the monetary
shocks t is set equal to its estimated value of 0.74 from Nakamura and Steinsson (2015). The
degree of interest rate smoothing is set to ρi = 0.954 to match the response of the real rate at
a 10-year horizon. We set the real rigidity parameter Ω equal to 56.5 to match the response of
inflation at a five-year horizon to a monetary shock estimated by Nakamura and Steinsson (2015).
As before, we set φ to 1.5. Figure 10 shows that this calibration does a good job of matching the
path of the response of the real interest rate to the monetary shocks identified by Nakamura and
Steinsson (2015). Finally, we set the autocorrelation of the productivity shocks to 0.95, and the
autocorrelation of the preference shocks and markup shocks to 0.8.

5.2

Two Methods for Analyzing Business Cycle Dynamics

There are well-known challenges involved in solving incomplete markets models in the presence of
aggregate uncertainty (Krusell and Smith, 1998). We now present two methods that can be used
to analyze our extended model. Both of the methods are premised on building an approximate
29

representation of household behavior that can be linearized and analyzed with standard techniques
for linear rational expectations models.
5.2.1

Linearizing the Full Model

First, we use the method proposed by Reiter (2009) to create a linear representation of the dynamics of the incomplete markets model. We approximate the distribution of wealth with a histogram.
The mass of households in each bin then becomes a state variable of the model. We also approximate the household decision rules with a discrete approximation (i.e. splines). In this way, the
model’s household block is represented with a large, but finite, number of variables and an equal
number of equations. These equations replace the Euler equation and the labor supply rule in the
representative agent model and we combine them with the other equations of the model such as
the Phillips curve and monetary policy rule. We then linearize the model with respect to aggregate
states, and solve for the dynamics of the economy as a perturbation around the stationary equilibrium without aggregate shocks using a standard linear rational expectations algorithm (Sims,
2002). The resulting solution is non-linear with respect to the idiosyncratic state variables, but
linear with respect to the aggregate states. Appendix A contains more details.
Since this method involves solving the aggregate dynamics using a perturbation approach, it
is easy to allow for many aggregate state variables. This implies that, using Reiter’s method, we
are able to extend the incomplete markets model to incorporate many of the features found in
workhorse monetary models (see also McKay and Reis, 2014).
This method has been shown to provide an accurate approximation to heterogeneous agent
models. We have verified that this algorithm yields a solution that is very similar to our fully nonlinear solution for the response to anticipated monetary shocks. In addition, appendix A presents
an error analysis based on Euler equation errors.
5.2.2

Discounted Euler Equation

We next develop a simpler version of our model that we refer to as the “discounted Euler equation
model,” which yields a single equation replacement for the standard consumption Euler equation.
This is a version of our main model in which idiosyncratic productivity is i.i.d. and takes one of
two values each period, which we refer to as employed (z = 1) and unemployed (z = 0). The only
30

income of the unemployed comes from home production in amount At m, where m is a parameter
that determines productivity at home. Furthermore, we assume that there are no assets available
(B = 0).23
We show in appendix C that under these assumptions we can derive the following log-linearized
consumption Euler equation24
Ĉt = αEt Ĉt+1 − γ −1 (it − Et πt+1 − rtn ).

(19)

This equation differs from the standard consumption Euler equation because of the parameter
α < 1. Solving this equation forward yields
Ĉt = −γ

−1

Et

∞
X

n
αj (it+j − Et+j πt+j+1 − rt+j
).

(20)

j=0

Notice that the effect of interest rates j periods in the future on current consumption is discounted
by a factor αj . For this reason, we refer to equation (19) as the “discounted Euler equation.” The
presence of α < 1 implies that far future interest rate changes have much smaller effects on current
consumption than near term interest rate changes.
In this version of the model, the unemployed households are liquidity constrained, while the
employed households are not. The presence of α in equation (19) results from the fact that with
some probability the currently employed households will be unemployed next period and next
period’s expected marginal utility is therefore partly determined by the exogenous marginal utility
in the unemployed state.25
In the incomplete markets model, the response of output to real interest rate changes differs
from the response for the complete markets model both because the response declines with the
horizon of forward guidance and also because the response to contemporaneous changes in the real
rate is smaller. The discounted Euler equation can match the first of these differences with an
23

Krusell, Mukoyama, and Smith (2011) and Ravn and Sterk (2013) have also used this approach to formulate
tractable incomplete markets models.
24
For simplicity, we present the discounted Euler equation for the case without technology shocks. Appendix C
extends the analysis to include those shocks.
25
Piergallini (2006) and Nistico (2012) provide an alternative micro-foundation for discounting in the Euler equation
based on mortality shocks as in Blanchard’s (1985) perpetual-youth model. In their formulation, discounting only
arises from aggregation over different generations, and to generate a quantitatively important deviation from the
standard Euler equation, these authors assume counter-factually high death rates. Our approach rationalizes why
long-lived consumers can have short planning horizons. Moreover, in Piergallini and Nistico’s formulation, the
discounting in the Euler equation is larger the larger is the amount of financial wealth in the economy and disappears
when financial wealth is in zero-net supply. In contrast, in our full model, agents discount the future more when they
have little liquid financial wealth to buffer shocks to income.

31

Discounted Euler Equation Model
Incomplete Markets
0.25

Percentage Points

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

−0.05
0

5

10

15
20
25
Horizon in Quarters

30

35

40

Figure 11: Response of output to a 50 basis point change in the expected real interest rate in
quarter 20 in the incomplete markets model and in the discounted Euler equation model.
appropriate value for α. To match the second of these differences we can change the value of the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution, 1/γ, in the discounted Euler equation.
Figure 11 shows that the discounted Euler equation with α = 0.97 and 1/γ = 3/8 provides
a good approximation to the response of output to a real interest rate shock 20 quarters in the
future in the baseline incomplete markets model analyzed in sections 3 and 4. The approximation is
nearly perfect up until the time that the interest rate changes. What the discounted Euler equation
misses is the fall in consumption after the interest rate shock. This fall is due to redistribution of
wealth in the incomplete markets model (from households with high MPCs to households with low
MPCs), which the discounted Euler equation does not capture.
In the discounted Euler equation model, the distribution of wealth is degenerate and the equilibrium conditions of the economy can be expressed using a small number of equations that can be
analyzed with standard linearization techniques. However, the discounted Euler equation model
does not incorporate distributional effects or the dynamics of the distribution of wealth. Nevertheless, we show below that the discounted Euler equation also provides a good approximation to the
full incomplete markets model for a range of standard business cycle shocks.

32

Output

2

Inflation

0

0

-0.05

-2
-0.1
-4
-0.15
-6

Incomp.
Comp.
Disc. Euler

-8
-10

0

10

20

30

-0.2
-0.25

40

Real rate

1

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

10

20

10

30

-0.2

40

20

30

40

30

40

Nominal rate

0.8

0.8

0

0

0

10

20

Figure 12: Impulse responses to a monetary shock.

5.3

Results

We first consider the response of the economy to the monetary shock estimated by Nakamura and
Steinsson (2015) and discussed above. Figure 12 plots the response of output, inflation, nominal
and real interest rates to this monetary shock for three models: (1) the incomplete markets model
described in section 5.1, (2) a complete markets version of that same model, and (3) a version of this
model where household behavior is governed by the discounted Euler equation. Under complete
markets, there is a large decline in output. A substantial part of this decline is driven by changes
in real interest rates several years in the future. As the incomplete markets model responds less
strongly to all changes in real interest rates and especially those at longer horizons, we find that
under incomplete markets the initial decline in output is only 60 percent as large as under complete
markets. The smaller decline in output translates into a smaller change in inflation. The figure also
shows that the discounted Euler equation model yields a good approximation to the full incomplete
markets model for this monetary shock.
Until now, we have focused on analyzing the response of the incomplete markets model to mon33

Table 3: Relative Volatility in Incomplete Markets Model
Output

Inflation

Monetary

Pref.

Markup

Tech.

Monetary

Pref.

Markup

Tech.

Baseline

0.62

0.78

0.64

1.21

0.86

0.79

1.35

1.08

Discounted Euler

0.61

0.69

0.62

1.28

0.92

0.92

1.38

1.00

–

–

0.92

0.97

–

–

–

–

Flexible prices

The table lists the standard deviation of output and inflation in the incomplete markets model as a fraction of
the same standard deviation in the corresponding complete markets model. The results in the first row are for the
incomplete markets model described in section 5.1, while the results in the second row are for a version of that model
where household behavior is governed by the discounted Euler equation. When prices are flexible, demand shocks
(monetary and preference) do not affect equilibrium output under complete markets although there are some small
effects in the incomplete markets that result from redistribution due to changes in real interest rates.

etary policy shocks. However, the arguments we have made apply to all shocks that yield variation
in real interest rates. To illustrate this, Table 3 compares the response of the incomplete markets model and the complete markets model to preference shocks, markup shocks, and technology
shocks, in addition to the monetary shocks we consider above. For a given shock, say a technology
shock, we simulate a time series for the shock and then compute the response of the incomplete
markets model as well as the response of the complete markets version of the model to this series of
shocks. We then report the standard deviation of output and inflation for the incomplete markets
model relative to the complete markets model. Since our approximate solutions are all linear in
the shocks, the scale of the shock is irrelevant to this calculation.
The results of these calculations are reported in the first row of Table 3. Just as one would
expect from Figure 12, the volatility of output that arises from monetary shocks is only 62% of
its level under complete markets and this implies that the volatility of inflation is only 86% of
its level under complete markets. We obtain similar results for the preference shock we consider.
Households in the incomplete markets model respond less strongly to changes in the discount rate—
recall that our preference shock is a shock to the discount rate—just as they respond less strongly
to changes in real interest rates. This implies that the volatility of output and inflation is smaller
under incomplete markets than complete markets in response to preference shocks.
Both monetary shocks and discount-rate shocks represent shocks to demand. The remaining
34

two shocks we consider are supply shocks. There are also considerable differences between the
incomplete and complete markets models in response to these shocks. Consider first the markup,
or “cost-push,” shock. The direct effect of this shock is to raise inflation. The central bank reacts to
this by raising real interest rates. In the incomplete markets model, the central bank’s efforts will
be less effective since households will react less strongly to the increase in interest rates. Output
will therefore react by less, and a larger share of the initial upward pressure on inflation will remain.
This is exactly what Table 3 shows.
In contrast to the other three shocks, when we consider technology shocks the volatility of
output is substantially larger under incomplete markets than under complete markets. This results
from the fact that the marginal propensity to consume extra income is substantially higher under
incomplete markets than complete markets. A positive technology shocks results in an increase in
household income. The demand of households in the incomplete markets model rises by more in
response to this rise in income, which raises wages and results in even higher income, amplifying
the response of output to the shock.
The large differences between the incomplete markets and complete markets models that we
document in Table 3 stand in stark contrast to the results of Krusell and Smith (1998). Krusell and
Smith compare the response of a complete markets and incomplete markets model to a productivity
shock and find that the difference is very small. While our model differs in several ways from theirs,
we now demonstrate that a crucial difference is that we incorporate nominal and real rigidities.
The last row of Table 3 presents results for a flexible price version of our model (we analyze only
markup and technology shocks here because monetary and preference shocks have no effect in the
complete markets model when prices are flexible).26 Specifically, we compare a flexible price version
of our incomplete markets model with a flexible price version of its complete markets counterpart.
In this case, the volatility of output is almost identical under incomplete markets and complete
markets.
The much larger difference between the complete and incomplete markets models in the sticky
price case has to do with the sluggish movements of real interest rates when prices are sticky. The
partial equilibrium response of output to both shocks to income and relative prices is quite different
26

Recall that there is no way for agents to save on aggregate in our model. For this reason, discount rate shocks have
no impact with flexible prices in the complete markets models. These shocks do affect prices and have distributional
consequences that lead to some small movements in quantities when markets are incomplete.

35

under incomplete markets than complete markets. When prices are flexible, these differences are
largely undone in general equilibrium by changes in real interest rates. These general equilibrium
responses of real interest rates are key to Krusell and Smith’s (1998) near equivalence result.
However, when prices are sticky, the behavior of real interest rates is governed by monetary policy.
If monetary policy follows a conventional Taylor-type rule and the response of inflation is small,
the response of real interest rates will be muted.
In the case of the productivity shock, the fact that agents in the incomplete markets model have
higher marginal propensities to consume out of increased income than under complete markets
implies that demand increases more in the incomplete markets model. If prices are sticky, this
increase in demand will translate into an increase in output. If, however, prices are flexible, real
interest rates will increase, putting downward pressure on aggregate consumption so that, in the
end, output responds almost identically to the complete markets model.
The second row of Table 3 shows that the discounted Euler equation model yields a reasonably
good approximation to the full incomplete markets for all four of the business cycle shocks that we
have considered. This is useful because it helps us develop intuition for these results. One way in
which the discounted Euler equation model differs from the full incomplete markets model is that it
does not incorporate redistributional effects. The fact that it yields such a good approximation to
the full incomplete markets model sheds some light on the (lack of) importance of redistributional
effects for our results.

6

Conclusion

We study the effects of forward guidance about monetary policy. We do this in a standard New
Keynesian model augmented with uninsurable income risk and borrowing constraints. Our main
finding is that allowing for uninsurable income risk and borrowing constraints substantially decreases the power of forward guidance relative to a New Keynesian model with complete markets.
In the standard New Keynesian model with complete markets, an announcement about interest
rates has the same effect on current consumption whether it pertains to the current short rate or
the short rate 5 years in the future. In contrast, when markets are incomplete the effect of such
an announcement on current consumption declines with with the horizon of the announcement.
Forward guidance about interest rates 5 years in the future has only about 40% as large an effect
36

on current consumption as in the complete markets case, while forward guidance about interest
rates 10 years in the future has essentially no effect on current consumption. Intuitively, in the
incomplete markets model, a precautionary savings effect counteracts the standard intertemporal
substitution motive.
We develop two approximations to our model that allow us to analyze it using standard methods
for solving linear rational expectations models. We then augment the model with several features
typically included in monetary business cycle models and analyze the response of this augmented
model to four different types of business cycle shocks. We show that the business cycle dynamics
in the incomplete markets model differ substantially from those in its complete markets counterpart. This result contrasts with the influential results of Krusell and Smith (1998). We show that
this arises as a consequence of the New Keynesian features we incorporate into the model, which
fundamentally change the determination of the real interest rate.

37

A
A.1

Computational Methods
Methods for Section 4

Here we describe the procedure used to find an equilibrium path of the heterogeneous agent model
along a perfect foresight transition for the zero-lower-bound episode considered in Section 4.3. The
algorithm used to compute the results for a one-time change in the real interest rate is closely
related to what we present here.
Writing the firm’s first order condition recursively.

For the numerical analysis it is conve-

nient to rewrite equation (7) recursively. Define
PtA
PtB

≡
≡

∞
X
s=t
∞
X

β

s−t

β

s−t

(1 − θ)

s−t

(1 − θ)

s−t

s=t





Pt
Ps

µ/(1−µ)

Pt
Ps

1/(1−µ)

Ys µWs

(21)

Ys .

(22)

then equation (7) becomes
p∗t
PA
= tB .
Pt
Pt

(23)

Equations (21) and (22) can be written recursively

Initial guess.

A
PtA = µWt Yt + (1 − θ)βEt (1 + πt+1 )−µ/(1−µ) Pt+1

(24)

B
PtB = Yt + β(1 − θ)Et (1 + πt+1 )−1/(1−µ) Pt+1
.

(25)

We assume that the economy has returned to steady state after T = 250 periods

and look for equilibrium values for endogenous variables between dates t = 0 to T . In this explanation of our methods we use variables without subscripts to represent sequences from 0 to T . Let X
denote a path for all endogenous aggregate variables from date 0 to date T. These variables include
aggregate quantities and prices
X ≡ {Ct , Lt , Nt , Yt , Dt , it , Wt , πt , rt , p∗t /Pt , St , τt , PtA , PtB }Tt=0 .
The dimension of X is given by 14 variables for each date and 251 dates. We require an initial
guess X 0 . In most cases we found it sufficient to guess that the economy remains in steady state.

38

Solving the household’s problem.

The household’s decision problem depends on X through

r, W , τ , and D. For a given X i we solve the household’s problem using the endogenous grid
point method (Carroll, 2006). We approximate the household consumption function c(b, z) with a
shape-preserving cubic spline with 200 unequally-spaced knot points for each value of z with more
knots placed at low asset levels where the consumption function exhibits more curvature. Given
the consumption function we calculate labor supply from the household’s intratemporal optimality
condition and savings from the budget constraint.
Simulating the population of households.

We simulate the population of households in order

to compute aggregate consumption and aggregate labor supply. We use a non-stochastic simulation
method. We approximate the distribution of wealth with a histogram with 1000 unequally-spaced
bins for each value of z again placing more bins at low asset levels. We then update the distribution
of wealth according to the household savings policies and the exogenous transitions across z. When
households choose levels of savings between the center of two bins, we allocate these households
to the adjacent bins in a way that preserves total savings. See Young (2010) for a description of
non-stochastic simulation in this manner.
Checking the equilibrium conditions.

An equilibrium value of X must satisfy equations

(4), (5), (9), (10), (11), (13), (15), (16), (23), (24), and (25) and the monetary policy rule it =
max[0, r̄ + φ ∗ πt + t ], where t is the exogenous deviation from the Taylor rule that takes a negative
value under our “extended” policy. Call these 12 equations the “analytical” equilibrium conditions.
The remaining two equilibrium conditions that pin down X are that C and L are consistent with
household optimization and the dynamics of the distribution of wealth given the prices. Call these
the “computational” equilibrium conditions.
To check whether a given X represents an equilibrium of the model is straightforward. We can
easily verify whether the analytical equilibrium conditions hold at X. In addition, we can solve the
household problem and simulate the population of households to verify that aggregated choices for
consumption and labor supply of the heterogeneous households match with the values of C and L
that appear in X.

39

Updating X i

The difficult part of the solution method arises when X i is not an equilibrium. In

this case we need to find a new guess X i+1 that moves us towards an equilibrium. To do this, we
construct an auxiliary model by replacing the computational equilibrium conditions with additional
analytical equilibrium conditions that approximate the behavior of the population of heterogeneous
households but are easier to analyze. Specifically we use the equations
−γ
Ct−γ = ηt1 β(1 + rt )Ct+1

(26)

Ct−γ Wt = ηt2 Lψ
t .

(27)

where η 1 and η 2 are treated as parameters of the auxiliary model. For a given X i , we have computed
C and L from the computational equilibrium conditions. We then calibrate η 1 and η 2 from (26)
and (27). We then solve for a new value of X from the 12 analytical equilibrium conditions and (26)
and (27). This is a problem of solving for 14 unknowns at each date from 14 non-linear equations
at each date for a total of 3514 unknowns and 3514 non-linear equations. We solve this system
using the method described by Juillard (1996) for computing perfect foresight transition paths for
non-linear models. This method is a variant of Newton’s method that exploits the sparsity of the
Jacobian matrix. Call this solution X i0 . We then form X i+1 by updating partially from X i towards
X i0 . We iterate until X i satisfies the equilibrium conditions within a tolerance of 5 × 10−6 .

A.2

Methods for Section 5

Solving for the household’s decision rules without aggregate shocks.

For each level of

idiosyncratic productivity, z, we solve for the asset level, b, at which the household chooses to
leave the period without savings, b0 = 0, and is therefore just on the threshold of being borrowing
constrained. Call this level of assets b(z). We create a grid of 100 unevenly spaced points with the
first grid point equal to b(z). We then solve for the household’s savings at each of these points.
Constructing the grid in this fashion allows for a more accurate solution because we know the
savings policy rule is constant at b0 = 0 for all b < b(z) and we do not interpolate across the
kink in the policy rule where the borrowing constraint stops binding. We also fix a grid of 100
points and solve for labor supply at each of these points. Between the grid points we interpolate
the savings and labor supply policies linearly. We solve for the household’s savings and labor
supply policies jointly using Broyden’s (1965) method by imposing that the Euler equation and
labor supply condition hold with equality at the grid points. Notice that the household policy rule
40

for savings is parameterized by 300 variables (three levels of z and 100 grid points for each) and
similarly the household labor supply policy rule is parameterized by another 300 variables.
Finding the stationary equilibrium.

This part of the algorithm is similar in spirit to Aiyagari

(1994). We assume the stationary equilibrium interest rate is 2 percent annually and we search for
the value of β for which this is an equilibrium. We find it also useful to guess values of equilibrium
output and dividends. So we search over values of β, Y , and D such that aggregate asset demand
by households matches the supply of government bonds, the labor market clears and the dividend
is equal to Y − W N . We perform this search using Broyden’s method. To simulate the stationary
distribution of wealth, we use non-stochastic simulation as described above.
Solving for aggregate dynamics

Here we follow Reiter (2009). Our non-stochastic simulation

algorithm tracks the distribution of wealth using a histogram. We consider the mass in each of
these bins to be a variable. We have three skill levels and 250 bins for each. In total there are 749
variables because the distribution must sum to one. For a given set of household policy rules, an
idiosyncratic shock process, and prices we can formulate an equal number of equations that dictate
how the distribution of wealth updates across these bins.
The 300 variables that parameterize the household savings policy and the 300 variables that
parameterize the household labor supply policy are unknowns that depend on the aggregate state.
As the aggregate state changes, we require that these variables satisfy the Euler equation and labor
supply first-order condition on the grids described above, which yields another 600 equations in
total.
Next we have a small number of aggregate variables and “aggregate” equations. The variables
are Y , L, C, π, W , i, R, τ and the four aggregate shocks. We then impose equations (4), (5),
R
(9), (13), (14), (17), (18), Ct ≡ ct (b, z)dΓt (b, z), and the four AR(1) stochastic processes for the
aggregate shocks. These are 12 additional equations and 12 additional variables.
At this stage, we have a large system of non-linear equations that the discretized model must
satisfy. We follow Reiter (2009) in linearizing this system around the stationary equilibrium using
automatic differentiation and then solving the linearized system as a linear rational expectations
model using the algorithm from Sims (2002). The results take the form of a VAR(1) representation
of the discretized model, but crucially, the solution is non-linear with respect to idiosyncratic states.
41

We use this linear system to compute impulse responses and simulate it to compute covariances of
aggregate quantities and prices.
Accuracy check: Euler equation errors.

In our calculations for Section 5 there are two

sources of errors both of which commonly arise in related algorithms. First, there are errors in the
household decision rules between the grid points. These errors are present even in the stationary
equilibrium. Away from the stationary equilibrium (the point around which we linearize) there
are errors due to non-linear responses to aggregate states as is the case with other applications
of perturbation methods. The procedure that follows assesses both of these types of errors by
using a finer grid and by checking the error in the non-linear equations away from the stationary
equilibrium.
To assess the accuracy of our solution, we calculate unit-free Euler equation errors.27 We use
a test grid over asset holdings that is finer than the grid on which we solve for household decision
rules.28 For a given state of the economy, Xt , the distribution of bond holdings at the start of the
period and exogenous variables are predetermined. In addition, the interest rate paid on current
bond holdings, rt−1 , is also predetermined.29 We then use the approximate model solution to
determine Wt , Rt , and the household savings and labor supply rules. We then use the non-linear,
static relationships, market clearing conditions, and budget constraints to determine τt , Lt , Nt ,
Yt , Dt , and the distribution of wealth at the start of the next period. In this step, all budget
constraints and market-clearing conditions are forced to hold.
From these calculations and a given set of aggregate shocks we can compute the next state of
the economy, Xt+1 , and repeat these calculations to find Wt+1 and so on. To compute expectations,
we use Gaussian quadrature over the four aggregate shocks using a grid that has seven nodes in
each dimension. For a household with particular idiosyncratic states, (b, z), we can compute the
level of consumption implied by the right-hand side of the Euler equation as



ĉt (b, z) ≡ β(1 + rt )Et ct+1 (b0 , z 0 )−γ

−γ

,

(28)

where the expectation is over aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks and b0 is computed using the
27

See Judd (1992) for an explanation of this accuracy check and the interpretation of the errors in terms of bounded
rationality.
28
Specifically, we use the same 250 point grid that we use to approximate the distribution of wealth.
29
In our calculations we track the distribution of the wealth at the start of the period when idiosyncratic shocks
have been realized but before interest has been paid.

42

approximate solution for the policy rule. The unit-free Euler equation error for a given type of
household is then ĉt (b, z)/ct (b, z) − 1, where ct (b, z) is the level of consumption implied by the
approximated decision rules.30 Using the steps above, we can compute the Euler equation error for
each type of household.
We can also assess the errors in household labor supply decision rules. Using the approximate
solution for the policy rules and the wage we can compute

1/ψ
n̂(b, z) ≡ W c(b, z)−γ
We can then compare this value to the approximate solution for the labor supply rule. We express
the error in this equation in unit-free terms as n̂(b, z)/n(b, z) − 1.
In order to assess the errors due to non-linearities we must take a stand on the magnitude of
the shocks hitting the economy. We target a standard deviation of log output of 0.0154, which is
the observed value for HP filtered data from 1960 to 2011. We assume that each shock accounts
for a quarter of the variance of log output.
The Euler equation and labor supply errors vary over the state space. We randomly draw points
in the state space by simulating the model for 100,000 periods and we compute the errors every
1,000 simulated periods. We describe the distribution of errors across the 100 resulting points by
reporting the largest absolute error and the mean absolute error for different types of households
as defined by assets and productivity. Figure A.1 plots the mean and maximum absolute errors
across the 100 aggregate states for both the Euler equation and the labor supply rule. The errors
rarely exceed 0.01 and are generally on the order of 0.001 or below. An error of 0.001, means that
a household following our approximate policy rule makes an error of $1 per $1,000 spent.

B
B.1

Model with Inflation Inertia and Real Rigidities
Final Goods Producers

Following Kimball (1995), we adopt a setup where the elasticity of demand for a particular intermediate good j by final goods producer falls as the relative quantity used of that intermediate good
30
We approximate the policy rules for savings as opposed to consumption so ct (b, z) is computed from the budget
constraint and depends on the approximate policy rule for labor supply and the market-clearing prices.

43

Mean abs. Euler errors

-3

Max. abs. Euler errors

-2

Log base 10

Log base 10

-2.2
-3.5

-4

-4.5

-2.4
-2.6
-2.8
-3
-3.2
-3.4

-5

0

10

20

-3.6

30

0

10

Assets
Mean abs. labor supply errors

-2.7

20

30

Assets
Max. abs. labor supply errors

-1.8
-1.9

Log base 10

Log base 10

-2.8
-2.9
-3
-3.1

-2
-2.1
-2.2
-2.3
-2.4
-2.5

-3.2

0

10

20

-2.6

30

0

Assets

10

20

30

Assets

Figure A.1: Mean and maximum Euler equation and labor supply equation errors (log base 10).
The mean and maximum are taken over 100 randomly selected points in the aggregate state space.
The three lines in each figure correspond to idiosyncratic productivities (dark = low-skill, dashed
= medium-skill, grey = high-skill). Assets are relative to average quarterly income.
rises. The final goods producer minimizes costs
1

Z

pj,t yj,t dj
0

subject to the implicit production function
Z

1


D

0

yj,t
Yt


dj = 1,

(29)

where following Dotsey and King (2005) we adopt the function form
D(x) =

µt
µt
[(1 + η)x − η]1/µt + 1 −
.
1+η
1+η

This function is increasing and strictly concave in x and satisfies D(1) = 1. Furthermore, with
η = 0 it reduces to the constant elasticity of substitution aggregator we use in section 3. Notice
that we allow µt to vary over time. We refer to variation in µt as markup shocks.
Cost minimization by final producers yields
"
#

yj,t
pj,t µt /(1−µt )
1
=
+η .
Yt
1+η
P̃t
44

(30)

where
Z

1

P̃t =
0

1/(1−µt )
pj,t
dj

1−µt
.

Starting from the definition of the price index, we can use equation (30) to see that
Z 1
pj,t yj,t
dj
1=
Pt Yt
0


pj,t Pt µt /(1−µt )
Z 1
+η
pj,t Pt P̃t
=
dj
1+η
0 Pt
 µt /(1−µt ) Z 1 

Z 1
pj,t
pj,t 1/(1−µt )
Pt
1
η
dj
=
dj +
1 + η P̃t
P
1
+
η
t
0 Pt
0
!1/(1−µt )
 µt /(1−µt )
Z 1
pj,t
1
Pt
P̃t
η
=
+
dj
1 + η P̃t
Pt
1 + η 0 Pt
Z 1
pj,t
η
1 P̃t
+
dj
=
1 + η Pt 1 + η 0 Pt
1
η
Pt =
P̃t +
P̄t ,
(31)
1+η
1+η
R1
where we have defined P̄t ≡ 0 pj,t dj. In other words, the price index is a convex combination of a
CES aggregator and a linear aggregator.

B.2

Intermediate Goods Producers

We assume prices that are not re-optimized are adjusted with lagged inflation. The evolution of
inflation can be defined in terms of the change in the CES and linear aggregators. The two price
aggregators evolve according to
P̃t
P̃t−1

!1/(1−µt )
=

(1 − θ)(1 + πt−1 )1/(1−µt )
 ∗ 1/(1−µt )
p
1 − θ P̃t

(32)

t

P̄t = (1 − θ)P̄t−1 (1 + πt−1 ) + θp∗t ,

(33)

where 1 + πt ≡ Pt /Pt−1 .
We assume the intermediate goods firm produces according to
yj,t = At nj,t

(34)

so real marginal cost is Mt = Wt /At , where Wt is the wage per efficiency unit of labor. The price
setting problem is then
max
∗
pt

∞
X

β s−t (1 − θ)s−t

s=t

45




p∗t Ps−1
− Ms yj,s
Ps Pt−1

where yj,s is given by

yj,s =

pj,t Ps−1
P̃s Pt−1

µt /(1−µt )

+η
Ys .

1+η

In the objective function, the term Ps−1 /Pt−1 reflects the indexation to lagged inflation. For the
sake of the algebra that follows we call this ratio Zs . The first order condition is


 ∗ µt /(1−µt )
 ∗ µt /(1−µt )−1
pt
pt




∞

+
η
Z
Z
∗
X
µt
1
1 
pt
P̃s s
P̃s s
s−t
s−t
β (1−θ) Ys
Zs
Z s − Ms
+
Zs = 0.

1+η
Ps
1 − µt
1+η
P̃s 
 Ps

s=t
Some manipulation of this equation yields
(
)
µt /(1−µt )
 ∗ µt /(1−µt )
∞
∞
X
X
p∗t
p∗t
pt
s−t
s−t
s−t
s−t
Zs
+ η(1 − µt ) =
Zs
β (1−θ) Ys Zs
β (1−θ) Ys Ms µt
Ps
P̃s
P̃s
s=t
s=t
To calculate the efficiency loss from price dispersion, combine the demand curve for intermediate
R1
products—equation (30)—the production function—equation (34)—and Nt ≡ 0 nj,t dj to arrive at
#
"Z 

1
pj,t µt /(1−µt )
1
At Nt =
dj + η Yt .
1+η 0
P̃t
Defining St ≡

R 1  pj,t µt /(1−µt )
0

P̃t

dj we have
At Nt =

1
[St + η] Yt
1+η

and St evolves according to

St = θ

B.3

p∗t
P̃t

µt /(1−µt )
+ (1 − θ)St−1 (1 + πt−1 )

µt /(1−µt )

P̃t−1
P̃t

!µt /(1−µt )
(35)

Log-Linearization

We use hats to denote log deviations. We log-linearize around a steady state in which P = P̃ =
P̄ = p∗ and π = 0. Log-linearizing (31), (32), and (33) yields
1 ˆ
η ˆ
P̃t +
P̄t
1+η
1+η
θ  ∗ ˆ
=
p̂ − P̃t + πt−1
1−θ t
θ  ∗ ˆ
=
p̂ − P̄t + πt−1 ,
1−θ t

P̂t =
P̃ˆt − P̃ˆt−1
P̄ˆt − P̄ˆt−1

46

(36)
(37)
(38)

where we have abused notation to write log(1 + πt−1 ) = πt−1 . Combining these yields
πt =


θ  ∗
p̂t − P̂t + πt−1
1−θ

(39)

(37)-(39) show that to a first-order approximation P̃t , P̄t , and Pt evolve in the same way.
Log-linearization of the firm’s price-setting first order condition yields
p̂∗t

= (1 − β(1 − θ))

∞
X

β

s−t

(1 − θ)

s−t



s=t

1 + (1 − µ)η
M̂s + µ̂t + P̂s − Ẑs
1+η


(40)

where we use the fact that in steady state µM = 1+(1−µ)η and the definition of Ẑs = P̂s−1 − P̂t−1 .
We also define


µ̂t = 

1+η+

µ2 η
(1−µ)2

1 + (1 − µ)η


 log



µt
µ


.

We can now rewrite this last expression recursively as



 

 
1 + (1 − µ)η
= (1 − β(1 − θ))
M̂t + µ̂t + P̂t + β(1 − θ) Et p̂∗t+1 − P̂t − P̂t−1
1+η
h

i
1 + (1 − µ)η
p̂∗t − P̂t = (1 − β(1 − θ))
M̂t + µ̂t + β(1 − θ)Et p̂∗t+1 − P̂t − P̂t − P̂t−1
1+η
h
i
1 + (1 − µ)η
M̂t + µ̂t + β(1 − θ)Et p̂∗t+1 − P̂t+1 + πt+1 − πt .
p̂∗t − P̂t = (1 − β(1 − θ))
1+η
p̂∗t

Combining this last expression with equation (39) yields
(πt − πt−1 ) =

θ(1 − β(1 − θ)) 1 + (1 − µ)η
M̂t + µ̂t + βEt [πt+1 − πt ] .
1−θ
1+η

(41)

If we define Ω = (µ − 1)η/(1 − (µ − 1)η), and notice that M̂t = Ŵt − Ât up to a first order
approximation, we have equation (17) in the text.
Just as in the standard case, there is no efficiency loss from price dispersion to a first-order
approximation. To see this, log-linearize (35)


µ  ∗ ˆ
µ 
ˆ
ˆ
Ŝt = θ
p̂ − P̃t + (1 − θ) Ŝt−1 +
πt−1 + P̃t−1 − P̃t
1−µ t
1−µ
and substitute for P̃ˆt−1 − P̃ˆt using (37) to arrive at
Ŝt = (1 − θ)Ŝt−1 .

47

C

A Simple Incomplete Markets Model

The discounted Euler equation (19) can be micro-founded with a simplified version of the model
we present in Section 3 in which:
1. The idiosyncratic productivity shock takes just two values, which we will call employed (z = 1)
and unemployed (z = 0).
2. Idiosyncratic productivity is i.i.d. across time: Pr(z 0 |z) = Pr(z 0 ).
3. The supply of government debt is zero: B = 0.
4. Unemployed agents have access to a home production technology that produces final goods
in amount At m.
5. Firm dividends Dt are distributed only to the employed households.
This version of our model is analytically tractable because there is no wealth in the economy and
there is a strict borrowing constraint, b0 ≥ 0. As the gross supply of assets is zero, there is no
possibility of saving in equilibrium and so the distribution of wealth remains degenerate at zero.
As individual assets are constant at zero, it follows that all households of a given employment
status must choose the same consumption. Let ce,t be the consumption of the employed and cu,t
be the consumption of the unemployed agents. Moreover, the absence of opportunities to borrow
and save implies that consumption must be equal to income for all individuals. The unemployed
will therefore consume mAt and the employed will consume
ce,t = Wt `t + Dt /(1 − u),
where `t is labor supply per employed household, Dt is per capita dividends paid by firms, and u
is the fraction of the population that is unemployed.
The Euler equation for employed agents is
h
i
−γ
−γ
qt
c−γ
e,t ≥ βe Rt Et (1 − u)ce,t+1 + u (mAt+1 )
and the Euler equation for an unemployed agent is
h
i
−γ
(mAt )−γ ≥ βeqt Rt Et (1 − u)c−γ
+
u
(mA
)
.
t+1
e,t+1
48

(42)

Notice that the right hand side of the Euler equation is independent of employment status as
employment is i.i.d. across time. Therefore, if mAt < ce,t the unemployed households must be
constrained and their Euler equation will not hold with equality. We assume that m is low enough
that mAt < ce,t for all t.31
Following Krusell, Mukoyama, and Smith (2011) and Ravn and Sterk (2013), we will focus on
the equilibrium of this economy in which the Euler equation of the employed holds with equality in
all periods. In this equilibrium, the employed households choose zero savings and are therefore up
against their constraint. But the constraint does not bind in the sense that they would not strictly
prefer to borrow more if allowed. There are other equilibria of this economy in which the Euler
equation for the employed household holds with inequality (implying that the employed households
would strictly prefer to borrow if allowed). We focus on the equilibrium in which the employed
households’ Euler equation holds with equality for the following reason. In the more realistic case in
which the supply of government debt is positive (B > 0) there is a unique equilibrium in which the
employed households’ Euler equation holds with equality. Consider a sequence of such economies
with smaller and smaller amounts of government debt. The equilibrium we focus on is the unique
equilibrium of the limiting economy for which the supply of government bonds goes to zero.32
We assume that home production is not measured as part of GDP. Therefore measured aggregate
consumption is
Ct = (1 − u)ce,t

(43)

and measured aggregate output is
Yt = (1 − u)At `t .
31

It is easy to relax the assumption that idiosyncratic productivity is i.i.d., however, with i.i.d. productivity it is
especially easy to see that the unemployed will be constrained if m is low enough.
32
Suppose the outstanding supply of government debt is positive (B = ε > 0). In this case, bond market clearing
requires some household to hold this debt at the prevailing interest rate (which is set by the monetary authority). This
household must be indifferent at the margin regarding how much they hold of the debt (i.e., their Euler equation must
hold with equality). If instead the Euler equation of all households held with strict inequality, no household would
want to hold the outstanding bonds. There would be excess supply of bonds and excess demand for consumption
goods. Since firms must meet demand at posted prices, they would produce more, which would increase income and
consumption and lead marginal utility of consumption to fall. This process would continue until the agents with the
lowest marginal utility of consumption—the employed agents—were willing to hold the bonds. Thus, for any positive
ε the Euler equation of the employed households will hold with equality in equilibrium and the equilibrium we focus
on is the limit of these equilibria as ε goes to zero.

49

From the budget constraint of the employed we have Ct = Yt . Substituting into the employed Euler
equation we have


(Ct /(1 − u))−γ = βeqt Rt Et (1 − u)(Ct+1 /(1 − u))−γ + u (mAt+1 )−γ

(44)

Log-linearizing this equation and using the Fisher equation yields
i
i
h
h
1
Ĉt = − [it − Eπt+1 − rtn ] + αE Ĉt+1 + (1 − α)E Ât+1 ,
γ

(45)

where
α≡

1
u
1−u

1+


c̄e γ ,
mĀ

rtn ≡ −qt ,

(46)
(47)

and bars denote steady state values and hats denote log deviations from steady state. Notice that
α is decreasing in the probability of becoming unemployed, u, and the consumption impact of
unemployment, c̄e /(Ām).
The labor supply condition for the employed is
ψ
c−γ
e,t Wt = `t .

Using the fact that aggregate labor supply is Lt = (1 − u)`t and aggregate consumption is given by
equation (43), this last expression can be rewritten as
(1 − u)γ+ψ Ct−γ Wt = Lψ
t .
Log-linearizing this equation and using Ct = Yt and Lt = Yt /At yields
Ŵt = (ψ + γ)Ŷt − (ψ + 1)Ât .
Finally, market incompleteness does not change the relationship between inflation and marginal
cost so we can write the Phillips curve as
h
i
πt − πt−1 = βEt [πt+1 − πt ] + κξ (ψ + γ)Ŷt − (ψ + 1)Ât + µ̂t ,

(48)

Figure 11 shows that α = 0.97 and 1/γ = 3/8 provides a close fit to the response of the incomplete
markets model in the 20-quarter-ahead forward guidance experiment. As our focus is on the Euler
equation, we recalibrate ψ and Ω, which determines ξ, so the coefficients on Ŷ and Â in the Phillips
curve are unaffected when we change γ. This requires ψ = 4 and Ω = 94.4.
50

1.2

1

Percentage Points

0.8

0.6

General Eqm.
Partial Eqm.
0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Horizon in Quarters

Figure A.2: General and partial equilibrium response to a one percentage point reduction in real
interest rates in period 20 with a unit intertemporal elasticity of substitution.

51

References
Aiyagari, S. R. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 109(3), 659–684.
Ascari, G. (2004): “Staggered Prices and Trend Inflation: Some Nuisances,” Review of Economic
Dynamics, 7, 642–667.
Bewley, T. (undated): Interest Bearing Money and the Equilibrium Stock of Capital. Manuscript.
Blanchard, O. J. (1985): “Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons,” Journal of Political Economy,
93(2), 223–247.
Broyden, C. G. (1965): “A Class of Methods for Solving Nonlinear Simultaneous Equations,”
Mathematics of Computation, 19(92), pp. 577–593.
Caballero, R., and E. Farhi (2014): “The Safety Trap,” Working Paper, MIT.
Calvo, G. A. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 12, 383–398.
Campbell, J. R., C. L. Evans, J. D. Fisher, and A. Justiniano (2012): “Macroeconomic
Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2012(1),
1–80.
Carlstrom, C. T., T. S. Fuerst, and M. Paustian (2012): “Inflation and Output in New
Keynesian Model a Transient Interest Rate Peg,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Carroll, C. D. (2006): “The Method of Endogenous Gridpoints for Solving Dynamic Stochastic
Optimization Problems.,” Economics Letters, 91(3), 312 – 320.
Chetty, R. (2012): “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro
and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 80(3), 969–1018.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011): “When Is the Government Spending
Multiplier Large?,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), 78–121.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 115, 1–45.
Del Negro, M., M. Giannoni, and C. Patterson (2013): “The Forward Guidance Puzzle,”
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Dotsey, M., and R. G. King (2005): “Implications of State-dependent Pricing for Dynamic
Macroeconomic Models,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 213–242.
Eggertsson, G. B., and M. Woodford (2003): “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003(1), 139–211.
Floden, M., and J. Lindé (2001): “Idiosyncratic Risk in the United States and Sweden: Is There
a Role for Government Insurance?,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 4(2), 406–437.
Gali, J. (2008): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
Gornemann, N., K. Kuester, and M. Nakajima (2014): “Doves for the Rich, Hawks for the
52

Poor? Distributional Consequences of Monetary Policy,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia.
Guerrieri, V., and G. Lorenzoni (2011): “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liquidity Trap,” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Gurkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. T. Swanson (2005): “Do Actions Speak Louder Than
Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,” International
Journal of Central Banking, 1, 55–93.
Guvenen, F., S. Ozkan, and J. Song (2014): “The Nature of Countercyclical Income Risk,”
Journal of Political Economy, 122(3), pp. 621–660.
Huggett, M. (1993): “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance
Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5-6), 953–969.
Jappelli, T., and L. Pistaferri (2010): “The Consumption Response to Income Changes,”
Annual Review of Economics, 2, 479–506.
Johnson, D. S., J. A. Parker, and N. S. Souleles (2006): “Household Expenditure and the
Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, 96(5), 1589–1610.
Judd, K. L. (1992): “Projection methods for solving aggregate growth models,” Journal of Economic Theory, 58(2), 410–452.
Juillard, M. (1996): Dynare: A program for the resolution and simulation of dynamic models
with forward variables through the use of a relaxation algorithm, vol. 9602. CEPREMAP Paris.
Kaplan, G., and G. Violante (2014): “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica, 82(4), 1199–1239.
Kaplan, G., G. L. Violante, and J. Weidner (2014): “The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2014(Spring), 77–138.
Kiley, M. T. (2014): “Policy Paradoxes in the New Keynesian Model,” Finance and Economics
Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board.
Kimball, M. (1995): “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, 27(4), 1241–1277.
Kopecky, K. A., and R. M. Suen (2010): “Finite state Markov-chain approximations to highly
persistent processes,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(3), 701 – 714.
Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama, and A. A. Smith (2011): “Asset Prices in a Huggett Economy,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 146(3), 812–844.
Krusell, P., and A. A. Smith (1998): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,”
Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867–896.
McKay, A., and R. Reis (2014): “The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the US Business Cycle,”
Working Paper, Boston University.
Nakamura, E., and J. Steinsson (2015): “High Frequency Identification of Monetary NonNeutrality,” Working Paper, Columbia University.
Nistico, S. (2012): “Monetary Policy and Stock-Price Dynamics in a DSGE Framework,” Journal
of Macroeconomics, 34, 126–146.
53

Oh, H., and R. Reis (2012): “Targeted transfers and the fiscal response to the great recession,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(S), S50–S64.
Parker, J., N. Souleles, D. Johnson, and R. McClelland (2013): “Consumer Spending
and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,” American Economic Review, 103(6), 2530–53.
Parker, J. A. (1999): “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in Social
Security Taxes,” The American Economic Review, 89(4), pp. 959–973.
Piergallini, A. (2006): “Real Balance Effects and Monetary Policy,” Economic Inquiry, 44(3),
497–511.
Ravn, M., and V. Sterk (2013): “Job Uncertainty and Deep Recessions,” UCL Working Paper.
Reiter, M. (2009): “Solving Heterogeneous-agent Models by Projection and Perturbation,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 33(3), 649–665.
Rouwenhorst, K. G. (1995): “Asset pricing implications of equilibrium business cycle models,”
in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, ed. by T. F. Cooley, pp. 294–330, Princeton, N.J.
Princeton University Press.
Sims, C. A. (2002): “Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models,” Computational Economics,
20(1-2), 1–20.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A Bayesian
DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606.
Werning, I. (2012): “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Working Paper,
MIT.
Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Young, E. R. (2010): “Solving the Incomplete Markets Model with Aggregate Uncertainty using
the Krusell-Smith Algorithm and Non-Stochastic Simulations,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 34(1), 36 – 41.

54

