                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE IMPACT OF UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFIT EXTENSIONS ON EMPLOYMENT:
                    THE 2014 EMPLOYMENT MIRACLE?

                                      Marcus Hagedorn
                                      Iourii Manovskii
                                        Kurt Mitman

                                     Working Paper 20884
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w20884


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2015




We thank seminar participants at the Bundesbank, Census Bureau, CFS at Goethe University,
CUNY Graduate Center, ECB, Edinburgh, EIEF, Greater Stockholm Macro Group, IIES,
Maryland, Toulouse, University of Oslo, UCL, UConn, Wisconsin, 2015 NBER Summer Institute
Macro Perspectives Group, 2015 Society of Economic Dynamics, the 2015 International
Conference on Labor Markets in/after Crises and the 11th Joint ECB/CEPR Labour
MarketWorkshop \Job creation after the crisis" for helpful comments. Support from the National
Science Foundation Grant Nos. SES-0922406 and SES-1357903 is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Marcus Hagedorn, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Unemployment Benefit Extensions on Employment: The 2014 Employment
Miracle?
Marcus Hagedorn, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman
NBER Working Paper No. 20884
January 2015, Revised May 2016
JEL No. E24,J63,J64,J65

                                          ABSTRACT

We measure the aggregate effect of unemployment benefit duration on employment and the labor
force. We exploit the variation induced by Congress' failure in December 2013 to reauthorize the
unprecedented benefit extensions introduced during the Great Recession. Federal benefit
extensions that ranged from 0 to 47 weeks across U.S. states were abruptly cut to zero. To
achieve identification we use the fact that this policy change was exogenous to cross-sectional
differences across U.S. states and we exploit a policy discontinuity at state borders. Our baseline
estimates reveal that a 1% drop in benefit duration leads to a statistically significant increase of
employment by 0.019 log points. In levels, 2.1 million individuals secured employment in 2014
due to the benefit cut. More than 1.1 million of these workers would not have participated in the
labor market had benefit extensions been reauthorized.



Marcus Hagedorn                              Kurt Mitman
Department of Economics,                     Institute for International Economic Studies
University of Oslo,                          Stockholm University
Box 1095 Blindern,                           106 91 Stockholm
0317 Oslo, Norway                            SWEDEN
marcus.hagedorn@econ.uio.no                  kurt.mitman@iies.su.se

Iourii Manovskii
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
manovski@econ.upenn.edu
1     Introduction
Our objective in this paper is to assess the impacts of unemployment benefit extensions
on the labor force and employment. Measuring the magnitude of these effects is manifestly
important for understanding the economic consequences of this widely used policy instrument.
Yet, the existing literature provides little information on the size, let alone the sign of these
effects. In the theoretical literature the effect of benefit extensions on employment is generally
ambiguous. Basic decision theory suggests that some unemployed may increase their search
effort in response to a cut in benefits, while others, who were mainly searching to qualify for
benefits, might drop out of the labor force once losing eligibility, leading to offsetting effects
on employment. Equilibrium job search theory typically implies a positive effect of a cut in
benefit duration on job creation. This makes it easier for the unemployed to find jobs and might
induce those previously out-of-labor force to rejoin the labor force, leading to an increase in
employment with an ambiguous effect on unemployment since the number of job vacancies
and the number of searchers increases at the same time. The empirical micro literature has
focused almost exclusively on measuring the effects of benefit eligibility on the search effort of
unemployed workers – a focus that is too narrow to infer the total impact of benefit duration
on employment. The estimates in the quantitative macro literature vary widely depending
on the value of parameters which are notoriously difficult to identify. Moreover, the literature
generally ignores the effect of policies on participation decisions of those out-of-the-labor force,
which limits their ability to measure the total effect on employment. Indeed, in the data the
flow from non-participation into employment accounts for over 60% of all transitions into
employment.
    We propose to sidestep these difficulties by directly measuring the employment and labor
force impacts of a large nationwide cut in benefit duration in December 2013. The attractive
feature of this quasi-natural experiment is that its effects can be measured using standard
empirical techniques that do not require imposing assumptions of a particular labor market
model on the data. Specifically, we measure the impact of the December 2013 decision by
Congress to terminate the Emergency Unemployment Compensation Act of 2008 (EUC08)
which abruptly lowered benefit duration in all states to their regular duration of typically
26 weeks. This decision terminated an unprecedented extension of unemployment benefit


                                                 1
durations adopted by policymakers following the onset of the Great Recession. While benefit
durations began declining in some of the states starting in 2011, even by the end of 2013, right
before the reform and long after the recession had ended, the average benefit duration across
U.S. states stood at 53 weeks.
   The decision to eliminate benefit extensions at the end of 2013 was quite controversial.
Summarizing the conventional wisdom at the time, the Council of Economic Advisers and the
Department of Labor (2013) predicted that 240,000 jobs would be lost in 2014 because of the
negative impact on aggregate demand. Many economists voiced a concern, first articulated in
Solon (1979), that without access to benefits unemployed workers will stop searching for jobs
and will exit the labor force instead.
   However, the U.S. labor market performance in 2014 surprised many observers (though
not all, see e.g. Mulligan (2015)). Figure A-1 in the Appendix reports some basic aggregate
statistics. Average employment growth was about 25% higher in 2014 than in the best of
several preceding years. The employment-to-population ratio rose. The unemployment rate
declined sharply. In contrast to typical predictions, the labor force participation rate suddenly
halted its steady secular decline. The number of job vacancies that employers were trying to
fill increased sharply.
   At the national level, however, it is difficult to ascertain the extent to which these aggregate
labor market developments were induced by the elimination of unemployment benefit exten-
sions. The fact that aggregate productivity growth was slower in 2014 than in the preceding
years eliminates the most prominent alternative explanation. While that can help explain the
low observed wage growth in 2014, it cannot reconcile the low wage growth with the otherwise
booming labor market. However, based on aggregate data alone, it appears difficult to rule
out the possibility that some other aggregate shocks (coincidental with the decline in benefit
duration) suddenly spurred the decisions of firms to create job vacancies and of jobless workers
to accept them.
   To overcome this difficulty, we take a different route in this paper. In particular, we exploit
the fact that, at the end of 2013, federal unemployment benefit extensions available to workers
ranged from 0 to 47 weeks across U.S. states. As the decision to abruptly eliminate all federal
extensions applied to all states, it was exogenous to economic conditions of individual states.
In particular, states did not choose to cut benefits based on, e.g. their employment in 2013

                                                2
or expected employment growth in 2014. This allows us to exploit the vast heterogeneity
of the decline in benefit duration across states to identify the labor market implication of
unemployment benefit extensions. Note, however, that the benefit durations prior to the cut,
and, consequently, the magnitudes of the cut, likely depended on economic conditions in
individual states. Thus, the key challenge to measuring the effect of the cut in benefit durations
on employment and the labor force is the inference on labor market trends that various
locations would have experienced without a cut in benefits. Much of the analysis in the paper
is devoted to the modeling and measurement of these trends. However, to immediately reduce
the importance of heterogenity of underlying employment trends, we focus the analysis on
comparisons of labor force and employment dynamics between counties that border each
other but belong to different states and thus experience different changes in benefit durations.
This is helpful because, as we explain below, underlying economic fundamentals are expected
to evolve more similarly across counties bordering each other than across states or randomly
paired counties.
   After describing the institutional features of the U.S. unemployment insurance system
and the details of the policy change in December 2013, in Section 2 we provide a very basic
description of patterns in the data. We find that employment growth was much higher in
2014 in the border counties that experienced a larger decline in benefit durations relative to
the adjacent counties. What makes this finding even more striking is that year after year
prior to 2014 the relative employment growth was lower in the high benefit counties. The
abrupt reversal in the relative employment growth trend of border counties belonging to
high benefit states in December 2013, right at the time when the benefit durations were cut,
strongly suggests that our analysis indeed identifies the implications of this particular policy
change. There were no other policy changes at the turn of 2014 that could have differentially
affected states depending on their pre-reform benefit duration and had significant labor market
implications.
   The primary focus of the formal analysis in the paper is on measuring the counterfactual
trends in labor force and employment that border counties would have experienced without
a cut in benefits. We build on two distinct methodologies in the literature for doing so. The
methodologies differ primarily in whether the post-reform observations are used for measuring
the counterfactual employment trends. The more common approach in the macro and labor

                                                3
literature is to use both pre- and post-reform information. We develop the associated econo-
metric methodology for formally measuring the effects of unemployment benefit extensions in
Section 3. Specifically, we consider three models of county-specific trends that differ in their
flexibility and the ease of interpretation. The first one is the workhorse in the literature due
to its parsimony and its reliance on easily interpretable variables. It allows for permanent
(over the estimation window) differences in employment across border counties which could
be induced by the differences in other policies (e.g., taxes or regulations) between the states
these counties belong to. Moreover, employment in each county is allowed to follow a distinct
deterministic time trend. The model also includes aggregate time effects and controls for the
effects of unemployment benefit durations in the pre-reform period.
   The second and third models are motivated by the economics underlying the existence of
potentially heterogeneous trends across border counties. Specifically, these trends reflect the
systematic response of underlying economic conditions across counties with different benefit
durations to various aggregate shocks and the heterogeneity is induced by differential exposure
of counties to these aggregate disturbances. For example, Holmes (1998) argued that border
counties may differ in the share of manufacturing industry employment, due to different state
right-to-work laws. In this case, aggregate shocks affecting the relative productivity of manu-
facturing industry will have a different impact on the employment in the two border counties.
Similarly, foreclosure laws differ across states, implying that aggregate shocks to house prices
have a different impact on the construction industry, and, say, demand for goods and services
in the two border counties. This may also induce different trends in employment in the two
border counties. Thus, there are numerous aggregate shocks that potentially induce different
trends across border county pairs.
   Motivated by this theory of trend heterogeneity, in the second model we extend the original
specification to also include various measurable aggregate factors (e.g., oil prices, construc-
tion employment, etc.) and estimate county-specific loadings on these factors to capture the
heterogeneous exposure of counties to these observed aggregate variables. While this specifica-
tion remains very transparent, the ability of the model to identify the correct counterfactual
trends depends on the selection of the appropriate aggregate factors. We bypass the need
to select individual aggregate factors in the third model, although at the cost of losing in-
terpretability of the aggregate factors. Specifically, we use a very flexible interactive effects

                                               4
specification of the county-specific trends developed in Bai (2009). The interactive effects es-
timator simultaneously identifies the important unobserved aggregate factors and measures
their heterogeneous impacts through county-specific factor loadings. Note that because factors
and loadings are simultaneously estimated, measuring of the counterfactual trends following
the reform necessitates the use of the post-reform data.
   The second methodological approach that we develop in Section 6 builds on the event
study methodology. In this approach the employment and labor force trends across counties
are estimated based on the pre-event (cut in benefit duration) information only. The estimates
are used to predict the evolution of the relevant labor market variables in the absence of the
unexpected cut in benefits. A comparison of the predicted values of these variables to the
actually observed ones following the benefit cut reveals the effect of the change in policy.
Using only the pre-event window for estimation minimizes the effect of the event itself on the
estimated trends.
   The results of the empirical analysis based on these two methodologies are presented and
discussed in Sections 4 and 6, respectively. While there is clear variation across the four
approaches we use to estimate the counterfactual employment trends across counties, overall
the results are quite consistent. This happens because counterfactual employment trends in
the labor force and in employment estimated using the four approaches we consider are fairly
similar, and capture quite well the small differences in employment growth of neighboring
counties. This allows us to conclude that, conditional on these trends, the common trend
assumption is satisfied. We can therefore obtain consistent estimates of the effects of the
cut in benefit durations on labor force and employment. All four specifications imply that
changes in unemployment benefit duration have a large and statistically significant effect on
employment: a 1 percent drop in benefit duration increases employment by 0.0144 to 0.0233
log points across specifications. Importantly, we also find that more than half of the increase
in employment attributed to the cut in benefits was due to an increase in the labor force.
Our analysis thus implies that, not only did the unemployed not drop out of the labor force
because of losing entitlement to benefits, but instead those previously not participating in the
labor market decided to enter the labor force. These effects are not unexpected in light of
equilibrium labor market theory which implies an increase in job creation in response to a cut
in benefit duration. The increased availability of jobs than draws non-participants into the

                                               5
labor market.1
       These estimates are based on the differential response of the labor force and employment
between bordering counties to changes in benefit duration. To the extent that economic ac-
tivity reallocates in response to differences in benefit durations across counties, the effects of
such a reallocation are reflected by our estimates. It would be desirable, however, to be able
to aggregate these estimates to obtain the effect of the nation-wide change in benefit duration
that precludes the possibility of reallocation of economic activity. To this end, we document
that individuals do not change the location of employment in response to changes in benefits.
In addition, we do not find any differential impact of benefit duration changes on employment
shares of tradeable and non-tradeable sectors. Using a simple trade model with frictional labor
markets, we show that these observations allow us to aggregate county-level elasticities to the
nation-wide one. Empirically, we find that our estimates imply that the cut in benefit duration
accounted for between 50 and 80 percent of aggregate employment growth in 2014.
       As follows from the discussion above, to help guide economic theory, the joint evolution of
employment and labor force in response to unemployment benefit duration changes is most
informative. The only data source in the U.S. that contains both measures at the county-
level at a reasonably high frequency is the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS).
Conveniently for our purposes, both variables are also consistently defined and represent the
counts of individuals in different employment states at each point in time. A complementary
data set that is often used to measure county-level job counts covered by the unemployment
insurance system is the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW). In Section 5,
we repeat the entire analysis using QCEW data. We find that across all four specifications
that we consider, changes in unemployment benefits have a large and statistically significant
effect on job counts: a 1 percent drop in benefit duration increases the number of jobs by 0.010
to 0.0236 log points. The point estimates for the increase in the number of jobs is somewhat
smaller than the estimate of the effect on employment. This might indicate that a cut in
benefits leads to an increase in the number of full-time jobs at the expense of part-time jobs.2
   1
      The theoretical prediction that an increase in job availability draws non-participants into the labor market
is the standard one in the literature. See Pissarides (2000) Ch. 7 for a textbook treatment and Krusell et al.
(2015) for a modern quantitative evaluation and additional references.
    2
      This happens because QCEW counts the number of jobs while LAUS counts the number of individuals
who have at least one job. Thus, for example, if a worker holding two part-time jobs secures a single full-time
job, the QCEW job count would decline by one while LAUS employment would not be affected.


                                                        6
This is not the only possibility, however, since the covered population also differs across the
two data sets.
        The only other paper to provide a direct estimate of the total impact of unemployment
benefit extensions on employment is Hagedorn et al. (2013). The objective of that paper
was to measure the effects of benefits on unemployment in a way that is consistent with
the standard equilibrium labor search model and to assess whether the model provides a
coherent rationalization of the joint evolution of various labor market variables in response to
unemployment benefit extensions. That paper exploits multiple changes in benefits over time
and space which necessitates the development of a novel structural measurement methodology
that controls for agents’ expectations regarding future policy changes that is consistent with
the theoretical model. Our focus in this paper is instead on the measurement of the effects of a
one-time permanent change in unemployment benefit extensions on employment. We exploit
the variation induced by the policy reform that lends itself to the analysis using the standard
tools developed by labor economists. This allows us to conduct the measurement without
imposing any theoretical restrictions of a particular labor market model. Nevertheless, we
compare the results in the two papers below and find that they imply a quantitatively similar
negative impact of benefit extensions on employment. In addition, Mulligan (2015) computes
the employment effect of the policy reform based on his measure of the change in implicit
marginal tax rates on work associated with the reform and obtains a very similar aggregate
employment impact to the one we find. Johnston and Mas (2015) study a similar, albeit
smaller, policy reform and find a significant positive employment impact of the abrupt cut of
benefit duration in Missouri in 2011. While our estimates based on the nation-wide reform
have the same sign, they are two to three times smaller in magnitude than theirs.


2         Data and the Unemployment Insurance Reform

2.1         Policy Environment

Prior to the onset of the Great Recession, unemployed workers in most states qualified for 26
weeks of unemployment compensation paid by the state in which the lost job was located.3 In
    3
        Note that benefit eligibility is based on the location of employment, not the residence of the worker.



                                                          7
response to the deterioration of labor market conditions, the federal Emergency Unemploy-
ment Compensation (EUC08) program was enacted in June 2008. The program started by
allowing for an extra 13 weeks of benefits to all states and was gradually expanded to have 4
tiers, providing potentially 53 weeks of federally financed additional benefits. The availability
of each tier was dependent on state unemployment rates. The EUC08 program was not orig-
inally envisioned to last for many years, but was periodically reauthorized by Congress. The
last annual reauthorization took place in December 2012.
       In addition, the Extended Benefits (EB) program allows for 13 or 20 weeks of extra benefits
in states with elevated unemployment rates. The EB program is a joint state and federal
program. The federal government pays for half of the cost, and determines a set of “triggers,”
related to the state insured and total unemployment rates, that the states can adopt to qualify
for extended benefits. At the onset of the recession, many states chose to opt out of the program
or only adopt high triggers. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 turned this
into a federally funded program. Following this, many states joined the program and several
states adopted lower triggers to qualify for the program. Most states wrote their legislation
implementing their EB program in a way that provided for their participation only as long as
federal government paid for 100 percent of the cost. The provision for federal financing of the
EB program was reauthorized together with reauthorizations of the EUC08 program.
       An important feature of the EB program is that many triggers available to the states
under the federal law contain look-back provisions. In particular, the state under those triggers
qualified for federal financing only if state unemployment was 110 or 120 percent (depending
on a trigger) higher than in the preceding two years. In other words, the EB program could be
made available under those triggers only if unemployment is rising. Consequently, starting in
2011 some states began losing eligibility for the EB program.4 As total duration of available
unemployment benefits began declining so did the unemployment rate resulting in some states
also losing eligibility for some of the tiers of the EUC08 program.
       As a result, by December 2013 there was substantial heterogeneity in the actual unem-
ployment benefit durations across U.S. states. As Table 1 shows, 3 states had 73 weeks of
benefits available, 20 states had 61-63 weeks, 9 states had 54-57 weeks, 18 states had 40-49
   4
    To mitigate this effect, the federal government temporarily gave states an option of using a three year
look-back period.



                                                    8
weeks, and one state had 19 weeks. These data on unemployment benefit durations in each
state is based on trigger reports provided by the Department of Labor. These reports contain
detailed information for each of the states regarding the eligibility and activation status of the
EB program and different tiers of the EUC08 program.5
       In December 2013, Congress chose not reauthorize the EUC08 program. As there is no
“phase-out” period for EUC08 payments, all EUC08 payments ceased abruptly in all states
when the program ended. Specifically, individuals who exhausted regular state unemployment
compensation after December 21, 2013 (December 22, 2013 in NY) were no longer eligible for
EUC08. For unemployed individuals already participating in the EUC08 program, the last
payable week of EUC08 benefits was the week ending December 28, 2013 (December 29, 2013
in NY)6 .
       From the moment the unemployment benefit extensions came to an end in December
2013, newly unemployed individuals could only qualify for the regular state unemployment
compensation for a duration of 26 weeks in most states. Some states had less than 26 weeks
available in 2014, including Arkansas (25), Florida (16), Georgia (18), Kansas (20), Michigan
(20), Missouri (20), North Carolina (19) and South Carolina (20). Two states – Massachusetts
(30) and Montana (28) – offered more generous benefit durations. Thus, the average benefit
duration across states dropped from 53 to 25 weeks in December 2013.
       An important property of the decision not to renew benefit extensions in December 2013
is that it applied to all states, regardless of their economic conditions. In particular, the states
could not choose whether to be treated by this reform, for example, based on their employ-
ment in 2013 or expected employment growth in 2014. The fact that the policy change was
exogenous from the point of view of an individual state, allows for a relatively straightforward
identification of its labor market impact. This contrasts sharply with the gradual decline in
benefit durations in many states since 2011. While those declines could have had significant
labor market implications, those policy changes were endogenous to a state’s labor market
conditions, making the identification of the effects of policies challenging.
       While from the outset, the federal unemployment benefit extension program was under-
   5
     See http://ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/trigger/ for trigger reports on the EB program and
http://ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/euc trigger/ for reports on the EUC08 program.
   6
     All states had triggered off the EB program by the end of 2012, so no states were offering extended benefits
under this program in December 2013.


                                                       9
            Table 1: Benefit Duration across States in December 2013

Weeks of Benefits   states

73 weeks            Illinois, Nevada, Rhode Island


63 weeks            Alaska, Arizona, California, Connecticut, Delaware, DC,
                    Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts,
                    Mississippi, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon,
                    Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Washington


61 weeks            Arkansas


57 weeks            Michigan


54 weeks            Alabama, Colorado, Idaho, Maine, New Mexico,
                    Texas, West Virginia, Wisconsin


49 weeks            Missouri, South Carolina


44 weeks            Georgia


40 weeks            Florida, Hawaii, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska,
                    New Hampshire, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota,
                    Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Wyoming


19 weeks            North Carolina




                                        10
stood to be temporary, the decision to stop the program came largely as a surprise. Indeed,
by December 2013 the program had been re-authorized a dozen of times. By that time it had
paid benefits for a record 66 months, over two years longer than any prior discretionary ben-
efit extension program. However, the U.S. unemployment rate was higher and the long-term
unemployment rate was at least twice as high as it was at the expiration of every previ-
ous unemployment benefit extension program. Moreover, the Council of Economic Advisors,
the Congressional Budget Office and others argued forcefully for the reauthorization on the
grounds that EUC08 is among policies with “the largest effects on output and employment
per dollar of budgetary cost.” In light of this, few expected Congress to terminate the program
in December 2013. Even following Congress’ decision, there was likely some uncertainty re-
garding the finality of the program throughout the first half of 2014. For example, on April 7,
2014, the Senate narrowly approved a bipartisan bill that would have restored (retroactively
to December 2013) federal funding for extended unemployment benefits. The bill faced a de-
termined opposition in the House of Representatives, which refused to hold a vote on it. Note
that, to the extent that economic agents were able to forecast the expiration of unemployment
benefit extensions prior to December 2013 and adjusted their actions accordingly, and to the
extent that they were uncertain about the possibility of the extensions being re-authorized
at some point in 2014, our estimates will provide a lower bound on the effects of the policy
change.


2.2     A First Look at the Data

As a first step in exploring whether this exogenous policy change helps account for some of the
observed rise in employment, we compare the evolution of employment in a sample of county
pairs that belong to different states and share a border, implying that many of the counties
within pairs had different benefit durations in December 2013. There are 1,175 such border
county pairs for which we have complete data (807 of which consisted of counties with different
benefit durations in December 2013). County-level data on employment and the labor force
are from the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) provided by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.7
   7
   ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/time.series/la/. Data accessed March 6, 2015. It is theoretically possible that the
BLS estimation procedures to some extent impute county-level employment and labor force using their state-


                                                    11
                 .006




                                                                                                               .01
                           .004




                                                                                                                           .008
  Difference in Log Employment




                                                                                                Difference in Log Labor Force
                     .002




                                                                                                        .004      .006
  -.002      0




                                                                                              .002
                 -.004




                                                                                                               0
                                  -15          -10               -5              0   5                                            -15          -10               -5              0   5
                                                     Quarters since expiration                                                                       Quarters since expiration


                                        (a) Difference in Log Employment                                                                (b) Difference in Log Labor Force

Figure 1: Difference of employment and labor force between high and low benefit border coun-
ties (benefit differences measured in December 2013). Vertical line indicates EUC expiration.


                   Figure 1 shows the average difference in quarterly employment and labor force across all
border counties from 2010 to 2014, where the county which had higher benefits in December
2013 is first. For example, Fairfax County, Virginia had 40 weeks of benefits available in
December 2013, whereas it’s border county in Maryland, Montgomery County, had 63 weeks
of benefits available. Thus, in every period the figure would reflect the employment rate in
Montgomery County minus the employment rate in Fairfax County. The series represents the
average of such differences among all border county pairs.
                   Figure 1 indicates that after a long period of relative employment and labor force losses,
the high benefit counties experienced a sharp relative employment and labor force gain in
2014. To verify that this pattern is unique to 2014 and is not an artifact of our assignment
of counties to the two groups based on benefit duration in December 2013, we repeat the
experiment in every quarter since 2010 by constructing the difference in employment and in
the labor force across border counties based on the duration of benefits in that quarter. To
simplify the presentation of the results, we summarize each resulting figure by one point in
Figure 2. Specifically, each point represents the difference between high and low benefit border
counties in the difference in employment or labor force in the year following that quarter and
level values. This has no material impact on the analysis in this paper since the policy change was exogenous to
cross-sectional differences across U.S. states. In addition, our formal analysis includes estimating counterfactual
employment trends for each county that are allowed to capture the potential residual impact of state-level
trends.



                                                                                         12
                 .005




                                                                                                      .005
  Difference in Log Employment




                                                                                       Difference in Log Labor Force
                                                                                                              0
                        0




                                                                                             -.005
       -.005




                                                                                                      -.01
                 -.01




                                 -15            -10                      -5   0                                        -15             -10                      -5   0
                                                   Quarters Since Reform                                                                  Quarters Since Reform


                                       (a) Difference in Log Employment                                                      (b) Difference in Log Labor Force

Figure 2: Difference between high and low benefit border counties (benefit differences defined
in the corresponding quarter) of the difference in employment and labor force growth in the
year after and year before the corresponding quarter. Points to the right of the dashed line
include data post EUC expiration.


the year preceding it. Note, that points to the right of the dashed line include data post-EUC
expiration. They imply that the fast growth of relative employment and labor force in counties
that had high benefit duration in December 2013 is a unique development. For example, the
high benefit duration counties in December 2012 did not experience a faster employment
growth in 2013 relative to their lower benefit duration counterparts. To put this differently,
the actual reform in December 2013 was followed by a fast recovery of relative employment in
counties with high benefit durations just before the reform. Performing “placebo” reforms in
any other quarter of the sample does not indicate fast growth of employment among counties
with high benefit durations on the eve of the placebo reform.8
                   The idea of identification of the effect of benefit duration on employment is simple. The
decision to cut benefit duration was exogenous from the point of view of every individual
county but the magnitude of the cut depended on the duration of benefits in December 2013.
A county with high benefit duration experienced a larger cut than a county with already
low benefit duration. We then compare the difference in employment across the two counties
         8
    It is interesting to note the abrupt changes in 2012/Q1 in the series in Figures 1 and 2. There was a
significant cut in benefit durations in that quarter with durations falling more in the counties that by December
2013 had lower duration than their counterparts across the state border. Contemporaneously, counties that
experienced larger cuts in benefits in 2012/Q1 tended to have higher benefits than their paired border counties.
Thus, both figures suggest higher employment growth in counties that experienced cut in benefits in 2012/Q1,
although we are not exploiting that variation for identification in this paper.


                                                                                  13
before the reform (benefit duration cut in December 2013) to the difference in employment
after the reform. In contrast to a standard diff-in-diff analysis where a control group is not
treated, all counties are treated here but at a different intensity. The county with high benefits
prior to the reform in December 2013 experiences a larger reduction in benefit duration and
thus a larger treatment than the neighboring county with low duration which is treated at a
lower intensity. We refer to the first county as the treated one and to the latter one as the
control one whenever such an analogy to the standard diff-in-diff methodology clarifies our
approach. Conducting this comparison of treatment and control counties for all county pairs
in the data provides an estimate of the employment effect induced by the benefit reduction.
   The typical diff-in-diff logic implies that permanent differences in the level of employment
between two neighboring counties are not a concern. Even if these differences are related to the
different benefit duration levels in the past, the double differencing eliminates such differences
in the level of employment. However, to obtain an unbiased estimate, it is required that the
benefit duration in December 2013 was unrelated to a preexisting trend in employment that
continued in 2014. To clarify this potential concern with an example, suppose that counties
with high benefit duration in December 2013 had a positive employment trend in 2013 that
would had continued in 2014 even without the benefit duration cut. In this case, the analysis
would yield an upward biased estimate of the effect of benefit duration, since the employment
gain in 2014 would be fully attributed to the benefit cut, whereas it is partly the result of
a continuing trend. In contrast, if the control county with low benefit duration prior to the
reform had the same trend in employment as the treated neighboring county with high benefit
duration (common trend assumption), there would be no systematic difference in employment
between the counties in the absence of a reform. In this case one can attribute the difference
in employment in 2014 to the reform.
   Note that our strategy of comparing neighboring counties from different states instead of
some arbitrary counties or states (with different benefits) makes the common trend assumption
a fairly reasonable one. As the median border county has only one half of one percent of its
state’s employment, it seems plausible that changes in employment trends in most individual
counties are unlikely to induce unemployment policy changes determined at the state level.
This is not a necessary condition, however. More importantly, neighboring locations separated
by a state border share the same geography, climate, access to transportation, agglomeration

                                               14
benefits, access to specialized labor and supplies, etc. Moreover, Hagedorn et al. (2013) provide
evidence that economic shocks do not stop when reaching a state border but tend to propagate
smoothly in space. This implies that the underlying economic fundamentals are expected to
evolve relatively similarly across counties bordering each other. The key feature that sets
border counties apart is the difference in policies on the two sides of the border (unemployment
benefit policies are set at the state level and apply to all counties within a state). These
observations imply that absent state policy differences, the employment trends induced by
fundamental economic shocks are expected to be similar across border counties in the same
pair.
   Thus, we begin our exploration of basic patterns in the data by simply assuming that the
difference in benefit levels across two neighboring counties (determined at the state level) is not
correlated with the difference in employment trends across the two counties. We considerably
weaken this assumption in the formal analysis in subsequent Sections of the paper. Note that
even the strong assumption underlying our exploration in this Section is much weaker than
in existing work based on the border-county methodology as the policy change at the end of
2013 was exogenous to cross-sectional differences across U.S. states.
   Following this logic, a sudden reversal of fortune experienced in 2014 by high benefit
counties, evident in Figure 1, suggests that the cut in benefits led to a substantial increase
in employment. After a long period of relative employment losses, the high benefit counties
experienced a relative average employment gain of 0.50 percent in 2014. As the average benefit
duration before the policy change was 56.7 weeks in the high benefit counties and 47.6 weeks
in the low benefit counties, the implied total employment gain from cutting benefits from an
average level of 53 weeks to 25 weeks equals:

                                   53 − 25
                                             0.50% = 1.5%.                                     (1)
                                 56.7 − 47.6

   Thus, ignoring (for now) the potential aggregation issues, this simple calculation suggests
a large increase in employment due to the cut in benefit durations. Similarly, for the labor
force:

                                   53 − 25
                                             0.43% = 1.3%.                                     (2)
                                 56.7 − 47.6


                                                15
                                                                                            .01
           .01




                                                                                                 .005
  Residuals from LTT




                                                                                  Residuals from LTT
               .005




                                                                                  0
  0        -.005




                                                                                            -.005
                        -15        -10               -5              0   5                               -15        -10               -5              0   5
                                         Quarters since expiration                                                        Quarters since expiration


                       (a) Difference in Log Employment Residuals                                       (b) Difference in Log Labor Force Residuals

Figure 3: Difference of residual employment and labor force between high and low benefit
border counties (benefit differences measured in December 2013). Residuals constructed by
removing fixed effects, linear time trends, and seasonality from the data for each county
estimated on 2010/Q1–2013/Q4 period. Vertical line indicates EUC expiration.


             In what follows we relax the common trend assumption underlying this simple experiment
and allow for the possibility that unobserved trends could have led to high employment growth
in border counties belonging to high benefit duration states even in the absence of the change
in benefit durations. Specifically, we perform a more sophisticated econometric analysis that
includes the estimation of the difference in trends between border counties in each pair.
             To provide a simple visual verification that even the least flexible model of a trend ensures
that the residual common trend assumption is satisfied, consider Figure 3, which plots the
average difference in residuals between high and low benefit counties (as measured in December
2013) obtained by regressing over the 2010–2013 period county employment or labor force
on a linear time trend, county fixed effects, and quarter dummies to remove seasonality.
The residuals are close to zero through the end of 2013 — indicating the lack of important
residual trends in the data (we will nevertheless use much more flexible models of trends below
to guarantee this). Taking into account these linear trends, however, does not overturn our
observations made based on Figure 1. Using the same estimates to construct the residuals in
2014 we observe, consistent with our previous reasoning, large positive residuals following the
reform, indicating that the evolution of labor force and employment in 2014 was not the result
of pre-existing trends.



                                                                             16
3       Empirical Methodology I
In this Section we describe the common methodology in the macro and labor literature for
measuring the effect of the reform.9 This approach utilizes both pre- and post-reform infor-
mation to measure the counterfactual trends in the labor force and employment that border
counties would have experienced without a cut in benefits. We develop three distinct models
of county-specific trends that differ in their flexibility and the ease of interpretation. Esti-
mating these models reveals the effect of benefit duration on the difference in labor force or
employment between border counties. At the end of this Section we show how these estimates
can be aggregated to obtain an effect of the nation-wide change in benefit duration.


3.1     Core of the Empirical Specification

Our objective is to measure the effect of the cut of benefit durations in December 2013 on
employment. The effect of this particular policy change on log employment ei,t in county i in
calendar quarter t is captured by the coefficient α in the regression equation


                                    ei,t = α It≥2013/Q4 bi,t + i,t ,                             (3)


where It≥2013/Q4 is one for the policy change period starting in 2013/Q4 and is zero otherwise,
bi,t is measured as the logarithm of available benefit duration, and the residual error term
i,t contains all other determinants of employment in county i at time t. Below we develop
alternative specifications of the stochastic process i,t , which include allowing for county fixed
effects, county specific time trends, a very general factor model structure, etc. Estimating
this process, e.g. a county specific time trend, requires to use data (on employment) prior
to 2013/Q4. To ensure a consistent estimate of the trend, the specification then also has to
control for the logarithm of benefit durations prior to 2013/Q4, of course, with a different
coefficient κ, as the coefficient of interest α measures the effect of the 2014 exogenous policy
change:
                          ei,t = κ It≤2013/Q3 bp,t + α It≥2013/Q4 bi,t + i,t .                   (4)
    9
    We apply an alternative methodology – the event study analysis – that uses only pre-reform data to
estimate the counterfactual trends in Section 6.




                                                   17
       As explained above, we consider the difference in employment of a pair p of counties i and
j which border each other but belong to different states. For each border-county pair p, we
difference Equation (4) between the two border counties i and j:


                         ∆ep,t = κ It≤2013/Q3 ∆bp,t + α It≥2013/Q4 ∆bp,t + ∆p,t ,                            (5)


where ∆ is the difference operator over counties in the same pair. More specifically, if counties
i and j are in the same border-county pair p, then ∆ep,t = ep,i,t − ep,j,t and ∆bp,t = bp,i,t − bp,j,t .
       This is the core specification we use throughout this section of the paper. We augment it
with different models of the stochastic process i,t that we develop next. It is important to
keep in mind that the effects of shocks or policies that affect these counties symmetrically are
differenced out since our estimates are based on the differences across border counties.


3.2       Baseline Empirical Model and Identification

Our benchmark specification represents the standard approach in the literature, which allows
for permanent and temporary differences in employment e across counties caused by, e.g.,
permanent differences in tax policies across states they belong to and it also contains county
specific employment trends. In addition, we control for aggregate time effects:


                                          i,t = γi t + φi + δt + νi,t ,                                      (6)


where γi is the county specific time trend of county i, φi is a county fixed effect and δt is a
time dummy. Differencing the error term across counties in the same pair, we obtain


                                  ∆p p,t = γi t − γj t + φi − φj + ∆p νp,t .                                 (7)


       Our baseline specification can then be written as


            ∆ep=(i,j),t = κ It≤2013/Q3 ∆bp,t + α It≥2013/Q4 ∆bp,t + γi t − γj t + φi − φj + νp,t .            (8)


Note that since we have several years of pre-reform data we can identify a pair-specific trend,10
  10
    Note that we estimate trends and fixed effects at the county level and refer to the difference across counties
within a pair of those trends as “pair-specific” trend.



                                                       18
which would not be possible if we had only one pre-reform and one post-reform observation
for every county pair. This data-rich environment thus allows us to precisely estimate the
pre-existing trend implying that differences in trend employment do not bias our results. The
identification assumption for the effects of benefits on employment is thus conditional on the
pair-specific trend, the pair-specific fixed effect and the time effect:


                                 Corr(It≥2013/Q4 ∆bp,t , νp,t ) = 0.                        (9)


As in any difference-in-differences analysis, the parameter of interest α is identified off the
change in benefits when EUC08 expires. The expiration of benefits is exogenous with respect
to cross-sectional differences in county employment. To understand what assumption (9) rules
out, imagine for a moment that our dataset contained just two counties i and j in a pair p
where county i has higher benefits at the end of 2013 than county j. In this case our estimate
would not recover the true effect of benefits on employment if county i would have had higher
employment growth (relative to the estimated trends) than county j even in the absence of
the benefit cut. In this case we would attribute some of the differences in employment growth
to the cut in benefits although not all of the employment differences are related to benefits.
   However, our dataset contains not just one county pair but 1,175 of such pairs. The iden-
tifying assumption then rules out that the higher benefit counties would have had on average
higher employment growth in the absence of the policy reform and does not rule it out for
every individual pair. It is important to recognize that this assumption is conditional on using
pair-specific trends to remove differences in trends between counties in a pair. The figures in
Section 2.2 above lend support to the identifying assumption as, prior to the policy change,
high benefit counties did not show on average faster employment growth than their low benefit
counterparts in the border pair. Instead, one clearly sees a sudden rise in employment growth
just when benefits were cut at the turn of 2014, but no sign of recovering, say, mechanically
due to mean reversion, prior to the benefit expiration. Moreover, as discussed above, with the
exception of the expiration of EUC08, there were no policy changes or other developments
that could have plausibly induced the co-movement between the size of the benefit cut and
the subsequent employment growth across border counties. Finally, it is also important to
note that to violate the identifying assumption, the higher average employment growth in the


                                                 19
higher benefit counties in the absence of the experiment would have to be purely mechanical
and not behavioral since counties and states could not select into the experiment based on
their employment in December 2013 nor on their expected employment growth in 2014. That
means, that the exogeneity of the program rules out a version of a behavioral Ashenfelter’s
“dip.”


3.3       Factor Models

An alternative modeling strategy for heterogeneous county-level employment trends formalizes
the insight that these trends are induced by the differences in exposure of counties to various
common aggregate disturbances. The differences in exposure may arise due to, e.g., differences
in sectoral composition, which may themselves be a consequence of heterogeneity in the host
of other state- and county-level policies. We therefore decompose the error term in Equation
(5) as
                                          ∆p,t = (λ0i − λ0j )Ft + νp,t ,                                      (10)

where λi , λi (r × 1) are vectors of county-specific factor loadings and Ft (r × 1) is a vector of
time-specific common factors. Note that this general notation nests additive county-level fixed
effects, county-specific time trends, and aggregate time effects.11 Our baseline specification can
then be written as
                             ∆ep,t = α It≥2013/Q4 ∆bp,t + (λ0i − λ0j )Ft + νp,t .                              (11)

       What remains to be done is to specify the aggregate factors. To this aim we pursue two
approaches.

3.3.1      Latent Factors Model

The first approach treats the factors as being unobserved so that both the factors and factor
loadings are parameters to be estimated. Specifically, we use an interactive-effects estimator
that was shown in Bai (2009) to achieve consistency and proper inference in a panel data
                                                                                                                 
  11                                               1                                                           ψi
     Suppose there are two factors in Ft =              (among others) with associated loadings λi =               ,
                                                   ξt                                                          1
           
         ψj
λj =          , yielding ∆p,t = (λ0i − λ0j )Ft + νp,t = ψi − ψj + ξt + νp,t , i.e., county fixed effects and a time
         1
effect.



                                                            20
context, such as ours.12
       Note that the interactive effects model, in addition to additive time and county fixed
effects, allows for a very flexible model of the heterogeneous time trends at the county level.
To implement this estimator, we need to specify the number of factors. Bai and Ng (2002)
have shown that the number of factors in pure factor models can be consistently estimated
based on the information criterion approach. Bai (2009) shows that their argument can be
adapted to panel data models with interactive fixed effects (see Appendix I).
       Note that since this estimator involves estimating the values of aggregate factors in every
period, to predict counterfactual trends it is necessary to use the post-reform data in estima-
tion. The factor loadings, however, are mainly identified from the period before the reform in
2013/Q4 as our estimation sample starts in 2005/Q1.
       The flexibility of this modeling approach comes at the cost of not being able to assign a
clear economic interpretation to estimated factors. To the extent that we are only interested in
an unbiased estimate of the effects of benefit on employment only, however, the interpretability
of estimated factors is not a relevant concern.

3.3.2      “Natural” Factors Model

While the latent factor approach is very flexible, the selection of factors is based on statistical
rather than economic considerations. To provide a more economically grounded model, we
consider a hybrid of the previous two models:


                                    i,t = γi t + φi + δt + λ0i Ft + νi,t .                               (12)


The key difference to the latent factor models is that now we select a set of observed ag-
gregate factors to include in Ft that economic analysis suggests are important in inducing
heterogeneous trends across counties. Thus, with the appropriate selection of the aggregate
factors, this specification approaches the flexibility of the latent factor model while inheriting
the transparency of the baseline specification.
  12
    Gobillon and Magnac (2015) establish the superior performance of the interactive effects estimator relative
to alternatives methods.




                                                      21
3.4     Aggregation of Local Employment Effects

Our estimate of the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on employment is based on the
difference across border counties. It is desirable to be able to use the resulting coefficient to
predict the effect of a nation-wide extension. A potential concern is that when some states
extend benefits more than others, economic activity may reallocate to states with, say, lower
benefits. This reallocation is picked up by our estimates but will be absent when the policy is
changed everywhere. Our results in Section 4.2.1 below alleviate such concerns. First, we find
large negative effects of unemployment benefit extensions on employment in sectors commonly
considered non-tradable and thus not subject to reallocation. Second, we find that unemployed
workers do not change the strategy of which county to look for work in response to changes
in benefits. Building on these insights, we show in Appendix II that we can use the estimates
obtained at the county level to compute the change in US employment due to the cut in
benefits in a model where each county is an open economy in the (closed) US economy and
the labor market in each county is governed by a Mortensen-Pissarides search and matching
model. Each county produces (and consumes) a nontradable and a tradable good. Both sectors,
the one producing the tradable good and the one producing the nontradable one, operate in
the same labor market and are subject to the same labor market frictions. We then show that
our elasticity for the employment response at the county level can be used at the aggregate
level as well.
   Specifically, due to the absence of reallocation and mobility caused by a change in benefits
we can estimate Equation (5) in the data and recover the coefficient of interest α and use it to
compute the percentage increase in U.S. employment in 2014 that is caused by the cancellation
of extended benefits as

                                      X                                Es2013
                       πE = α                       (b2014
                                                      s    − b2013
                                                              s    )          ,             (13)
                                                                       EU2013
                                                                          S
                                All U.S. states s

where b2013
       s    denotes the logarithm of the number of weeks of benefits available in state s in
December 2013 (just prior to the policy change), b2014
                                                  s    is the logarithm of the number of weeks
of benefits available in state s in 2014, Es2013 is employment in state s in December 2013 and
EU2013
   S is aggregate U.S. employment in December 2013. The corresponding gain in the total




                                               22
number of employed then equals

                                               π E × EU2014
                                                        S
                                        ∆E =                ,                                        (14)
                                                  1 + πE

where EU2014
         S refers to U.S. employment in December 2014.

       Estimating Equation (5) but replacing the difference in the log of the number of employed
in the border county pair on the left hand side with the corresponding difference in the log of
the number of labor force participants allows as to compute the effect of the cut in benefits
on the labor force. Using the analogues to Equations (13) and (14), we can then measure
the percentage increase in the labor force π L and the increase in the number of labor force
participants ∆L as a consequence of the policy reform.


3.5       Placebo Reform Analysis

In addition to measuring the effects of the actual cut in benefit duration in December 2013,
we also re-estimate each empirical model in the paper to assess the effects of a placebo reform.
Specifically, we counterfactually assume that benefit durations were cut nationwide starting
in the second quarter of 2010. We choose this date for the placebo reform for two reasons.
First, there were no actual cuts in benefit duration in 2010, meaning that the counterfactual
reform was a true placebo. Second, the second quarter of 2010 represented a turning point in
the dynamics of aggregate unemployment, which declined significantly for the first time since
the onset of the Great Recession.13
       The objective of estimating the effects of the counterfactual placebo reform is to verify
whether the turning point of employment dynamics in 2013/2014 of high relative to low benefit
countries was indeed caused to a large degree by the exogenous cut in benefits in December
2013 as opposed to being the result of an employment adjustment which would have happened
anyway and with the simultaneous cut in benefit durations being a pure coincidence. To the
extent that the analysis of a placebo reform reveals that the employment in high benefit
counties did not grow faster (or indeed grew even slower) than in their border counties in
lower benefit duration states, it strengthens the case that the co-movement of the benefit cuts
  13
    In practice, we found that performing the placebo experiment at other points in time leads to the same
conclusions.



                                                   23
            Table 2: Unemployment Benefit Extensions, Employment, and Labor Force.
                                  Benchmark Specification.

                                         Actual Reform                             Placebo Reform
                                Employment            Labor Force          Employment            Labor Force
       Weeks of Benefits             -1.90                -0.86                 1.72                 2.68
                                    (0.000)              (0.000)               (0.050)              (0.000)

       Note - All coefficients are multiplied by 100. Bold font denotes significance at a 95%
       level based on bootstrapped p-values in parentheses.


and the 2014 employment boom was not coincidental.


4        Unemployment Benefit Extensions, Employment and
         Labor Force
4.1       Empirical Methodology I, Specification I - Baseline. Findings.

Table 2 contains the results of the estimation of the effect of unemployment benefit duration
on employment using the baseline specification in Equation (8) for the period 2010–2014. We
find that changes in unemployment benefits have a large and statistically significant14 effect on
employment: a 1 percent drop in benefit duration increases employment by 0.019 log point.15
We can also use Equation (8) with labor force on the left hand side to estimate the percentage
change in the labor force attributable to the cancellation of policy. Estimating this equation,
we find that a 1 percent drop in benefit duration increases the labor force by 0.0086 log points.
       The results of estimating the effects of a placebo reform are very different. They indicate
that without the actual cut in benefit duration, employment and the labor force in high benefit
counties grew significantly slower than in the lower benefit duration counties across the state
border. Inspecting Figure 2 makes this finding not very surprising as there is only one turning
point in the dynamics of relative employment and labor force between border counties in 2014
but not in earlier years. We conclude that both in 2010 and 2014 high benefit counties did
not experience higher employment growth than low benefit counties for reasons unrelated to
  14
     To take into account the potential correlation in the residuals, standard errors in this and other specification
in the paper are computed using block-bootstrap following Bertrand et al. (2004).
  15
     This is slightly larger but comparable to the corresponding effect estimated in Hagedorn et al. (2013).

                                                         24
benefits. The difference between 2010 and 2014, however, is that in 2014 benefits were cut
whereas in 2010 such a cut did not happen. As a result, we find an employment boom in 2014
but not in the placebo reform.16


4.2       Implications for Aggregate Employment and Labor Force
4.2.1      Evidence on Reallocation and Mobility

As discussed above, the degree to which one can rely exclusively on our local estimates of the
effects of unemployment benefit extensions to predict the effects of a nation-wide extensions
depends on whether local benefit extensions induce a spatial reallocation of economic activity.
In this section we document the extent of such reallocation.
       If the local change in employment was driven to an important degree by reallocation, we
would expect that benefit extensions have a larger effect on the tradable sector, which can
reallocate, than on the non-tradable, which can reallocate to a much lesser degree. Thus, if
there is substantial reallocation of economic activity in response to local changes in benefit
duration, we would expect to find an increase in the ratio of employment in non-tradable
to tradable sectors in the relatively high benefit duration counties. To assess this possibility,
we apply our border-county empirical methodology to measure the change in employment
in sectors producing output that is plausibly non-tradable across states, such as retail or
food services, to the change in employment in tradable sectors. We find that a rise in benefit
duration has no significant effect (a coefficient of -0.00267 with a p-value of 0.23) on the
relative employment in the two sectors, implying that the null hypothesis of no reallocation
induced by benefit extensions cannot be rejected in the data.
       In addition, Hagedorn et al. (2015) use the Nielsen Consumer Panel Data to measure the
responsiveness of cross state border shopping to changes in unemployment benefit generosity.
Their results indicate that this effect is also negligible.
  16
     Our motivation for considering border counties as a unit of analysis was the fact that these locations
are relatively small and share common exposure to aggregate shocks which makes it more likely that the
common trend assumption is satisfied. While we include all border county pairs in the analysis, we can also
select subsets of border counties where this is even more likely to be the case. This does not alter the results,
however. For example, restricting the sample to only small counties that account for less than 15% of their
state’s employment yields coefficients of -1.95 and -0.86 for employment and labor force, respectively. Similarly,
limiting the analysis only to closely integrated counties in the same Core-Base Statistical Area yelds respective
estimated coefficients of -2.08 and -1.42. Despite smaller samples, the coefficients remain highly statistically
significant.


                                                       25
   Another potential reallocation effect arises because households may live in different states
than where they work. Note that this type of worker reallocation would bias even our local
estimates if the households systematically change their job search behavior in response to
changes in unemployment benefits. For example, suppose households search in states with
less generous benefits to take advantage of a higher job-finding rate. As county employment
is measured based on the place of residence and not on the basis of the location of the job,
our estimate of the effect of benefit extensions on employment would be biased downwards,
since households residing in high benefit counties would face a higher job-finding rate, which
would translate into higher employment in their county of residence (despite them actually
working in the neighboring county). To investigate whether this is the case, we use direct
empirical evidence on where people work relative to where they live. Specifically, we use
data from the American Community Survey (ACS) from 2005-2013. The ACS is an annual
1% survey of households in the United States conducted by the Census Bureau. The survey
contains information on the county of residence of households and the state of employment.
The survey is representative at the Public Use Micro Area level - a statistical area that
has roughly 100,000 residents (and thus also for counties with more than 100,000 residents).
We compute the share of households in border counties who work in the neighboring state.
We can then examine how this share of cross state border workers responds to changes in
benefits across states. Using the difference-in-difference estimator, we find a very small and
statistically insignificant coefficient on weeks of benefits available of 0.0107 (p-value 0.219).
This evidence implies that workers’ search behavior does not respond significantly to changes
in local unemployment benefit duration.

4.2.2   Aggregate Implications of Baseline Empirical Results

The foregoing results that changes in benefit durations induce neither reallocation of economic
activity nor worker mobility imply (using the model laid out in Appendix II) that we can rely
on our estimate based on border counties to derive the implications for employment for the
aggregate U.S. economy. In particular, our estimate implies that the drop in benefit duration




                                               26
led to a percentage increase in aggregate employment of

                                        X                            Es2013
                π E = |{z}
                       α                          (b2014
                                                    s    − b2013
                                                            s    )          = 0.015,      (15)
                                                                     EU2013
                                                                        S
                      −0.0190   All
                                | U.S. states s {z                        }
                                                 −0.799


that is U.S. employment increased by 1.5 percent due to the cut of benefit durations. The
corresponding gain in the total number of employed then equals

                                       0.015 × EU2014
                                                  S
                                ∆E =                  = 2, 074, 100.                      (16)
                                         1 + 0.015

   Similarly, the percentage change in the size of the labor force in the U.S. due to the
cancellation of benefits equals

                                        X                            L2013
                                                                      s
                π L = |{z}
                       αL                         (b2014
                                                    s    − b2013
                                                            s    )         = 0.007,       (17)
                                                                     L2013
                                                                      US
                                |All U.S. states s {z
                      −0.0086
                                                                         }
                                                 −0.801


and the corresponding increase in the size of the labor force is

                                        π L × L2014
                                               US
                                 ∆L =               = 1, 119, 500.                        (18)
                                          1 + πL

   Thus, more than half of the increase in employment was due to the increase in the labor
force as a result of the reduction of benefit duration. The remaining increase corresponds to
a decrease in the number of unemployed by 954, 600 = 2, 074, 100 − 1, 119, 500. Our analysis
thus shows that the dominant impact of the benefit cut on employment was not driven by a
contraction in the labor force – unemployed dropping out of the labor force because they were
no longer entitled to benefits – but instead by those previously not participating in the labor
market deciding to enter the labor force.
   It is also interesting to note that the existing empirical literature has mainly attempted
to measure the “micro” effect of unemployment benefit duration on search intensity and job
acceptance decisions of individual workers. Hagedorn et al. (2014) find these effects to be
very small, confirming the sentiment in the literature. Clearly, this micro effect is zero for
those out-of-labor force who were entitled to benefits neither in 2013 nor in 2014. Yet, it was
predominantly movements from out-of-labor force that drove the rise in employment in 2014.

                                                  27
        Table 3: Unemployment Benefit Extensions, Employment, and Labor Force.
                              Interactive Effects Model.

                                     Actual Reform                   Placebo Reform
                           Employment        Labor Force        Employment      Labor Force
   Weeks of Benefits           -2.33             -1.23             1.22             1.94
                              (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.030)          (0.010)
   Number of Factors             4                   4              4                 4

   Note - All coefficients are multiplied by 100. Bold font denotes significance at a 95%
   level based on bootstrapped p-values in parentheses.


Presumably this happened due to a large “macro” effect of the benefit cut on job creation.
It is then the availability of jobs that drew non-participants back into the labor force, as is
consistent with the standard prediction of labor search models.


4.3    Empirical Methodology I, Specification II - Interactive Effects
       Model. Findings.

Table 3 contains the results of this estimation of the effect of unemployment benefit duration
on employment and labor force using the interactive effects specification of the factor model
in Equation (11). This is the most flexible, albeit the least transparent, model of underlying
county-level employment and labor force trends that we consider.
   Relative to a more restrictive baseline specification, the results of estimating this model
reveal slightly larger effects of unemployment benefit durations. Specifically, the estimates
imply that a 1 percent drop in benefit duration increases employment by 0.0233 log points
and the labor force by 0.0123 log points. Similar to the baseline specification, these estimates
also imply that more than half of the increase in employment was due to the increase in the
labor force as a result of the reduction of benefit duration.




                                               28
            Table 4: Unemployment Benefit Extensions, Employment, and Labor Force.
                                  “Natural” Factors Model.

                                     Actual Reform                     Placebo Reform
                             Employment        Labor Force      Employment         Labor Force
       Weeks of Benefits          -1.44           -0.58             1.38              2.27
                                 (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.020)           (0.000)

       Note - All coefficients are multiplied by 100. Bold font denotes significance at a 95%
       level based on bootstrapped p-values in parentheses.


4.4       Empirical Methodology I, Specification III - “Natural” Factors
          Model. Findings.

We now consider the “hybrid” factor model specification where we include “natural” factors in
addition to standard controls in the baseline specification such as fixed and time effect as well
as pair-specific trends. We consider three aggregate time series for this purpose.17 The first
one represents the price of oil. There was a sharp decline in the price of oil in the second half of
2014 which likely had a heterogeneous impact on counties and the exposure of counties to the
booming oil industry in 2013 might have been correlated with pre-reform benefit duration. The
second series represents aggregate employment in the construction sector. The construction
sector was dramatically affected by the recession with considerable spatial heterogeneity which
might have been also correlated with benefit duration across states. Finally, we include an
index of monetary policy. The specific series we use - the reserve balances with the Fed system
- shows a clear structural break in early 2014 and might imply spatially heterogeneous impacts
on the availability of credit.
       Table 4 contains the results of this estimation of the effect of unemployment benefit du-
ration on employment using the “natural” factors specification in Equation (12). Similar to
the results from the two alternative specifications described above, we find that changes in
unemployment benefits have a large and statistically significant effect on employment: a 1
percent drop in benefit duration increases employment by 0.0144 log point. We can again use
  17
    All “natural” factor series (“Crude Oil Prices: West Texas Intermediate (WTI) - Cushing, Okla-
homa” [DCOILWTICO], “All Employees: Construction” [USCONS], “Total Reserve Balances Maintained
with Federal Reserve Banks” [RESBALNS]) retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/, May 27, 2015.


                                                 29
Equation (12) with labor force on the left hand side to estimate the percentage change in the
labor force attributable to the cancellation of policy. Estimating this equation, we find that a
1 percent drop in benefit duration increases the labor force by 0.0058 log points.


5        Unemployment Benefit Extensions and QCEW
         Payroll Employment
The traditional approach, at least in the macroeconomics literature, to measuring the aggre-
gate effects of policies on employment, defines the latter variable as including all individuals
who did any work for pay or profit during a given week. For example, when measuring the
aggregate effects, the literature usually does not draw a distinction whether the increase in em-
ployment was due to more individuals becoming employees or starting their own businesses.
The object of interest is the change in the total number of individuals supplying labor in
the market in response to a policy change. This is the established definition of employment
adopted by the Current Population Survey and it corresponds to the measure of employment
used so far in this paper. The disadvantage of this measure of employment is that some com-
ponents of employment have to be measured through surveys that are subject to sampling
error.
       A more narrow notion of employment can, however, be measured through administrative
records. These data are called Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) and
represent the count of jobs for which a paycheck subject to a UI tax was issued. Due to
the nature of these data, this employment measure counts the number of jobs rather than
the number of individuals with at least one job so that the same individual may be counted
multiple times if he or she receives payments from multiple employers. Moreover, the data
excludes most jobs not subject to the UI tax, such as self employed workers, unpaid family
workers or employees of schools affiliated with religious organizations, railroad employees, etc.
as well as jobs excluded for other reasons, such as employees of national security agencies.
       It is well documented that these two measures of employment often diverge significantly
even after accounting for the differences in coverage.18 Of a particular concern to the period
we study is the sharp rise in non-traditional employment, or what has become known as the
  18
       See Hagedorn and Manovskii (2011) for the discussion and additional references.

                                                       30
        Table 5: Unemployment Benefit Extensions and QCEW Payroll Employment

         Specification         Actual Reform                 Placebo Reform

         Benchmark                  -1.00                         1.00
                                   (0.050)                       (0.030)

         Natural Factors            -1.41                          0.78
                                   (0.020)                       (0.200)

         Interactive Effects        -1.21                         1.59
                                   (0.030)                       (0.050)

         Note - All coefficients are multiplied by 100. Bold font denotes significance
         at a 90% level based on bootstrapped p-values in parentheses.


rise of “1099 economy” (the IRS form 1099-MISC must be submitted by all “employers” who
pay someone $600 or more a year in nonemployee compensation). Dourado and Koopman
(2015) document a sharp rise in the number of these forms submitted to the IRS in recent
years. For example, an Uber driver would be paid this way. He or she will be classified as
being employed according to the CPS definition but will not appear in the QCEW data. An
additional complication presented by this rapid ongoing change in the labor market is that an
Uber driver may not even classify himself as being self-employed but to consider himself as
being employed by Uber when replying to the survey. This makes it challenging to interpret
the data on self-employment and to use it in conjunction with QCEW data to obtain the
picture of total employment changes.
   Nevertheless, as QCEW data refer to a well defined segment of employment and are not
affected by the sampling error, it appears interesting to assess the effects of the cut in benefits
on payroll counts as measured by the QCEW. Accordingly, we repeat the entire analysis above
using these data. Table 5 contains the results. We find that these data also reveal a signifi-
cant positive impact of the reduction in benefit duration on payroll employment. Specifically,
across the methodologies we consider, a 1 percent drop in benefit duration significantly in-
creases payroll counts by between 1 and 1.4 log points. These effects are slightly smaller than
those obtained using the total employment measures. The foregoing discussion illustrates the
difficulties in interpreting this difference. For example, it might be that non-traditional em-
ployment was particularly sensitive to the cut in benefits. Alternatively, it might be that

                                                31
holders of several part-time jobs secured full-time employment as a result of increased job
availability following the EUC08 expiration which would be recorded as a decline in the num-
ber of jobs in the QCEW. To put even these smaller estimates into perspective, consider the
implied aggregate employment changes using the smallest estimate based on QCEW data
across all specifications we consider. This estimate implies that the drop in benefit duration
led to a percentage increase in aggregate payroll employment of
                                                                       2013
                                    X                                EQCEW,s
             π E = |{z}
                    α                             (b2014
                                                    s    − b2013
                                                            s    )    2013
                                                                               = 0.008,     (19)
                                                                     EQCEW,U S
                             |All U.S. states s
                   −0.0100
                                                     {z                      }
                                                   −0.803


that is U.S. payroll employment increased by 0.8 percent due to the cut of benefit durations.
The corresponding gain in the total number of employed on payrolls then equals
                                              2014
                                    0.008 × EQCEW,U S
                             ∆E =                     = 1, 105, 289.                        (20)
                                        1 + 0.008

This accounts for 36% of the growth in payroll employment in 2014.
    Estimating the effects of a placebo reform on QCEW data once again indicate that without
the actual cut in benefit duration, payroll employment and the labor force in high benefit
counties grew slower than in the lower benefit duration counties across the state border.


6     Empirical Methodology II: Event Study Analysis
A different methodological approach we use to measure the impact of the cut in benefit
durations on labor force and employment is based on an event study analysis. The event
study approach is widely used in economics and finance (see MacKinlay (1997) for a survey).
The idea of an event analysis is simple. The normal or expected evolution of e.g. employment
is estimated using data before the event. The pre-event estimate is then used to compute
the “unusual” changes in employment as the deviation of the actual post-event evolution of
employment from its normal behavior that would have been expected in the absence of the
event. Thus, the post-event normal behavior of employment is computed using the estimates
from the pre-event estimation window without conditioning on the event taking place.
    In our application, the event is the cut in benefit durations at the very end of Decem-


                                                     32
ber 2013. The pre-event estimation window includes the years 2005-2013 and the post-event
window is the year 2014.
   The key step of the event study methodology is to choose a rich model of the normal
evolution of employment that fits the pre-event data as well as possible and can be used to
accurately forecast its post-event evolution. Note that in an event analysis or a forecasting
analysis including (potentially) endogenous variables on the RHS is not problematic since we
are not interested in the estimated coefficients but we want to use all available information
to accurately predict the (counterfactual) normal evolution of employment in 2014. The only
restriction is that the forecast cannot rely on post-event variables that are endogenous with
respect to the event itself. Therefore, the model we use to describe the normal evolution of
employment in county i prior to 2014 features a cubic time trend and 4 lags of employment:


    ei,t = γ1i t + γ2i t2 + γ3i t3 + φi + δt + µ1 ei,t−1 + µ2 ei,t−2 + µ3 ei,t−3 + µ4 ei,t−4 + νi,t .   (21)


As before, we difference this equation between neighboring counties i and j in a pair p:


             ∆p ep,t = γ1i t − γ1j t + γ2i t2 − γ2j t2 + γ3i t3 − γ3j t3 + φi − φj

                       + µ1 ∆p ep,t−1 + µ2 ∆p ep,t−2 + µ3 ∆p ep,t−3 + µ4 ∆p ep,t−4 + νp,t .             (22)


Denote the parameter values of this model estimated on the pre-event window with a hat.
These estimates can then be used to describe the expected evolution of the difference in
employment across counties in a pair in 2014 without conditioning on the cut in benefit
duration taking place:


             E(∆p ep,t ) = (γ̂1i − γ̂1j )t + (γ̂2i − γ̂2j )t2 + (γ̂3i − γ̂3j )t3 + (φ̂i − φ̂j )

                           + µ̂1 ∆p ep,t−1 + µ̂2 ∆p ep,t−2 + µ̂3 ∆p ep,t−3 + µ̂4 ∆p ep,t−4 ,            (23)


where the expected post-reform evolution of employment is computed recursively.
   The unusual or unexpected component of the dynamics of the difference in border county




                                                     33
          Table 6: Unemployment Benefit Extensions, Employment, and Labor Force.
                                       Event Study.

                                           LAUS Data                                QCEW Data
                                Employment            Labor Force                   Employment
      Weeks of Benefits              -1.83                -1.08                          -2.36
                                    (0.000)              (0.010)                        (0.000)

      Note - All coefficients are multiplied by 100. Bold font denotes significance at a 95%
      level based on bootstrapped p-values in parentheses.


employment, ∆p ep,t , at post-event date t is denoted ˆ∗p,t and equals


             ˆ∗p,t = ∆p ep,t − E(∆p ep,t )

                    = ∆p ep,t − (γ̂1i − γ̂1j )t + (γ̂2i − γ̂2j )t2 + (γ̂3i − γ̂3j )t3 + (φ̂i − φ̂j )
                                  

                                                                                    
                    + µ̂1 ∆p ep,t−1 + µ̂2 ∆p ep,t−2 + µ̂3 ∆p ep,t−3 + µ̂4 ∆p ep,t−4 ,                        (24)


where ∆p ep,t is the actual observed employment difference in a quarter t in 2014.
    Finally, to assess the impact of the benefit duration cut on the unusual dynamics of em-
ployment in 2014, we estimate


                                      ˆ∗p,t = α(∆p bp,t − ∆p bp,2013/Q4 ).                                  (25)


    As before, we compute standard errors via block bootstrap and take into account that our
forecast ∆p ep,t is an estimated outcome subject to forecast error.19


6.1      Empirical Findings from the Event Study Analysis

Table 6 contains the results of this estimation of the effect of unemployment benefit duration
on employment and the labor force using an event study methodology. Both LAUS and QCEW
data imply a large positive impact of the cut in benefit duration on the respective measures
of employment. Similar to the preceding findings based on different methodologies, the results
  19
     Specifically, in each bootstrap replication, to construct the county forecast ẽi,t , we take the fitted value
predicted by the pre-event regression, êi,t and add in forecast error (to be consistent with the magnitude of
errors from the forecasting regression, we do this by sampling from the residuals of the pre-event regression in
Eq. 23). We then difference across pairs to generate E (∆p ẽp,t ).


                                                        34
of the event analysis imply that approximately one half of this increase in employment was
due to the increase in the labor force as a result of the reduction in benefit duration.


7     Conclusion
In this paper we measure the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on employment and
the labor force. We exploit the variation induced by the decision of the U.S. Congress in
December of 2013 to abruptly stop all federal unemployment benefit extensions. The particular
usefulness of this policy change for understanding the employment effects of benefit extensions
stems from the fact that the policy change at the national level was exogenous to economic
conditions of individual states.
    Following the aftermath of the Great Recession, by December 2013 there was a wide
heterogeneity of federally-financed durations of benefits across U.S. states, ranging from 0
to 47 weeks on top of the regular state-funded benefits with a typical duration of 26 weeks.
The available benefit duration in a given state just prior to the reform was endogenous to
the economic conditions of the state. Thus the key challenge to a proper inference of the
effects of benefits is to ensure that the effects are not confounded by pre-existing differences
in employment or labor force trends.
    Our formal analysis relies on four distinct empirical strategies to account for the possible
trend differences across locations. Common to all of these strategies is the focus on comparing
the counties that border each other but belong to different states and are thus subject to
different UI policies. This is helpful primarily because underlying trends are likely to be more
similar across relatively small neighboring counties than across large states or counties that
are far apart. Moreover, the state-level policies are less likely to be endogenous to economic
condition of individual border counties.
    The first three empirical strategies use the pre- and post-reform data to estimate pre-
existing trends. The strategies differ in the modeling of trends (they all allow for county level
fixed effects and aggregate time effects). The baseline specification, which is the workhorse
in the literature, simply controls for deterministic county level trends. The second model of
trends is the latent factor (or interactive effects) model where county-level trends are assumed
to be induced by different exposure of each county to various aggregate shocks. This is a very


                                               35
flexible model of trends but the estimated aggregate factors and county-specific loadings do
not have a clear economic interpretation. Consequently, the third model is a hybrid of the first
two where the aggregate factors are represented by aggregate time series which are recognized
drivers of the aggregate economy.
   The fourth empirical strategy relies on the event study methodology where county-level
employment and labor force trends are estimated on the pre-reform data only and the effects
of benefits are inferred from the difference in the actual evolution of the labor force and
employment following the reform from the prediction based on the pre-reform data.
   A simple descriptive analysis shows a much faster employment growth in 2014 in counties
that belong to high benefit states relative to their neighboring counties that belong to states
with lower benefit durations prior to the reform. It also finds no evidence of mean-reversion
at the level of border counties. In other words, in the absence of a change in UI policy,
counties that belong to high benefit states in a given quarter are not more likely to grow faster
subsequently than the neighboring counties across the state border. Moreover it illustrates
that even the least flexible model of county-level trends among those we consider ensures that
conditional on the estimated trends, the common trend assumption is satisfied when border
counties are compared.
   Applying the four formal empirical methodologies, we find that after controlling for hetero-
geneous county-level employment trends, changes in unemployment benefits have a large and
statistically significant effect on employment: a 1 percent drop in benefit duration increases
employment by 0.0144 to 0.0233 log point and labor force by 0.0058 to 0.0123 log points.
These estimates are based on comparisons of border counties. While this is of direct interest
for assessing the effects of local policy changes, it is also desirable to be able to use these
estimates to infer the effects of a nation-wide policy change. We documents several empirical
facts and provide a simple model that guides the aggregation of these effects. We find that
the cut in benefit duration accounted for about 50 to 80 percent of the aggregate employment
growth in 2014. Over half of the aggregate employment growth was due the increase in the
labor force induced by the policy reform.
   While our primary focus in the paper is on total employment and the labor force for
which the only data source is the LAUS program of the BLS, we also replicate the entire
analysis using the administrative payroll counts from the QCEW. As we discuss above, the

                                               36
                                            3
                                                                         Employment (LAUS)
      Implied Aggregate Eﬀect (millions)
                                                                         Labor Force (LAUS)
                                           2.5
                                                                         Payroll Employment (QCEW)
                                             2


                                           1.5


                                                1


                                            0.5


                                                 0
                                                     M1,S1
                                                                 M1,S2
                                                                                M1,S3
                                                                                               M2
                                                             Methodology and Speciﬁca;on

Figure 4: Implied aggregate effects of the benefit cut across methodologies and datasets. M1,S1:
Benchmark (Section 4.1); M1,S2: Interactive Effects Model (Section 4.3); M1,S3: “Natural”
Factors Model (Section 4.4); M2: Event Study Analysis (Section 6).


two data sets are different in terms of the notion of employment and in terms of coverage. The
conclusions they lead to are nevertheless very similar. More generally, all our findings, although
based on different methodologies and different data sets, point to the same conclusion that
the benefit cut in 2014 lead to significant employment gains and an increase in the labor force.
To highlight the similarities between them, Figure 4 collects the estimates of the aggregate
employment and labor force growth in 2014 due to the policy reform across all methodologies
and data sets we consider.
   Our empirical approach is agnostic about the channels which cause employment and labor
force participation to increase. Instead of measuring one specific channel, our objective is
to measure the aggregate total effect of all potential channels at the same time, including


                                                                         37
equilibrium effects. In particular, our measure also includes the effect of changes in demand
on employment and the labor force, while remaining agnostic about the reason for the change
in demand. For example, it allows for a drop in demand (e.g. in nontradables) across counties
due to the cut in benefit payments as well as an increase in demand as a result of an increase
in employment which is due to the benefit cut.
   While we did not impose any theoretical restrictions of a particular labor market model
on our empirical analysis, the findings are consistent with the predictions of the standard
equilibrium labor market search model. For example, the primary labor market effect of a
cut in unemployment benefit duration in the framework of Mortensen and Pissarides (1994)
is the positive impact on job creation (in such a framework Mitman and Rabinovich (2013)
find a quantitatively similar effect of the expiration of benefits on employment in 2014). It
is this rise in job creation that leads in equilibrium to the increase in employment. It is
also consistent with standard search models that an increase in job availability draws non-
participants (who are not eligible for benefits either before or after the reform) into the labor
market leading to a positive effect on the labor force (for a textbook treatment see Chapter
7 in Pissarides (2000)), even outweighing the potentially countervailing effect of unemployed
leaving the labor force after losing eligibility for benefits. Remarkably though, such aggregate
labor market implications of unemployment benefit policies have been largely neglected by
the empirical literature. The findings in this paper suggest that future research and policy
analyses should take these aggregate implications into account.




                                               38
References
Bai, J. (2009): “Panel Data Models with Interactive Fixed Effects,” Econometrica, 77, 1229–
 1279.
Bai, J. and S. Ng (2002): “Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor
 Models,” Econometrica, 70, 191–221.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004): “How Much Should We Trust
 Differences-In-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 249–275.
Council of Economic Advisers and the Department of Labor (2013): “The Eco-
 nomic Benefits of Extending Unemployment Insurance,” Report, The White House.
Dourado, E. and C. Koopman (2015): “Evaluating the Growth of the 1099 Workforce,”
 Mercatus Center, George Mason University.
Gobillon, L. and T. Magnac (2015): “Regional Policy Evaluation: Interactive Fixed
 Effects and Synthetic Controls,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.
Hagedorn, M., J. Handbury, and I. Manovskii (2015): “Demand Stimulus and Infla-
 tion: Empirical Evidence,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Hagedorn, M., F. Karahan, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2013): “Unemployment
 Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects,” NBER
 Working Papers 19499, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
——— (2014): “Unemployment Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role
 of Micro Effects,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Hagedorn, M. and I. Manovskii (2008): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unem-
 ployment and Vacancies Revisited,” American Economic Review, 98, 1692–1706.
——— (2011): “Productivity and the Labor Market: Co-Movement over the Business Cycle,”
 International Economic Review, 52, 603–619.
Holmes, T. J. (1998): “The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing:
 Evidence from State Borders,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 667–705.
Johnston, A. and A. Mas (2015): “Potential Unemployment Insurance Duration and Labor
  Supply: The Individual and Market-Level Response to a Benefit Cut,” Working paper,
  Princeton University.
Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama, R. Rogerson, and A. Sahin (2015): “Gross Worker Flows
 over the Business Cycle,” Centre for Macroeconomics (CFM) Discussion Paper 1530.



                                            39
MacKinlay, A. C. (1997): “Event Studies in Economics and Finance,” Journal of Economic
 Literature, 35, pp. 13–39.
Mitman, K. and S. Rabinovich (2013): “Do Changes in Unemployment Insurance Explain
 the Emergence of Jobless Recoveries?” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Mortensen, D. T. and C. Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
 Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61, 397–415.
Mulligan, C. B. (2015): “The New Employment and Earnings Taxes Created by Social
 Programs,” Testimony for the U.S. House of Representatives.
Pissarides, C. (1985): “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies and
  Real Wages,” American Economic Review, 75, 676–690.
——— (2000): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, Cambridge, MA, second ed.: MIT Press.
Solon, G. (1979): “Labor Supply Effects of Extended Unemployment Benefits,” Journal of
  Human Resources, 14, 247–255.




                                         40
                                        Appendices

I    Estimating the Number of Factors
To implement the interactive effects estimator, we need to specify the number of factors. Bai
and Ng (2002) have shown that the number of factors in pure factor models can be consistently
estimated based on the information criterion approach. Bai (2009) shows that their argument
can be adapted to panel data models with interactive fixed effects. Thus, we define our criterion
CP as a function of the number of factors k as:
                                                                     log (N T )
                     CP (k) = σ̂ 2 (k) + σ̂ 2 (k̄) k (N + T ) − k 2
                                                  
                                                                                 ,
                                                                         NT

where k̄ ≥ r is the maximum number of factors, N is the number of pairs, T is the number of
time observations, σ̂ 2 (k) is the mean squared error, defined as

                             N   T
                2        1 XX                                    0
                                                                              2
               σ̂ (k) =             ∆ep,t − α It≥2013/Q4 ∆bp,t − λi (k) Ft (k) ,
                        N T i=1 t=1

                 0
and Ft (k) and λi (k) are the estimated factors and their loadings, respectively, when k factors
are estimated. To avoid collinearity, we set k̄ to the minimum of seven and T − 1, one less
than the total number of time observations. Our estimator for the number of factors is then
given by
                                      k̂ = arg min CP (k).
                                                 k≤k̄



II     Aggregation: A Simple Trade Model of the US
In this section we show that we can use our estimates based on border counties to derive
the implications for the induced employment for the aggregate U.S. economy. To this aim,
we develop a model where each county is an open economy inside the (closed) US economy.
The labor market in each county is governed by a Mortensen Pissarides search and match-
ing model. Each county produces (and consumes) a nontradable and a tradable good. Both
sectors, the one producing the tradable good and the one producing the nontradable one,
operate in the same labor market and are subject to the same labor market frictions as in
s standard Mortensen Pissarides model. The evidence provided in Section 4.2.1 implies that
the unemployed do not change where to search for a job in response to changes in benefits.
In the model, which we use to study a policy change in benefits, we therefore assume that
unemployed search for jobs in their own county only.


                                                  41
   Specifically, each county is described by a discrete time two sector version of the Pissarides
(1985, 2000) search and matching model. There is a measure one of infinitely lived workers
and a continuum of infinitely lived firms. Workers maximize their expected lifetime utility:
                                              ∞
                                              X
                                          E         δ t yt ,                                   (A1)
                                              t=0


where yt represents income in period t and δ ∈ (0, 1) is workers’ and firms’ common discount
factor. We denote the sectors producing tradable and non-tradable goods by Ω ∈ {T, N T }.
Firms in both the tradable (Ω = T ) and the non-tradable (Ω = N T ) sector have a constant
returns to scale production technology that uses labor as the only input (Pissarides (1985,
2000) shows that capital can be added to the model leaving all equations unchanged).
    Output of each unit of labor in sector Ω is denoted by AΩ . There is free entry of firms into
both sectors. Firms attract unemployed workers by posting a vacancy at the flow cost c. The
price of the tradable good is normalized to one (pT = 1) and the price of the non-tradable
is denoted pN T . Once matched, workers and firms separate exogenously with probability s
per period. Employed workers in sector Ω are paid a wage wΩ , and firms in sector Ω make
accounting profits pΩ AΩ − wΩ per worker each period in which they operate. Unemployed
workers get flow utility z from leisure/non-market activity. Unemployed workers can search
in either one of the two sectors. In equilibrium they are indifferent in which sector to search.
Workers and firms split the surplus from a match according to the generalized Nash bargaining
solution. The bargaining power of workers is β ∈ (0, 1).
    Let uΩ denote the unemployed searching in sector Ω, eΩ the employment in sector Ω and
v Ω the number of vacancies posted in sector Ω. We refer to θΩ = v Ω /uΩ as the market tightness
in sector Ω. The number of new matches in each sector is given by a constant returns to scale
matching function m(uΩ , v Ω ). Employment in each sector evolves according to the following
law of motion:

                               nΩ             Ω      Ω Ω
                                t+1 = (1 − s)nt + m(ut , vt ).                                 (A2)

    The probability for an unemployed worker searching in sector Ω to be matched with a
vacancy next period equals f (θtΩ ) = m(uΩ      Ω    Ω           Ω
                                           t , vt )/ut = m(1, θt ). The probability for a vacancy
in sector Ω to be filled next period equals q(θtΩ ) = m(uΩ       Ω    Ω        Ω            Ω    Ω
                                                            t , vt )/vt = m(1/θt , 1) = f (θt )/θt .
We restrict m(uΩ      Ω          Ω Ω
                 t , vt ) ≤ min(ut , vt ).
    In each sector Ω, denote the firm’s value of a job (a filled vacancy) by J Ω , the firm’s value
of an unfilled vacancy by V Ω , the worker’s value of having a job by W Ω , and the worker’s




                                                    42
value of being unemployed and searching in sector Ω by U Ω .

                                                                 0
                          J Ω = pΩ AΩ − wΩ + δ(1 − s)J Ω                                  (A3)
                                                 Ω0
                         V Ω = −c + δq(θΩ )J                                              (A4)
                                                                      0
                         U Ω = z + δ{f (θΩ )W Ω + (1 − f (θΩ ))U Ω }                      (A5)
                                                      Ω0         Ω0
                         W Ω = wΩ + δ{(1 − s)W             + sU }.                        (A6)

   The interpretation is straightforward. Operating firms earn profits pΩ AΩ − wΩ and the
matches are exogenously destroyed with probability s. A vacancy costs c and is matched with
a worker (becomes productive next period) with probability q(θΩ ). An unemployed worker
derives utility z and finds a job next period with probability f (θΩ ). An employed worker
earns wage wΩ but may lose her job with probability s and become unemployed next period.
   Nash bargaining with worker bargaining power β implies that a worker and a firm split
the surplus S Ω = J Ω + W Ω − U Ω such that

                                        J Ω = (1 − β)S                                    (A7)
                                     W Ω − U Ω = βS Ω .                                   (A8)

Free entry implies that the value of posting a vacancy is zero: V Ω = 0 and, therefore,

                                                             0
                                   c = δq(θΩ )(1 − β)S Ω .                                (A9)

   As shown in Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) the steady state surplus equals

                                            p Ω AΩ − z
                              SΩ =                            .                           (A10)
                                     1 − δ(1 − s) + δf (θΩ )β

Plugging this into the free entry condition yields:

                               pΩ A Ω − z               c
                                            Ω
                                                =     Ω
                                                                ,                         (A11)
                        1 − δ(1 − s) + δf (θ )β   δq(θ )(1 − β)

and, equivalently,

                         1 − δ(1 − s)      Ω   p Ω AΩ − z
                                      + βθ   =            (1 − β).                        (A12)
                            δq(θΩ )                 c

   Since unemployed workers are indifferent between searching in the tradable or in the non-
tradable sector, U T = U N T , which implies that AT = pN T AN T (where we used the nor-
malization pT = 1), θT = θN T and wT = wN T . To see this, suppose AT 6= pN T AN T , say


                                               43
AT > pN T AN T . Then, the above equations imply that θT > θN T and since wages equal

                             wT = βAT + (1 − β)z + cβθT                                     (A13)
                           wN T = βpN T AN T + (1 − β)z + cβθN T ,                          (A14)

we also have wT > wN T . As a a result, U T > U N T , implying by contradiction that AT =
pN T AN T , which then implies θT = θN T and wT = wN T .
                                                             f (θi )
    This implies that employment in county i equals ei = s+f    (θi )
                                                                      , where θi = θT = θN T .
Employment in the US then equals
                                             X
                                E=                           ei Li ,                        (A15)
                                     All U.S. counties i

where Li is labor force in county i.
    In the empirical analysis we compare two neighboring counties i and j. The difference in
log employment is log(ei ) − log(ej ) + log(Li ) − log(Lj ), where in this simple model Li and Lj
are fixed. Our regression then delivers an estimate of the elasticity of employment in county i
w.r.t. an increase benefit duration in county i, since employment in county i does not depend
on the benefit level in other counties. To see this, note that since θi solves

                           1 − δ(1 − s)         AT,i − zi
                                        + βθi =           (1 − β),                          (A16)
                              δq(θi )               c

it just responds to changes in zi but not to changes in zj .
    This then implies that this measured elasticity yields also the response of county i em-
ployment when we compute the policy induced change in employment for the whole US.
Specifically, the percentage employment gain in the US equals

                                     X                                 e2013
                                                                        i    L2013
                                                                               i
                   πE = α                         (b2014
                                                    i    − b2013
                                                            i    )                 ,        (A17)
                                                                          EU2013
                                                                             S
                            All U.S. counties i

where α is the estimated elasticity at the county level and b is the logarithm of benefit duration.
  The corresponding gain in the total number of employed then equals

                                            π E × EU2014
                                                     S
                                     ∆E =           E
                                                         .                                  (A18)
                                               1+π

   The same derivations for employment can be applied to the labor force as well. Indeed,
Pissarides (2000) shows in a more complex model, where heterogenous households take a
participation decision, that the labor force can be written as a function of market tightness
as well. The same derivations as above in the more elaborated model imply that labor force

                                                44
in a county depends on market tightness in that county only (and not on market tightness in
other counties). Our regression then delivers again an estimate of the elasticity of the labor
force in county i w.r.t. an increase benefit duration in county i (since labor force in county i
does not depend on the benefit level in other counties). And we can again use this estimate at
the county level to compute the percentage change of the aggregate labor force and the gain
in the the total number of labor force participants.




                                              45
                                         III                       Appendix Figures


                                                             Average	  Monthly	  Job	  Growth	                                                                                                    Employment	  Popula.on	  Ra.o	  
                                     300	                                                                                                                                           59.20	  




                                                                                                                                         Employment/Popula.on	  	  
Thousands	  of	  Jobs	  




                                     250	                                                                                                                                           59.00	  
                                     200	                                                                                                                                           58.80	  
                                     150	                                                                                                                                           58.60	  
                                     100	                                                                                                                                           58.40	  
                                         50	                                                                                                                                        58.20	  
                                           0	                                                                                                                                       58.00	  
                                                               2011	        2012	                  2013	      2014	                                                                                  2011	        2012	                 2013	         2014	  
                                                                                         Year	                                                                                                                                   Year	  


                                                                      (a) Monthly Job Growth.                                                                                                        (b) Employment to Population Ratio.

                                                             Unemployment	  Rate	  Change	                                                                                                       Labor	  Force	  Par+cipa+on	  Growth	  
                                                   0	                                                                                                                                0.00	  


                                                                                                                                        Labor	  Force	  Par+cipa+on	  Rate	  
                                    -­‐0.02	                    2011	       2012	                 2013	      2014	                                                                                  2011	        2012	                2013	         2014	  
                                                                                                                                                                                     -­‐0.02	  
                                    -­‐0.04	  
Percent	  Change	  




                                    -­‐0.06	                                                                                                                                        -­‐0.04	  
                                     -­‐0.08	  
                                                                                                                                                                                     -­‐0.06	  
                                         -­‐0.1	  
                                    -­‐0.12	                                                                                                                                        -­‐0.08	  
                                    -­‐0.14	  
                                                                                                                                                                                     -­‐0.10	  
                                    -­‐0.16	  
                                     -­‐0.18	                                                                                                                                       -­‐0.12	  
                                                                                          Year	                                                                                                                                  Year	  


                                                              (c) Unemployment Rate Change.                                                                                                         (d) Labor Force Participation Growth.


                                                           Average	  Monthly	  Vacancy	  Growth	                                                                                                          Produc3vity	  Growth	  
                                         100	                                                                                                                                      0.012	  
      Thousands	  of	  Vacancies	  




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.01	  
                                                                                                                                  Annual	  Growth	  Rate	  




                                           80	  
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.008	  
                                           60	  
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.006	  
                                           40	  
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.004	  
                                           20	                                                                                                                                     0.002	  

                                              0	                                                                                                                                           0	  
                                                                2011	        2012	                  2013	      2014	                                                                                2011	        2012	                 2013	         2014	  
                                                                                          Year	                                                                                                                                  Year	  


                                                                  (e) Monthly Vacancy Growth.                                                                                                                (f) Productivity Growth.

                                                                                        Figure A-1: U.S. Labor Market Performance in 2014.

                                         Note - Data series downloaded from the Bureau of Labor Statistics                                                                                                                                               website
                                         http://www.bls.gov/data/ on 01/09/2015 with the following series identifiers:
                                         Panel (a) - CES0000000001, Panel (b) - LNS12300000, Panel (c) - LNS14000000,
                                         Panel (d) - LNS11300000, Panel (e) - JTS00000000JOL, Panel (f) - PRS85006093.


                                                                                                                             46
