                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INSURANCE DECISION-MAKING FOR RARE EVENTS:
                              THE ROLE OF EMOTIONS

                                          Howard Kunreuther
                                             Mark Pauly

                                         Working Paper 20886
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20886


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2015




Our thanks to Sargent Shriver for his assistance in helping us analyze the data and to Carol Heller
and Robert Shiller for helpful suggestions on an earlier draft of the paper. Support for this research
comes from the National Science Foundation (SES-1061882 and SES-1062039); the Center for Climate
and Energy Decision Making through a cooperative agreement between the National Science Foundation
and Carnegie Mellon University (SES-0949710); the Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism
Events (CREATE) at the University of Southern California; the Center for Research on Environmental
Decisions (CRED; NSF Cooperative Agreement SES-0345840 to Columbia University), the Z-Zurich
Foundation and the Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes Center. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Howard Kunreuther and Mark Pauly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Insurance Decision-Making For Rare Events: The Role Of Emotions
Howard Kunreuther and Mark Pauly
NBER Working Paper No. 20886
January 2015
JEL No. C90,D12,D60,D81,G22

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper describes the results of a web-based multi-period insurance purchasing experiment focusing
on how individuals make insurance choices for low-probability, high-consequence events. Participants
were told the probability and resulting losses of a hurricane occurring and were informed that these
were stable from period to period. We contrast the model of informed expected utility [E(U)] maximization
with alternative behavioral models of choice as explanations for what we observe. The majority of
individuals (63 percent) behaved in ways that were consistent with expected utility theory, although
we do not know whether these individuals were utilizing other decision rules. A sizeable number of
uninsured individuals decided to purchase insurance after learning that they had suffered a loss and
revealing that they were unhappy about having been uninsured. In this sense, the study shows that
a loss coupled with emotions is likely to play an important role in convincing an uninsured person
to buy coverage. In contrast, insured individuals who did not suffer a loss rarely dropped coverage.
The paper concludes by raising questions regarding the welfare implications of this behavior.


Howard Kunreuther
Operations and Information Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3730 Walnut Street, 500 JMHH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu

Mark Pauly
Health Care Management Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
208 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu
               INSURANCE DECISION‐MAKING FOR RARE EVENTS: THE ROLE OF EMOTIONS 1

                                              Howard Kunreuther
                                                 Mark Pauly

                                                 January 2015


                                                   Abstract

This paper describes the results of a web‐based multi‐period insurance purchasing experiment focusing
on how individuals make insurance choices for low‐probability, high‐consequence events. Participants
were told the probability and resulting losses of a hurricane occurring and were informed that these were
stable from period to period. We contrast the model of informed expected utility [E(U)] maximization
with alternative behavioral models of choice as explanations for what we observe. The majority of
individuals (63 percent) behaved in ways that were consistent with expected utility theory, although we
do not know whether these individuals were utilizing other decision rules. A sizeable number of uninsured
individuals decided to purchase insurance after learning that they had suffered a loss and revealing that
they were unhappy about having been uninsured. In this sense, the study shows that a loss coupled with
emotions is likely to play an important role in convincing an uninsured person to buy coverage. In
contrast, insured individuals who did not suffer a loss rarely dropped coverage. The paper concludes by
raising questions regarding the welfare implications of this behavior.

Keywords: individual decision‐making; choice under uncertainty; multi‐year insurance; disasters

JEL: C90, D6, D12, D81, G22


1. Introduction

Insurance is most valuable against relatively rare and large losses. Yet there is considerable empirical
evidence that consumers have difficulty deciding whether or not to buy insurance. Mistakes often occur
and are most consequential when the probability of the risky event is low and the potential loss is large.
For these low‐probability high‐consequence (LP‐HC) events, consumers have little loss experience either
personally or by observing first‐hand the impact of these disasters on others. Should they suffer damage
from an adverse event, they may overreact to the losses by overestimating the likelihood of a future loss.

In making decisions about whether to purchase insurance at a given point of time, there are three types
of mistakes: (1) consumers may continue to renew a given insurance policy due to a status quo bias even
when the objective circumstances (premiums, expected losses) change over time (Neipp and Zeckhauser,
1985; Madrian and Shea, 2001); (2) some consumers who are insured may be inclined to drop their

 1
   Kunreuther and Pauly, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. Email: Kunreuth@wharton.upenn.edu and
 Pauly@wharton.upenn.edu. Our thanks to Sargent Shriver for his assistance in helping us analyze the data and to
 Carol Heller for helpful suggestions on an earlier draft of the paper. Support for this research comes from the
 National Science Foundation (SES‐1061882 and SES‐1062039); the Center for Climate and Energy Decision Making
 through a cooperative agreement between the National Science Foundation and Carnegie Mellon University (SES‐
 0949710); the Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events (CREATE) at the University of Southern
 California; the Center for Research on Environmental Decisions (CRED; NSF Cooperative Agreement SES‐0345840
 to Columbia University), the Z‐Zurich Foundation and the Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes Center.



                                                        1
coverage if the event has not occurred even when objective circumstances do not change, because they
view insurance as an investment and feel it is not paying off (Michel Kerjan, Lemoyne de Forges and
Kunreuther, 2012); (3) uninsured consumers who suffer a loss may regret not having bought coverage and
then decide to buy insurance even though the occurrence of the loss does not imply any change in future
loss probabilities. That is, there may either be excess or insufficient persistence, relative to what would
be implied if a consumer maximized expected utility. Empirical evidence from laboratory experiments
and field studies indicates that individuals often make insurance purchase decisions based on factors such
as past experience and emotions. In making their choices they utilize simplified decision rules and exhibit
systematic biases (Kunreuther, Pauly and McMorrow, 2013).

Some changes in consumers’ purchase behavior can be understandable if recent experience signals to
them that there has been a change in their probability of loss. For example, when insureds have not
experienced a loss over a long period of time, they may perceive the likelihood of a future loss to be lower
than they originally thought. A recent loss may lead the individual to perceive that the probability of a
future loss is higher than it previously was, even though there may be no scientific evidence to support
this reaction. However, if there is credible external evidence that the loss probability remained constant
over time, past experience should not lead to changes in purchasing if the buyer is properly informed.

This paper focuses on how individuals make insurance choices when dealing with LP‐HC events and how
those decisions contrast with choices consistent with a benchmark model based on expected utility [E(U)]
theory. One rationale for comparing actual behavior with a normative model of choice such as E(U) is to
develop a more robust theory of behavioral welfare economics by building on the conceptual thinking of
Gul and Pesendorfer (2007), Koszegi and Rabin (2007), and Bernheim and Rangel (2009). These papers all
address the problem of making welfare economic judgments when consumers make choices that appear
to outside observers to be “mistakes.” When consumers happen to behave in ways that do not appear to
be rational, are such choices a priori candidates for policy interventions?

In this paper we focus on factors that have been shown to influence consumer decision‐making. The
number of anecdotally plausible factors is very large, but it is an empirical question as to which ones have
the most consistent and greatest influence on actual behavior. We specifically examine emotional
reactions, such as how insured individuals feel after not experiencing a loss or how uninsured individuals
who suffer a loss in a given period feel immediately thereafter. We then explore how these emotions
may influence future insurance purchase decisions in ways not predicted by the benchmark model of
choice. It will also be useful to know how consumers’ insurance purchasing behavior changes as loss
experience accumulates over time.

Recent work on insurance demand has emphasized the fact that there is heterogeneity in choice among
those facing similar risky circumstances, potentially arising both from differences in preferences or utility
functions, but also from individuals’ propensity to use different kinds of decision making processes or
models (Einav et al., 2012). Some individuals behave as if they followed the benchmark expected utility
maximization model while others are influenced by recent and/or accumulated experience and make
decisions in ways that are inconsistent with that model. We are particularly interested in how we can
explain differences in behavior and what public policy interventions (if any) should be implemented that
move people toward E(U) maximization.

In an effort to shed light on these questions, we designed a multi‐period insurance purchasing
experiment in which participants were told the loss probability and were informed that it was stable
from period to period, but where participants experienced different patterns of losses. We contrast
the model of informed expected utility maximization with alternative behavioral models of choice as
explanations for what we observe. We focus on emotions (rather than imperfect probability updating)
as an explanation for changes in insurance purchasing behavior over time. To do this we probe



                                                       2
consumers’ emotions before and after knowing their loss experience in any time period as potential
predictors of their purchasing behavior in subsequent periods.

2. Predictions based on the Benchmark Model of Choice

The benchmark model assumes that individuals are risk averse and maximize their expected utility with
complete information regarding the probability of a loss and its magnitude in every time period. In this
experiment, participants were told that the loss probability is identical in every period regardless of
whether or not they experienced a loss in earlier periods. These consumers will presumably choose
whether or not to buy coverage by comparing the premium they are offered with the likelihood of a loss
and its consequences. When faced with premiums that are either favorable or actuarially fair, all risk
averse consumers behaving according to the benchmark model should purchase insurance in every period
regardless of their loss experience. Risk‐loving consumers may choose not to be insured, but they also
should be consistent across periods. When faced with an actuarially unfair premium, the decision on
whether to purchase coverage depends on the individual’s degree of risk aversion. In all cases, whatever
decision is made in the first period should be repeated in all subsequent periods.

We also inquired about emotions of two sorts. Using an indexed scale, we asked respondents how GLAD
they were after they had made their insurance purchase decision but before they knew the loss
outcome. After they knew whether or not they suffered a loss in a given period, we then asked
participants to characterize how they FEEL on an indexed scale. Expected utility treats the emotions of
GLAD and FEEL to be independent of previous experience.

3. Role of Emotions in Choice Behavior

There is a growing literature on how emotions influence individuals’ decisions under risk (Loewenstein et
al., 2001; Finucane et al., 2000). For low‐probability, high‐consequence events, those at risk may buy
coverage to reduce their anxiety about experiencing a large financial loss, giving them peace of mind. After
observing whether or not they have suffered a loss, individuals may regret their insurance decision (Bell,
1982; Loomes and Sugden, 1982; Braun and Muermann, 2004). Imagine you were residing in Florida and
had not purchased insurance against possible damage from hurricanes and a storm occurred causing
extensive losses to your property. After the disaster you likely wished you had purchased coverage and
regret not having done so. If you feel very badly that you were uninsured, you may decide to purchase
insurance as a way of avoiding this emotion in the future. Conversely, if you have been paying premiums
for years and never collected a penny, the regret you feel over that situation may eventually prompt you
to stop purchasing.

The behavioral model we will examine is one that explicitly considers emotions as part of the decision
process. More specifically, we hypothesize that a person’s prior loss experience will influence the value of
FEEL which may then lead to a change in the person’s insurance purchasing decision in the next period.
We hypothesize that FEEL will be higher for people who purchased insurance and then suffered a loss
relative to people who purchased insurance and whose home was unscathed. Similarly, FEEL will
also be higher for people who were uninsured and did not suffer a loss relative to those who did suffer a
loss. If the level of FEEL is low enough, indicating a strong negative emotional reaction, an individual is
likely to change his/her insurance status in the next period.

We will also be exploring two other kinds of anomalies. One has to do with the relationship of
premiums to demand for insurance: risk averse people who are uninsured every period when charged




                                                      3
favorable or fair premiums will be behaving anomalously; these individuals are classified as price
inconsistent. The other has to do with changing insurance purchase behavior when neither loss
probability nor experience differs; these individuals are switching for no objective reason and are
classified as time‐inconsistent.

It is important to note that behavior that can be explained by a given model may also be consistent with
other models. In those cases, one cannot specify the reason for an individual’s behavior. On the other
hand, if behavior is consistent with one model and inconsistent with others, then this offers support for
the model that is consistent with behavior.

4. Experiments to Test Hypotheses Implied by Expected Utility Theory

4.1 Experimental Design

To determine whether individuals’ insurance purchasing decisions are consistent with expected utility
maximization under risk aversion, and the role that emotions (GLAD and FEEL) play in their decision
process, we undertook an experiment with adults in the United States. Most of the participants were
over 30, so were likely to have experience purchasing insurance. The experiment consisted of a 10‐
period game where participants were asked to imagine that they own a house worth US$100,000.

Participants were told at the outset of the experiment that they would play a 10‐period game, and that in
each period there is a chance that a major hurricane will occur. If a hurricane occurs, the house will suffer
a loss in value of US$50,000 unless the participant has purchased insurance for that period, in which case
s/he will be fully reimbursed by the insurer for the loss. Participants were told that experts estimate the
likelihood of a hurricane occurring to be 1 in 25 (i.e., 4%). After making their insurance decision,
participants were asked one of the following questions depending on whether or not they had purchased
coverage:

         •   “How glad are you with your decision to buy insurance at this premium?"
         •   “How glad are you with your decision not to buy insurance at this premium?"

The question had the following 5‐point scale used to define the variable GLAD:

  Very unhappy         Unhappy            Neither unhappy nor glad                Glad             Very glad
        1                 2                          3                             4                   5

After making their insurance decision, participants were told whether a hurricane occurred, and then
one of the following questions was posed:

         •   When a hurricane occurred, participants were asked: "How do you feel about [not]
             having bought insurance now that you know a hurricane did occur?"
         •   When a hurricane did not occur, participants were asked: "How do you feel about [not]
             having bought insurance now that you know a hurricane did not occur?"

The response scale was identical to the one noted above for the questions related to GLAD and is used
to define the variable FEEL.

At the end of each period, a new round of the game was played and participants were told the conditions
were the same. In other words there was no change in the insurance premium the likelihood of a hurricane
was 1 in 25, and the loss if a hurricane occurred was US$50,000. By providing individuals with explicit
information on the probabilities of a hurricane and the resulting loss if it occurred, we may not have
depicted how individuals actually behave when faced with LP‐HC events; however, the design of the
experiment enables us to examine whether emotions impact on their choices over time. As Wagenaar and
                                                      4
Keren (2006) have shown many individuals believe that their decisions in many real world situations are
due to luck that enables them to escape from negative consequences. (Wagenaar and Keren 2006). It
would be surprising if participants responded to the FEEL questions by associating good or bad luck with
their insurance decision in a particular round.

To avoid income effects, there was no accumulation of wealth across periods. Repeating the same game
allowed us to determine how demand for insurance evolves over time, whether it changes following the
occurrence of a hurricane, the role that GLAD plays in the decision on whether to buy insurance, and the
impact on FEEL of learning whether or not a person suffered damage from a hurricane. Since participants
were asked how they FEEL about having bought or not bought insurance in round t after learning about
whether a hurricane had occurred but before making their insurance decision in round t+1, FEEL could
not be used to justify their insurance decision in round t+1.

To analyze the impact that suffering a loss from a hurricane had on decisions in future periods, the
experiment was designed so that one‐third of the participants experienced a hurricane in period 2, one‐
third in period 8, and one‐third did not experience any hurricanes at all. Any individual who experienced
a hurricane in period 2 was precluded from experiencing another one in period 8.

We also examined the impact that insurance premium differentials had on participants’ decisions on
whether or not to purchase coverage. The expected loss from the hurricane over all 10 periods was
$2,000 per period (i.e., .04 x 50,000). One‐third of the participants were offered insurance at a favorable
premium of $1,600; one‐third were offered an actuarially fair policy at a premium of $2,000; and
one‐third were offered insurance at a premium of $2,400, which implies a loading factor of 20 percent.

The experiment was conducted on a web‐based platform (Qualtrics) with 1,834 adults in Florida–a
state subject to hurricanes–whose demographics are representative of the state of Florida. About
three‐ quarters of the participants were placed in a voluntary setting where they could determine
whether or not to purchase coverage; the others were required to have insurance. Slightly more than
half of the participants who could voluntarily purchase insurance and two‐thirds of those required to
have insurance were given tutorials with respect to how to undertake deliberative thinking in
evaluating whether insurance is worth having. Midway through the game (in period 5), half of the
participants in every group were shown graphic pictures of damage that could occur from a hurricane
to see whether this impacted their insurance purchase decision.2

Before a participant began the 10‐period game, s/he was asked two hypothetical questions to make sure
that s/he understood the nature of the experiment and the impact of a specific insurance decision on
the asset level at the end of each of the two successive periods. Individuals who answered only one of
the questions correctly were directed to read the instructions again but could participate in the
experiment. Those who gave wrong answers to both test questions were excluded from participating in
the experiment to increase statistical power and reliability (Oppenheimer et al., 2009).

This paper examines the decision process of those who had the opportunity to purchase insurance
voluntarily. Table 1 shows the number of those participants who experienced hurricanes in period 2 or 8
or did not suffer a loss in the 10‐period game.




2
 A preliminary analysis of the data indicates that the tutorial had no significant impact on the insurance purchase
decision. A graphic photo of damage from a hurricane in period 5 tended to increase insurance demand in that
period. We will provide an analysis of the impact of these variables in a subsequent version of this paper.
                                                          5
                                                   TABLE
                                                     1
                              Number of Subjects who Could Purchase Insurance
                                                Voluntarily
                                          Experiencing Hurricane
                                                  Damage

                                         PERIOD 2 HURRICANE       445
                                         PERIOD 8 HURRICANE       454
                                              NO HURRICANE        447


 4.2 Comparing the Models


E(U)‐maximizing participants in our experiment who could choose to purchase insurance voluntarily
should exhibit two kinds of behavior:

         (1) If they are risk averse they should purchase coverage if faced with favorable or fair
             premiums, but might choose not to buy coverage under unfair premiums if their aversion to
             risk is low
         (2) Whatever decision on coverage is made, it should be the same in every period regardless of
             loss experience

Hence, we can get a lower‐bound estimate of participants engaged in anomalous behavior by identifying
those who switch coverage status, and we can get an upper bound measure by adding those who are
consistently uninsured under favorable or fair premiums.

The informed risk averse E(U) maximizer responds to an actuarially unfair price by choosing whether or
not to buy insurance based on her/his degree of risk aversion, but s/he should surely purchase insurance
in all 10 periods if the premium is favorable or actuarially fair (defined as STAY INSURED). In addition,
those facing an actuarially unfair premium (that reflects administrative costs and profit) who decided to
remain uninsured for all 10 periods (defined as STAY UNINSURED) were considered to be consistent with
E(U) theory. Those inconsistent with E(U) theory would have switched insurance status at least once
during the 10 periods (defined as time‐inconsistent) or be uninsured for all 10 periods when offered a
favorable or fair premium (defined as price‐inconsistent).

Table 2 shows the proportion of respondents exhibiting time‐consistent and price‐consistent behaviors at
the three premiums.

                                                    TABLE 2
             Percent of Persons Continuously Insured and Uninsured for all 10 Periods (per Premium)

                 PREMIUM            N        STAY INSURED     STAY UNINSURED         SWITCH
                FAVORABLE          479          64.9%               7.5%              27.6%
                   FAIR            437          58.6%               9.8%              31.6%
                  UNFAIR           430          56.7%               9.3%              34.0%
                  TOTAL           1346          60.1%               8.9%              31.1%




                                                       6
Taken together, these data indicate that 60 percent of the participants chose to STAY INSURED and an
additional 3 percent chose to STAY UNINSURED if premiums were unfair.3 The behavior of these
individuals is consistent with what would be predicted by E(U) theory, although their actual decision
process might have been a different one from E(U) maximization. For example, a person could decide to
insure for all 10 periods to gain peace of mind, or remain uninsured because the likelihood of a hurricane
was below their threshold level of concern. Another 31 percent chose to SWITCH insurance status at least
once during the 10 periods. (Some of these time‐inconsistent participants also failed to purchase insurance
at favorable or fair premiums.) This behavior would be inconsistent with E(U) maximization regardless of
risk preferences. The remaining 6 percent chose to STAY UNINSURED even though they were offered
favorable or fair premiums. Their behavior would be inconsistent with E(U) maximization under the
assumption of risk aversion.

Figure 1 shows how participants’ purchasing behavior in the experiment varied with the premium. As can
be seen, the proportion purchasing insurance over all periods was highest at the favorable premium,
slightly lower at the fair premium and lowest at the actuarially unfair premium. This suggests that
individuals took premiums into account when making their decisions in a manner that is consistent with
E(U) theory.

                                                     FIGURE 1
                             PERCENT INSURED FOR FAVORABLE, FAIR AND UNFAIR PREMIUMS




 3
   There were 40 participants who chose to STAY UNINSURED when premiums were unfair, which is 3 percent of the
1,346 participants.
                                                        7
5. Switching Behavior and FEEL

We hypothesize that individuals respond to their loss experience in a two‐stage process. In stage 1, a bad
experience–such as being worse off than if a different purchase decision had been made–will likely affect a
person’s emotions, as measured by the score on the question about FEEL. More specifically, a person who
chose to be uninsured will likely have a lower level of FEEL if a loss occurs than if it does not, whereas
someone who chose to be insured will likely have a lower level of FEEL if a loss does not occur than if one
does. However, because the financial consequences of an uninsured loss are larger than the consequences
of a premium payment with no benefit, we expect the size of the difference in FEEL to be larger for the
uninsured individual than for the insured one.

Stage 2 relates to a possible switch in subsequent insurance purchasing behavior as a function of the
level of FEEL in the current period. We hypothesize that the lower the level of FEEL associated with
current behavior and current‐period loss experience, the more likely the person’s behavior will change in
the next period. Again, we expect this reaction to be stronger for those who suffer uninsured losses than
for individuals who pay a premium but do not collect on their policy because they do not suffer a loss.
One difficult question we will examine is whether switching behavior, for the uninsured, is primarily
determined by the effect of loss on FEEL (compared to no loss) or whether those uninsureds who suffer a
loss switch their insurance status independent of their level of FEEL

Our most interesting empirical results are associated with changes in insurance purchasing behavior for the
uninsured, depending on whether they do or do not experience an uninsured loss. We examine how the
emotion FEEL impacts these individuals’ decisions on whether or not to purchase coverage as a function of
their hurricane loss experience. To do this we define the variable LOSS, which takes on the value 1 if a
person suffers damage and 0 if she does not. We find that both FEEL and LOSS are significantly associated
with some uninsured individuals’ decision to switch to being insured. This is most likely to occur when an
uninsured individual suffers a loss and also feels very badly about the situation relative to her feelings if she
didn’t suffer a loss. The following section examines the role of FEEL on next‐period purchasing decisions by
uninsured individuals after they learn whether or not they have suffered a loss. We then turn to the
insured individuals and indicate why emotions such as FEEL are unlikely to explain their decision to switch
to being uninsured even when they have not suffered a loss for a number of periods.

6. Behavior of Uninsured Individuals

6.1 The Role of LOSS on FEEL

A low level of FEEL by an uninsured individual who experiences a loss may reflect regret at not having
purchased coverage. Conversely, if the uninsured individual did not suffer damage from a hurricane, the
average level of FEEL is likely to be much higher than for those who did suffer a loss, although some
persons who chose to be uninsured may still display low levels of FEEL even without a loss. That is, FEEL is
likely to be affected by the loss experience but not wholly determined by it. Table 3 shows that the
average level of FEEL among the uninsureds who experienced a hurricane loss is much lower than for
uninsureds who did not suffer a loss and is highly significant using a Wilcoxon‐Mann‐Whitney test.4 The
median values of FEEL were 2 and 5 in both periods 2 and 8 for LOSS and NO LOSS respectively.




4
 The Wilcoxon‐Mann‐Whitney test is used in place of an independent samples t‐test when the dependent variable is
not assumed to be a normally distributed interval variable.
                                                        8
                                                      TABLE 3
                   Relationship of LOSS to FEEL Score among Uninsured by Prior Period Behavior

                                                    PERIOD 2 LOSS

                                                             AVE FEEL SCORE                 WILCOXON‐MANN‐
                                        N               LOSS              NO LOSS            WHITNEY TEST
                 ALL UNINSURED         207               1.79              4.35                (p < .0001)
              ALWAYS UNINSURED         171               1.79               4.31               (p < .0001)
                  EVER INSURED          36               1.80               4.50               (p < .0001)
                                                      (p = .94)           (p = .44)
                  WILCOXON‐MANN‐WHITNEY TEST
                                                    (N = 72) z = .07    (N =135) z = .77


                                                    PERIOD 8 LOSS

                                                             AVE FEEL SCORE
                                                                                            WILCOXON‐MANN‐
                                        N              LOSS               NO LOSS            WHITNEY TEST
                 ALL UNINSURED         217              2.16                4.30               (p < .0001)
              ALWAYS UNINSURED          99              2.76                4.21               (p < .0001)
                  EVER INSURED         118              1.68                4.37               (p < .0001)
                                                    (p < .0001)           (p = .50)
                  WILCOXON‐MANN‐WHITNEY TEST
                                                   (N = 73) z = ‐3.87   (N = 144) z = .68



Period 8 provides a much more revealing picture of the role that consistency of behavior plays with
respect to FEEL since we are able to compare those who were uninsured for the first 7 periods and
remained uninsured in period 8 with those who had switched some time during the first 7 periods and
also were uninsured in period 8. As detailed in Table 3, those who were consistently uninsured and
suffered a loss late in the game (ALWAYS UNINSURED) had a much higher and statistically significant
post‐loss level of FEEL (2.76) than those who had been inconsistent non‐purchasers (EVER INSURED)
(1.68). The medians also were different between these two groups of uninsured when individuals
suffered a loss: 3 for the ALWAYS UNINSURED and 1 for the EVER INSURED.5 We attribute this higher
value of FEEL by the ALWAYS UNINSURED group as their being more prepared to suffer a loss compared to
those who had switched at least once. As expected, individuals who did not suffer a loss had a much
higher level of FEEL at the end of period 8 and there was almost no difference in the value of FEEL
between the two groups. This implies that insurance status in periods 1 through 7 had no significant
impact on how the subject felt if s/he did not suffer a loss in period 8 and was uninsured.

6.2 The Impact of LOSS and FEEL on Switching from Uninsured to Insured

We next turn to the relationship between suffering a loss and switching. Table 4 shows that a slightly
larger percentage of all uninsured individuals who suffered a loss in period 2 switched to being insured in
period 3 than those who did not suffer a loss (29.2% vs. 22.2%) but the difference is not statistically
significant. However, turning to period 8, we see that there is a statistically significant difference in
next‐period switching behavior between those suffering and not suffering a loss (37.0% vs. 22.2%;
p=.02).6

It is understandable that if a person is uninsured and suffers a loss, s/he will feel badly about not having
insurance, but this does not necessarily mean that one should decide to purchase coverage the next
period. If an individual behaves in a way that is consistent with expected utility theory, then he makes a


5
 The median was 5 for both groups when they did not suffer a loss.
6
 In examining switching behavior between periods 2 and 8 for those who did and did not suffer a loss, we see from
Table 4 that there is no statistically significant difference.
                                                             9
decision not to purchase insurance knowing that he will want to remain uninsured the next period unless
there is a decrease in the premium and/or an increase in the risk of a future hurricane. Given that these
parameters are constant across all 10 periods, an E(U) maximizer should be consistent over time in his
decision on whether or not to purchase insurance.

                                                     TABLE 4
                         Relationship of LOSS to Next Period Switching among Uninsured
                                                 PERIOD 2 LOSS
                           NUMBER                                                   % SWITCHING
  PERIOD 2        N          LOSSES           NO LOSSES            TOTAL               AFTER LOSS            AFTER NO LOSS CHI‐SQUARE TEST
  PERIOD 8       207           72               135                 24.6                   29.2                   22.2         (p = .27)
                 217           73               144                 27.2                   37.0                   22.2          (p = .02)
                                                                  (p = .55)              (p = .32)              (p = 1.0)
                                      CHI‐SQUARE TEST         (1, N = 424) = .36      (1, N = 145) = 1.00      (1, N = 279) = .00




To examine whether consistency over time affects either the relationship of LOSS to FEEL or switching in
response to a loss, we also compare those individuals who have always been uninsured prior to the time
that a hurricane occurred (periods 2 or 8) with those who may have previously switched insurance status.
We want to see if this prior behavior makes a difference as to how they FEEL after a loss and whether or
not they switch to being insured in the next period.

Table 5 shows that there is a difference in switching percentages, regardless of loss experience, between
those who had purchased insurance in one of the earlier periods and those who were consistently
uninsured. Compared to those who were EVER INSURED, a much smaller percentage of those who were
ALWAYS UNINSURED switched to being insured in the next period, whether or not they suffered a loss in
period 2 or 8.

                                                      TABLE 5
             Relationship of LOSS to Next‐Period Switching among Uninsured by Prior Period Behavior
                                                       PERIOD 2 LOSS
                                 NUMBER                                              % SWITCHING
                       TOTAL      LOSSES        NO LOSSES          TOTAL              AFTER LOSS            AFTER NO LOSS CHI‐SQUARE TEST
  ALWAYS UNINSURED      171         62            109                 33                  25.8                    15.6        (p = .10)
      EVER INSURED       36         10            26                  18                  50.0                    50.0         (p = 1.0)
                                           CHI‐SQUARE TEST        (p < .001)            (p = .12)              (p < .001)
                                                             (1, N = 207) = 15.10     (1, N = 72) = 2.44    (1, N = 135) = 14.38


                                                       PERIOD 8 LOSS
                                 NUMBER                                              % SWITCHING
                       TOTAL      LOSSES        NO LOSSES          TOTAL              AFTER LOSS            AFTER NO LOSS CHI‐SQUARE TEST
  ALWAYS UNINSURED       99         33            66                   7                  12.1                     4.5         (p = .17)
      EVER INSURED      118         40             78                 52                  57.5                    37.2        (p = .035)
                                                                  (p < .001)           (p < .001)              (p < .001)
                                           CHI‐SQUARE TEST
                                                             (1, N = 217) = 37.22    (1, N = 73) = 15.95    (1, N = 144) = 22.03




                                                             10
The difference in switching behavior between the two groups is particularly noticeable and highly
statistically significant following a loss in period 8 where only 4 individuals heretofore in the ALWAYS
UNINSURED group (12.1%) decided to buy insurance in period 9, while 23 of the 40 individuals (57.5%)
of the EVER INSURED group switched their status by purchasing insurance.

We also see higher switching rates among those with a loss (compared to those without a loss) for the
ALWAYS UNINSURED (25.8% vs. 15.6 % in period 2, and 12.1 % vs. 4.5% in period 8). The one statistically
significant difference in switching rates as a function of loss was among those who had been insured at
least once prior to period 8; they switched at a rate of 57.5% after a loss, which is high relative to those
with no loss (37.2%). These data provide additional evidence that those who were EVER INSURED were
much more likely to switch to being insured after suffering a loss than if they had not suffered a loss,
compared to those who were ALWAYS UNINSURED during the first 7 periods.

6.3 Two Stage Model of Switching Behavior: Results

We now explore the two‐stage model described earlier that highlights the relative roles that FEEL and
LOSS might play in the behavior of the uninsured to change behavior (SWITCH). We have already shown
that, among the uninsured, LOSS affects both FEEL and SWITCH. We now explore whether FEEL can
explain switching behavior. The model also highlights the potential importance of emotions in influencing
behavior of those individuals who are not consistent with the standard expected utility model by
purchasing insurance in an earlier period.

We approach this question in two different ways. First, using logistic regression, we ask whether the
observed level of FEEL predicts switching, both in isolation and along with the binary measure of LOSS. In
effect, we ask whether a loss helps to explain switching after we have controlled for the level of FEEL.
Second, we analyze the relationship between FEEL and SWITCH, treating FEEL as an endogenous variable
with LOSS used as the instrument. We use two‐stage least‐squares (2SLS) for this analysis and therefore
estimate a linear probability model as the second stage.

Because FEEL is a continuous variable, we present results using logit regressions where SWITCH is the
dependent variable and FEEL and LOSS are independent variables. The adjusted odds ratio coefficients
reported in Table 6 show the estimated change in the odds ratios on switching for a one‐unit change in
the right side variable. Hence a coefficient significantly less than 1 indicates that increasing the
magnitude of the explanatory variable reduces the likelihood of switching.

Rows 1 and 3 in Table 6 show that high values of FEEL are related to lower odds of switching from
uninsured to insured, with the effect significant in period 8. In addition, rows 2 and 4 show that, when
FEEL is included in the regression, adding a binary variable for LOSS is not statistically significant. In period
8, even though LOSS significantly predicted switching, it no longer does so when FEEL is included, but
higher FEEL still predicts lower odds of switching, and is statistically significant. This implies that, although
both FEEL and LOSS taken alone are related to switching, the variable measuring emotion is more strongly
predictive. With respect to period 2, the odds ratios are in the expected direction but are not statistically
significant.




                                                       11
                                                     TABLE 6
                        Relationship of FEEL and FEEL & LOSS to SWITCH for All Uninsured
                                  Adjusted Odds Ratios and (Significance Levels)
                                                         PERIOD 2
                                                                                   MODEL
                                  N           FEEL                  LOSS        SIGNIFICANCE
                                               0.90
                       ROW 1     207                                   −          (p = .31)
                                             (p = .31)
                                              0.96                   1.30
                       ROW 2     207                                              (p = .54)
                                             (p = .84)              (p = .65)



                                                         PERIOD 8
                                                                                   MODEL
                                  N           FEEL                  LOSS        SIGNIFICANCE
                                               0.71
                       ROW 3     217                                   −         (p = .001)
                                             (p < .001)
                                              0.70                   0.96
                       ROW 4     217                                             (p = .005)
                                             (p = .023)             (p = .93)




Table 7 presents the results of the 2SLS linear probability models for the uninsured. As before, the level of
FEEL is statistically significant in period 8. The fact that switching is related to a value of FEEL predicted
from the relationship of LOSS to FEEL supports the hypothesis that the chain of causation runs from LOSS
to a lower level of FEEL to SWITCH.

The finding that uninsured behavior in period 8 provides much stronger evidence for the 2‐stage model
than uninsured behavior in period 2 is consistent with findings from trust behavior in multi‐period
experiments conducted by Bottom et al. (2002) and Lount et al. (2008). They find that negative emotional
responses (FEEL in our experiment) and reduced cooperation (SWITCH in our experiment) were much
more pronounced in a late trust breach (LOSS in our experiment).




                                                           12
                                                     TABLE 7
                    Relationship of LOSS and FEEL to SWITCH for all Uninsured in Loss Periods
                        TWO‐STAGE LEAST‐SQUARES LINEAR PROBABILITY REGRESSION
                                                                        MODEL
                             NUMBER LOSS (STAGE 1) FEEL (STAGE 2) SIGNIFICANCE
                                           ‐2.56         ‐0.03
                    PERIOD 2   207                                     p = .27
                                                  (p < .001)                 (p = .27)
                                                   ‐2.13                     ‐0.07
                    PERIOD 8      217                                                                  P = .02
                                                  (p < .001)                 (p = .02)




Finally, we look for a possible relationship between FEEL and switching among the subset of uninsureds
who did suffer a loss, and then separately for the subset who did not. We see from the adjusted odds
ratios in the top half of Table 8 that an uninsured individual with a low level of FEEL who also had a loss in
period 8 is more likely to switch to being insured than an uninsured participant with a high level of FEEL
who also suffered a loss. In other words, the coefficient of FEEL among uninsured with a loss is less than 1
and significant in relation to the dependent variable (SWITCH). This implies that those who suffered a loss
from a hurricane that translated into a low level of FEEL are the individuals most likely to switch. With
respect to period 2, the odds ratio is also less than 1 but not statistically significant. The lower half of
Table 8 repeats the analysis for those uninsured who did not suffer a loss, and here the level of FEEL is
greater than 1 as would be expected but it is not a statistically significant predictor of switching. This
implies that an uninsured person who does not suffer a loss will want to remain uninsured, independent of
her level of FEEL.

                                                      TABLE 8
                                 Relationship of FEEL to SWITCH for All Uninsured

                                   Adjusted Odds Ratios and (Significance Levels)
                                                        WITH LOSS
                                                                                       MODEL
                                          NUMBER                 FEEL               SIGNIFICANCE
                                                                 0.73
                               PERIOD 2      72                                           (p = .37)
                                                                (p = .38)
                                                                    0.32
                               PERIOD 8      73                                          (p < .0001)
                                                                (p < .001)


                                                         NO LOSS
                                                                                       MODEL
                                          NUMBER                FEEL                SIGNIFICANCE
                                                                 1.09
                               PERIOD 2     135                                           (p = .71)
                                                                (p = .72)
                                                                    1.22
                               PERIOD 8     144                                           (p = .42)
                                                                (p = .43)




                                                               13
7. Behavior of Insured Subjects

Those who bought insurance should not respond to whether or not there was a loss in a given period
when making their decisions on purchasing coverage in the future if they are E(U) maximizers and if the
probability of a loss and the consequences remain constant over time (as in our experiment). In many
real‐world insurance situations with low‐probability events, however, people have a tendency to drop
coverage if there is no loss after several years. This behavior is consistent with the hypothesis that
consumers treat insurance as a short‐term investment and feel that they have wasted their premium
because they have not received any return in the form of a claims payment (Kunreuther et al. 1978). It is
difficult to convince them that insurance should be treated as a protective measure and that they should
celebrate not having a loss. In other words, while individuals should recognize that the best return on an
insurance policy is no return at all, not all do so.

In our experiment we observe insured people who did and did not suffer losses in period 2 and in period 8.
In line with the analysis of the uninsured in the previous section, we expect that insured individuals who
suffer a loss and hence collect on their policy have a higher level of FEEL than those who are unscathed.
Table 9 indicates that there is a statistically significant relationship between LOSS and FEEL in both periods.
However, the difference in FEEL between the loss and no‐loss groups in each period is much smaller than the
difference in FEEL for the uninsured that do and do not suffer hurricane losses (see Table 3). This is not
surprising since the perceived loss experienced by the insured that did not have damage from a hurricane (in
the form of a perceived unnecessary premium paid) is much less than the loss to an uninsured individual
who suffered property damage from the hurricane.

                                                     TABLE 9
                   Relationship of LOSS to FEEL Score among Insureds by Prior Period Behavior

                                            PERIOD 2 LOSS

                                                                                     WILCOXON‐MANN‐
                               N              LOSS                NO LOSS             WHITNEY TEST
       ALL INSURED            817              4.40                  3.50               (p < .0001)
   ALWAYS INSURED             751              4.39                  3.54               (p < .0001)
   EVER UNINSURED              66              4.43                  3.04               (p < .0001)
                                             (p = .35)            (p = .001)
     WILCOXON‐MANN‐WHITNEY TEST
                                           (N =262) z = ‐.94   (N = 555) z = ‐3.26


                                            PERIOD 8 LOSS

                                                                                     WILCOXON‐MANN‐
                               N              LOSS                NO LOSS             WHITNEY TEST
       ALL INSURED            807              4.52                  3.48               (p < .0001)
   ALWAYS INSURED             647              4.50                  3.56               (p < .0001)
   EVER UNINSURED             160              4.60                  3.18               (p < .0001)
                                             (p = .32)            (p = .003)
     WILCOXON‐MANN‐WHITNEY TEST
                                           (N = 272) z = .99   (N = 535) z = ‐2.94




Table 9 also reveals that, among those with NO LOSS, the level of FEEL is significantly lower for those
who were EVER UNINSURED than for those who were ALWAYS INSURED up to the time of the loss. This
implies that previously uninsured individuals who did not suffer a loss were more likely to feel worse
than those who bought insurance in all previous periods about learning that they would not be able to
make a claim.
                                                          14
Table 10 examines whether the switching rate for an insured individual without a loss is higher than the
switching rate for those with a loss. The first thing to note in Table 10 is that the ALL INSURED switching
rate (regardless of loss experience) is only 5% in period 2 and less than 4% in period 8, much lower in both
periods than it was for the uninsured (see Table 4). This means that it will be hard to detect differences as
a function of whether or not an individual suffered a loss. Table 10 shows that there is no significant
difference in switching between these two groups.

When we examine the ALWAYS INSURED subgroup we find even lower switching rates than for the full
sample of insured individuals, especially in period 8 where only 7 out of the 647 individuals insured in
periods 1 through 8 switched to being uninsured in period 9. As in the full sample, in the ALWAYS INSURED
and EVER UNINSURED groups there is no significant effect of LOSS on switching in either period.

                                                       TABLE 10
                Relationship of LOSS to Next‐Period Switching among Insureds by Prior Period Behavior
                                                        PERIOD 2 LOSS
                                  NUMBER                                              % SWITCHING
                      TOTAL       LOSSES        NO LOSSES           TOTAL             AFTER LOSS             AFTER NO LOSS CHI‐SQUARE TEST
        ALL INSURED    817          262           555                 42                  4.2                     5.6           (p = .40)
    ALWAYS INSURED     751          241           510                 32                   2.5                     5.1          (p = .10)
    EVER UNINSURED      66           21            45                 10                  23.8                    11.1          (p = .18)
                                                                  (p < .001)             (p < .001)               (p < .09)
                                            CHI‐SQUARE TEST
                                                               (1, N = 817) = 14.76   (1, N = 262) = 21.83    (1, N = 555) = 2.84


                                                        PERIOD 8 LOSS
                                  NUMBER                                              % SWITCHING
                      TOTAL       LOSSES        NO LOSSES           TOTAL             AFTER LOSS             AFTER NO LOSS CHI‐SQUARE TEST
        ALL INSURED    807          272           535                 31                  4.0                     3.7           (p = .83)
    ALWAYS INSURED     647          218           429                  7                   1.2                    0.92          (p = .77)
    EVER UNINSURED     160           54           106                 24                  16.7                    14.2          (p = .67)
                                                                  (p < .001)             (p < .001)              (p < .001)
                                            CHI‐SQUARE TEST
                                                               (1, N = 807) = 67.27   (1, N = 272) = 27.66   (1, N = 535) = 39.83




Because Table 10 reveals no statistically significant effect of loss experience on switching, we did not
further examine whether changes in FEEL predicts switching for the full sample of insureds.7 However,
we do explore whether FEEL is related to SWITCH for each of the subsamples of insureds split by whether
or not they experienced a loss. Table 11 does find that the insureds with no loss and a lower level of FEEL
have higher odds of switching, notably in period 2 (statistically significant) and also in period 8. So
although those insured persons whose property is not damaged by a hurricane in period 2 or 8 do not
consistently drop coverage, those who feel badly about having purchased insurance are likely to cancel
their policy. These individuals may have felt that they made a poor decision in purchasing coverage
because they wasted their money on a premium. This would imply that they viewed insurance as an
investment rather than as a protective mechanism. For those who had a loss, the impact of FEEL was not
statistically significant in either period 2 or 8.




7
  The only group approaching statistical significance was the ALWAYS INSURED in period 2. Those who did not
experience a loss in periods 1 and 2 were more likely to switch to being uninsured than those did suffer a loss, behavior
that is consistent with individuals treating insurance as an investment rather than a form of protection.
                                                               15
                                                   TABLE 11
                             Relationship of FEEL to SWITCHING for All Insureds

                                 Adjusted Odds Ratios and (Significance Levels)

                                                  WITH LOSS
                                                                       MODEL
                                       NUMBER           FEEL        SIGNIFICANCE
                                                       2.23
                            PERIOD 2     262                          (p = .10)
                                                      (p = .21)
                                                       2.46
                            PERIOD 8     272                          (p = .12)
                                                      (p = .19)


                                                   NO LOSS
                                                                       MODEL
                                       NUMBER          FEEL         SIGNIFICANCE
                                                       0.69
                            PERIOD 2     555                          (p = .04)
                                                      (p = .04)
                                                       0.73
                            PERIOD 8     535                          (p = .15)
                                                      (p = .14)




8. Conclusions

Sixty percent of the 1,346 individuals who participated in our experiment purchased insurance in all 10
periods and nine percent were uninsured for all periods. Since the probability of a loss, the magnitude
of the damage from a hurricane, and the insurance premium were identical in all periods, an individual
should want to maintain her insurance status over time if her sole focus is the risk of damage from a
hurricane and the price of protection. The individuals who purchased insurance in every period behaved
in ways that were consistent with the benchmark model of choice: expected utility maximization. Of
course, we cannot know whether their decisions were based on comparing the insurance premium with
the expected benefits from having coverage or whether participants in the experiment were utilizing
other decision rules that do not involve these comparisons. For example, a person could have decided
that insurance was an attractive option by comparing the premium with anticipated claims should they
suffer a loss without factoring in the probability of a hurricane occurring. The 79 individuals (6 percent
of the sample) who were uninsured for all 10 periods and faced either fair or favorable premiums were
inconsistent with expected utility theory if they were risk averse.

The 420 individuals (31 percent of sample) who changed their insurance status at least once during the
ten periods were impacted by factors normally not incorporated in an E(U) model. By inquiring as to
how subjects felt about their insurance decision after they learned whether or not they had suffered a
loss, we gained insight into the role that their emotions played in influencing their purchase decision in
the next period. A sizeable number of uninsureds decided to purchase insurance after learning that they
had suffered a loss and revealing that their FEEL level was very low. In this sense, the study shows that a
loss coupled with emotions is likely to play an important role in convincing an uninsured person to buy
coverage. This behavior is consistent with findings by Gilovich and Medvec (1995) that indicate that
decisions made today that produce great regret in the short term will lead individuals to take steps
immediately to reduce the pain of their actions. This may partially explain why the uninsured with low
levels of FEEL switched their insurance status in the next period rather than delaying taking action.




                                                      16
On the other hand, those who were insured and didn’t suffer a loss had a much higher level of FEEL than
uninsured persons with a loss, because they had foregone only a relatively small premium compared with
uninsured victims of a hurricane who had to use their own resources to cover the loss. The data indicate
that the small decrease in the FEEL level of insured individuals who did not suffer a loss was unlikely to
change their decisions to buy insurance again next period.

While our findings about the roles of preferences and emotions in insurance purchasing behavior are
reasonably clear, the welfare implications are of this behavior are not obvious for the participants in our
sample who were inconsistent in their insurance purchasing behavior. Sometimes they bought coverage
and sometimes they were uninsured even though the observable external conditions were the same so
they do not show what Bernheim and Rangel (2009) call an “unambiguous choice relation”. Their
inconsistency raises challenging questions for behavioral welfare economics, especially for the
uninsured who switched to being insured, apparently because of a loss and its impact on their emotions.

If one takes the position that individuals should be consistent in their behavior over time given that the
parameters influencing the decision have not changed, then one might recommend providing
individuals with information as to why they should not be influenced by the outcome of an uncertain
event, or even structuring choice settings in ways that deter switching. On the other hand, if one
believes that emotions play an important role in a person’s well being, then one should not discourage
someone from switching to coverage who is disappointed after experiencing an uninsured loss. How
they feel is how they feel, and there is no obvious reason to over‐ride someone’s choice of what they
consider to be best for themselves. An argument could be made that the strong negative feeling
generated by having to pay for the loss forces the individual to reflect on the advantages of having
insurance and was a positive learning experience. Further research is needed to understand more fully
why emotional reactions to an outcome may lead to a change in behavior as our experiment revealed.

The findings from our experiment raise the broader question as to the appropriate role of insurance and
public policy in dealing with low‐probability high‐consequence events. Do individuals utilize simple
heuristics in making their insurance decision that are influenced by past experience and are guided by
emotional reactions and other attributes, such as reduction of worry and gaining peace of mind in the
spirit of intuitive thinking as documented by Kahneman (2011)? When is it appropriate to require
individuals to purchase insurance rather than making coverage voluntary? In the spirit of
recommendations by Thaler and Sunstein (2008) and others, would the default option of providing
insurance unless one opts out serve as an appropriate nudge for individuals to maintain coverage when
they are likely to feel regret if they are not insured and suffer a loss? Can one design new insurance
products to deal with people’s emotional reactions to adverse events, such as home equity insurance,
that would protect against losses in the value of homes from causes other than fire and natural disasters
as advocated by Shiller (2003)? Additional controlled experiments and field studies are needed to shed
light on these questions to be able to provide guidance on the welfare implications of taking steps prior
to a disaster to encourage people to undertake protective measures rather than waiting for the
catastrophe to occur.




                                                    17
                                                  REFERENCES

Bell, D. (1982). ‘‘Regret in Decision Making Under Uncertainty.’’ Operations Research 30: 961–981.

Bernheim, B. D., & Rangel, A. (2009). “Beyond revealed preference: choice‐theoretic foundations for
behavioral welfare economics.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1): 51‐104.

Bottom, W., Gibson, K., Daniels, S., & Murnighan, J.K. (2002). “When T*alk Is Not Cheap: Substantive
Penance and Expressions of Intent in Rebuilding Cooperation.” Organizational Science 13: 497‐513.

Braun, M., & Muermann, A. (2004). The impact of regret on the demand for insurance. Journal of Risk
and Insurance, 71(4): 737‐767.

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Pascu, I., & Cullen, M. (2012). “How General Are Risk Preferences? Choices
under Uncertainty in Different Domains.” American Economic Review 102: 2606‐2638.

Finucane, M. L., Alhakami, A., Slovic, P., & Johnson, S. M. (2000). “The affect heuristic in judgments of
risks and benefits.” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 13(1): 1‐17.

Gilovich, T., & Medvec, H. (1995). “The Experience of Regret: What, When and Why.” Psychological
Review 102: 379‐395.

Gul, F., & Pesendorfer, W. (2007). Welfare without happiness. The American Economic Review, 97: 471‐
476.

Kahneman, D. (2011) Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Kőszegi, B., & Rabin, M. (2007). Mistakes in choice‐based welfare analysis. The American Economic
Review, 97: 477‐481

Kunreuther, H., Pauly, M. V., & McMorrow, S. (2013). Insurance and Behavioral Economics: Improving
Decisions in the Most Misunderstood Industry. Cambridge University Press.

Kunreuther, H., Ginsberg, R., Miller, L., Sagi, P., Slovic, P., Borkan, B., & Katz, N. (1978). Disaster
Insurance Protection: Public Policy Lessons. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, N. (2001). ‘‘Risk as Feelings.’’ Psychological
Bulletin 127: 267–286.

Loomes, G., & Sugden, R. (1982). ‘‘Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of Rational Choice under
Uncertainty.’’ Economic Journal 92(368): 805–824.

Lount, R., Zhong, C., Sivanathan, N., & Murnighan, J.K. (2008). “Getting Off on the Wrong Foot: The
Timing of a Breach and the Restoration of Trust,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34:1601‐
1612.

Madrian, B.C., & Shea, D.F. (2001). “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and Saving
Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 1149‐1187.

Michel‐Kerjan, E., Lemoyne de Forges, S., & Kunreuther, H. (2012). “Policy Tenure under the U.S.
National Flood Insurance Program.” Risk Analysis, 32(4): 644‐658.

Neipp, J., & Zeckhauser, R. (1985). “Persistence and Choice of Health Plan.” Advances in Health
Economics and Health Services Research 6: 47‐72.


                                                      18
Oppenheimer, D., Meyvis, T., & Davidenko, N. (2009). “Instructional manipulation checks: Detecting
satisficing to increase statistical power.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 45: 867–872.

Shiller, R. (2003). The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century. Princeton, NJ.

Thaler, R., & Sunstein, C. (2008). Nudge: The gentle power of choice architecture. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.

Wagenaar, W. and Keren, G. (1988) “Luck and Chance are Not the Same.” Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making 1: 65‐75.




                                                    19
