NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF REGULATORY HARMONIZATION ON CROSS-BORDER LABOR MIGRATION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE ACCOUNTING PROFESSION
Matthew J. Bloomfield
Ulf Brüggemann
Hans B. Christensen
Christian Leuz
Working Paper 20888
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20888

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015
We appreciate the helpful comments of Mary Barth, Jannis Bischof, Matthias Breuer, Willem
Buijink, Richard, Crowley, Scott Emett, Joachim Gassen, Chris Hansen, Alan Jagolinzer, Morris
Kleiner, Michael Welker, Steve Zeff as well as workshop participants at Bristol University,
University of Chicago, Colorado Summer Accounting Research Conference, Cornell University,
EAA Annual Congress 2015, University of Exeter, Frankfurt School of Finance and
Management, Global Issues in Accounting Conference 2014, IHW Halle, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Lancaster University, London Business School, University of Manchester,
University of Paderborn, Queen’s University, Rice University, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
Vienna University of Economics and Business, WHU, XI Workshop on Empirical Research in
Financial Accounting and University of Zurich. This study is based on data from Eurostat,
Labour Force Survey, 2002-2010. The responsibility for all conclusions drawn from the data lies
entirely with the authors. We thank Marie Johann (DAAD) for kindly providing data on the
Erasmus program. Christian Leuz gratefully acknowledges research funding provided by the
Initiative on Global Markets (IGM) at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Matthew J. Bloomfield, Ulf Brüggemann, Hans B. Christensen, and Christian Leuz.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Regulatory Harmonization on Cross-border Labor Migration: Evidence from
the Accounting Profession
Matthew J. Bloomfield, Ulf Brüggemann, Hans B. Christensen, and Christian Leuz
NBER Working Paper No. 20888
January 2015, Revised September 2016
JEL No. D10,E24,F22,F55,F66,J44,J61,J62,K22,L84,M41,M42
ABSTRACT
The paper examines whether international regulatory harmonization increases cross-border labor
migration. To study this question, we analyze European Union (EU) initiatives that harmonized
accounting and auditing standards. Regulatory harmonization should reduce economic mobility
barriers, essentially making it easier for accounting professionals to move across countries. Our
research design compares the cross-border migration of accounting professionals relative to
tightly-matched other professionals before and after regulatory harmonization. We find that
international labor migration in the accounting profession increases significantly relative to other
professions. We provide evidence that this effect is due to harmonization, rather than increases in
the demand for accounting services during the implementation of the rule changes. The findings
illustrate that diversity in rules constitutes an economic barrier to cross-border labor mobility and,
more specifically, that accounting harmonization can have a meaningful effect on cross-border
migration.
Matthew J. Bloomfield
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
mbloomfi@chicagobooth.edu
Ulf Brüggemann
Wirtschaftswissenschaftliche Fakultät
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
Unter den Linden 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany
u.bruggemann@hu-berlin.de

Hans B. Christensen
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
hans.christensen@chicagobooth.edu
Christian Leuz
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu

1.

Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed a strong push towards global convergence of rules in

many areas of regulation. These initiatives are often intended to ease cross-border investments
and to improve the allocation of capital (e.g., FSAP, 1999). Research in accounting and finance
has analyzed whether regulatory harmonization indeed increases cross-border capital flows and
has associated benefits such as increased liquidity and lower cost of capital (see Leuz and
Wysocki, 2016, for an overview). Capital, however, is not the only factor of production for
which diversity in rules could create economic barriers to mobility. Regulatory harmonization
should also make it easier for professionals to seek employment outside of their home country,
which in turn should improve the efficiency of labor markets. Indeed, labor mobility could be an
important adjustment mechanism through which regions adjust to asymmetric economic shocks,
especially in a currency union such as the Eurozone (Mundell, 1961; Farhi and Werning, 2014).
However, there is no evidence on the role and potential benefits of regulatory harmonization for
cross-border labor mobility.
In this paper, we analyze the effects of regulatory harmonization affecting the accounting
profession in the European Union (EU) on cross-border labor migration. This setting has several
desirable features from a research-design perspective. First, the accounting profession generally
has a higher level of standardization than comparable occupations (Madsen, 2011), and
regulatory harmonization has typically taken the form of adopting identical rules (or standards).
Both factors should make it easier to detect an effect of regulatory harmonization on labor
migration in the accounting profession, if there is one. Second, there is free movement of labor in
the EU. Free movement of labor ensures that we can focus on regulatory harmonization and
economic barriers, rather than immigration policies and other explicit restrictions. Third, there
has been a relatively sharp increase in regulatory harmonization for the accounting profession in
1

the EU in recent years. In particular, two EU initiatives have substantially harmonized the rules
relevant to those working in the accounting profession: (1) after mandatory reporting under IFRS
publicly traded firms use identical accounting standards; (2) Directive 2006/43/EC harmonized
statutory audits of companies’ annual accounts and consolidated financial statements. We
analyze changes in cross-border labor mobility around these regulatory changes. Henceforth, we
refer to these changes also as “the treatment”.
Our data are based on the EU’s annual Labour Force Survey (LFS). The LFS is meant to
generate a representative sample for each country using a standardized methodology, which
substantially improves the comparability of mobility statistics across countries. In addition, the
LFS data are collected at the individual level, giving us a rich set of demographics to control for
other factors that affect migration. Following the literature, our main analysis is based on
changes in a stock measure of migrants, i.e., the number of individuals that have a foreign
nationality and were born abroad (Martí and Ródenas 2007; Bonin et al., 2008). To get closer to
migration flows around regulatory changes, we also present analyses using a novel quasi-flow
measure that starts from the stock measure but counts only foreigners that recently changed jobs,
who are more likely to have moved in response to accounting and auditing harmonization.
Our identification strategy exploits that the regulatory changes primarily affect the
accounting profession. Thus, we perform a difference-in-differences estimation comparing
changes in cross-border mobility of accounting professionals with changes in mobility of other
professions around regulatory harmonization. We estimate the effects relative to three separate
control groups: legal professionals, all other professionals, and a combination of business people.
We control for demographic characteristics known to determine migration (i.e., gender, marital
status, age, education level, and the presence of children), including all possible interactions of
these characteristics in order to account for non-linearities in these categorical demographics. In
2

addition, we estimate the effects within country and year to account for unrelated changes and
shocks affecting labor mobility of professionals (e.g., changes in economic growth,
unemployment benefits, national adjustments to survey methodology, etc.). To further tighten
our design, we perform a double-matched difference-in-differences analysis. We pair accounting
and control professionals from a given country by the exact same characteristics (e.g., single
males, in Germany, between 25-29 years old, without children, with a university degree) for a
year in the pre-treatment period and a year in the post-treatment period, creating a quadruplet.
We then compute the relative change in mobility rates within each quadruplet. This doublematched approach assures perfect overlap in characteristics across treatment and control groups
as well as across time and hence controls for composition changes in the survey sample.
Using the above setting and design, we find that cross-border labor migration increases
for accounting professionals relative to matched professionals around the EU harmonization of
accounting and auditing standards. The estimated increase in labor mobility is fairly similar
across specifications and control groups. In our preferred (and most restrictive) specifications,
the magnitude is between 20% and 22% of the pre-treatment mobility rate. This percentage
increase implies that 10,000 to 16,000 accounting professionals moved within the EU as a result
of regulatory harmonization, which is economically significant.
An important challenge for estimating the cross-border mobility effects of regulatory
harmonization is that even regulatory changes without harmonization could increase labor
mobility simply by changing the demand for accounting services. To see this, consider the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), which is not intended to harmonize accounting and auditing in the
U.S. 1 Nevertheless, SOX likely increases labor mobility in the U.S. due to changes in the
1

We thank one of our reviewers for providing this example. We note that regulatory harmonization can also change
demand (e.g., by lowering the wages for accountants). As such knock-on effects are still the result of harmonization,
we do not attempt to separate them in our empirical analyses (see Section 2).

3

demand for accounting services leading to new matches between employers and accountants
(e.g., with respect to internal control skills). Such demand effects could confound our analysis
and overstate the cross-border mobility effects due to harmonization.
However, a non-harmonizing regulatory change such as SOX should affect both the
demand for domestic and foreign accountants. For example, new matching of accountants and
employers can take place across borders but also domestically. In contrast, cross-border
harmonization effects should be specific to foreigners. Thus, we introduce controls for changes
in domestic job mobility to absorb demand effects. Doing so hardly changes the estimated
treatment coefficient, which is inconsistent with a demand explanation for our results.
Next, we perform a series of robustness tests that evaluate other design assumptions and
data challenges. First, our analysis assumes that the mobility trends in the accounting profession
would have been parallel to those in the control groups had there been no regulatory
harmonization in accounting. To assess the validity of this assumption, we provide graphical
evidence that the pre- period trends are similar. We also show that pre-treatment mobility rates
are close once we control for demographic characteristics. In addition, we consider several
potential violations of the parallel-trends assumption, including differential changes in crossborder student mobility as well as licensing rules, and find that they cannot explain our results.
Second, we face two major data constraints. One constraint is that the LFS dataset does
not provide researchers with job codes at the most granular level. Hence, we cannot perfectly
identify accountants and auditors. For instance, the treatment group also contains personnel and
career professionals. However, as long as the fraction of non-accountants in the treatment group
does not systematically change around harmonization, which we verify to be the case, the
difference-in-differences analysis takes care of this data issue.

4

The other LFS data constraint is that it is difficult to construct reliable flow measures of
cross-border migration: low incidence rates cause a mini-domain problem (Purcell and Kish,
1980) and sampling techniques cause inconsistencies with population registers (Martí and
Ródenas, 2007). We therefore base our main analysis on a stock measure and a novel quasi-flow
measure using information about recent job changes. However, for these two measures, the
timing of migration cannot be determined, yet naturally matters given our research question.
Again, this data limitation should not affect the difference-in-differences analysis as long as the
rate of earlier migration outside the relevant analysis window does not systematically change
over time. We further mitigate this issue by using a quasi-flow measure, which has a time
dimension based on job changes. In addition, we provide sensitivity tests using two flow
measures, for which we can determine the exact timing of migration. While these tests confirm
that flow measures have low incidence rates resulting in noisier estimates, we still find
significantly positive mobility effects after regulatory harmonization among those individuals
who are expected to be most responsive (i.e., singles without children, especially when they are
young or work for large employers), which corroborates our main results.
Finally, we examine cross-country variation in the migration effects. We find that our
results continue to hold when we restrict the analysis to EU-15 source and destination countries.
The estimates are smaller but still significant, which is noteworthy because prior research finds
that the migration response in the EU-15 is generally low, for instance, when it comes to labor
market shocks (Bonin et al., 2008; Dao et al., 2014; OECD, 2014). Showing the results hold
within the EU-15 also alleviates the concern that EU enlargement unduly influences our
estimates. We also examine other sources of cross-country variation, such as the degree to which
audit standards are harmonized, the fraction of public firms that adopt IFRS, licensing rules, and
the market share of Big-4 auditors. While it is difficult to ex ante sign predictions for these
5

factors as well as to isolate their effects empirically, the evidence suggests that cross-border
migration effects are stronger when there is more harmonization, licensing rules are less strict,
and Big-4 auditors have a larger market share, consistent with the interpretation that regulatory
harmonization drives our results.
Our paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, the literature on accounting
harmonization focuses almost exclusively on informational effects in capital markets. 2 However,
accounting harmonization potentially also affects the efficiency of labor markets, which would
be economically important. Our study is the first to examine and document this effect. Our
findings, which demonstrate relatively strong effects from accounting and auditing
harmonization on cross-border labor mobility, may appear inconsistent with recent evidence
suggesting that the capital-market effects attributable to accounting harmonization via IFRS
adoption are fairly modest or even non-existent (e.g., Daske et al., 2008; Christensen et al.,
2013). A potential explanation for weak capital-market results is that reporting standards grant
managers discretion with respect to their application. Hence, capital-market effects hinge
critically on whether harmonized standards alter managers’ reporting incentives and the extent to
which standards are being enforced (e.g., Ball et al., 2003; Burgstahler et al., 2006; Daske et al.,
2013). The role of these forces is less obvious in a labor market setting. For instance, accountants
and auditors need to know the relevant accounting and auditing rules to perform their jobs even
if the standards grant managers discretion. Moreover, formal harmonization could have effects
even when enforcement is weak. Therefore, we do not view our findings as inconsistent with
those in the capital-market literature.
2

See, e.g., Barth (2006), Soderstrom and Sun (2007), Hail et al. (2010) and Brüggemann et al. (2013) for reviews.
There are two exceptions. Wu and Zhang (2009) document an increase in the sensitivity of CEO turnover to net
earnings after voluntary IFRS adoption. Balsam et al. (2015) find an increase in CFO pay around IFRS adoption
consistent with better monitoring and increased responsibility. There is also an accounting literature examining labor
market outcomes for executives (see Armstrong et al., 2010) and for analysts (see Healy and Palepu, 2001).

6

Second, we contribute to the economics literature on cross-border labor migration. Much
of this prior literature has focused on the effect of wage and unemployment differentials as well
as legal barriers in the form of immigration laws (Zaiceva and Zimmermann, 2008; Skupnik,
2013) or occupational licensing rules (Holen, 1965; Kleiner et al., 1982). Immigration laws and
occupational licensing rules are explicit government-enforced rules restricting who can move
into a particular country or who can offer services in a particular market. The general result in
this literature is that explicit restrictions create mobility barriers (see Kleiner, 2000, for an
overview). International differences in the rules governing work practices or professions, which
are the focus of our study, are different in that they constitute an implicit economic barrier, rather
than an explicit government intervention aimed at restricting entry. Disparate professional rules
are more akin to frictions that impede the portability of social security (D’Addio and Cavalleri,
2015) and tax differentials that encourage migration (e.g., Conway and Houtenville, 1998, 2001;
Bakija and Slemrod, 2004; Coomes and Hoyt, 2008; Kleven et al., 2014). However, access to
social security and tax differentials create direct monetary incentives to migrate (or not), whereas
disparate rules create economic barriers via the required human capital investments by potential
migrants.
Showing that differential professional rules indeed constitute a substantial barrier to
cross-border labor mobility illustrates that the costs of learning and practicing other standards are
economically significant. It further suggests that regulatory harmonization can be a policy
instrument to improve cross-border mobility and labor market efficiency. Indeed, creating and
improving the EU’s “internal market,” in which goods, services, capital, and people can move
freely, is the main motivation for regulatory harmonization (e.g., FSAP, 1999). Our evidence
suggests that disparate rules can be an economic barrier to cross-border migration and that
regulatory harmonization can have economically large effects on mobility (even within the EU7

15 where migration responses are typically low). We acknowledge, however, that our findings
are limited to the accounting profession, for which harmonization could arguably play a greater
role. Hence, the magnitude of our estimates needs to be interpreted carefully.
2.

Conceptual Underpinnings and Institutional Setting
In their migration decision, individuals trade off the initial costs of migration against the

expected increase in income (Roy, 1951; Sjaastad, 1962; Borjas, 1987) as well as other potential
benefits from moving, including better educational and job opportunities for their children. The
costs of migration include transportation costs, income losses during migration, non-portable
social rights losses, and psychological costs (Stark and Bloom, 1985; Massey et al. 1993;
D’Addio and Cavalleri, 2015).
Another obstacle and hence cost of migration could come from differential rules and
regulations of which knowledge is relevant when working in a particular profession. For
instance, an auditor, lawyer, or building engineer who wants to move abroad needs to learn and
know the accounting and auditing standards, laws, and building codes of the destination country,
respectively, in order to perform the job. Thus, diversity in rules could act as an implicit
economic barrier to labor migration, even when entry into the profession is unrestricted.
Harmonization of professional rules across countries should, ceteris paribus, reduce this
mobility barrier and hence could increase cross-border labor migration. Consistent with this
argument, the EU’s regulatory harmonization intends to improve the functioning of the internal
market so that goods, services, capital, and people can move freely. For instance, the Financial
Services Action Plan (FSAP), which was established in 1999 with the goal to improve and
harmonize EU financial market regulation through a series of legislative initiatives, explicitly
cites the plan’s potential to increase labor migration as one of the motivations for regulatory

8

reform. 3 Providing some anecdotal evidence, comment letters sent to the European Commission
for its “Consultation on the Impact of IAS Regulation in the EU” in 2014 cite increased labor
migration as one of the benefits from the IFRS mandate (see Internet Appendix, Table IA1).
Nevertheless, it is not obvious that regulatory harmonization significantly increases labor
mobility. The benefits from harmonizing professional rules could be too small relative to other
costs involved in migrating to another country to have a meaningful effect on cross-border labor
mobility. In addition, it is possible that local accounting and auditing practices persist after the
formal harmonization of the rules (e.g., Kvaal and Nobes 2010, 2012). To the extent these local
traditions make it difficult for foreigners to practice in the country even when the rules are the
same, regulatory harmonization is much less effective.
Thus, our study aims to analyze whether differential rules indeed constitute a substantial
economic barrier and to shed light on the effectiveness of (formal) regulatory harmonization as a
policy instrument to increase labor migration. We study the impact of regulatory harmonization
on labor migration in the context of the accounting profession for several reasons. First,
accounting and auditing standards play an important role in the profession, and learning how to
apply them likely is a significant human capital investment. For instance, knowledge of
accounting standards is required for any accountant involved in the production of generalpurpose financial statements, regardless of whether they work as preparers or auditors. Second,
there has been substantial regulatory harmonization in accounting and auditing, which affected
virtually all aspects of the profession. Third, accounting harmonization has generally taken the
form of explicitly adopting a common set of standards issued in English by an international
3

The FSAP’s motivation discusses among other things that “lack of a Community framework can also discourage
labour mobility.” The discussion, however, is framed in terms of reforms to the EU pension systems. So far, the EU
has passed Directive 2003/41/EC, which facilitates the operation of pension funds across member states. The
European Commission is also proposing regulation that would make pensions portable across member states. Such
regulation would also remove an economic mobility barrier (but its effects would occur after our sample period).

9

organization. Thus, there is almost complete formal harmonization of the accounting rules and
the remaining country-level variation in the rules after harmonization is relatively minor. Prior to
regulatory harmonization, however, there were substantial differences in countries’ accounting
and auditing standards. 4 Thus, harmonization has the potential to eliminate economic barriers for
auditors and accountants. Fourth, the large auditing firms are set up as international networks,
enabling them to take advantage of accounting and auditing harmonization.
In addition, there are several advantages to studying labor migration in the EU. In
principle, labor can move freely among EU member states. Free movement of labor is a
fundamental principle enshrined in Article 45 of the “Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union,” which grants EU citizens the right to work in another EU country without a work permit.
The absence of explicit immigration restrictions makes it easier for us to examine economic
barriers and to measure the effect of regulatory harmonization on labor migration. 5 Furthermore,
the EU has been on the forefront of international regulatory harmonization in the accounting
profession and changes in recent years have been substantial. In 2005, the application of IFRS
became mandatory in the consolidated financial statements for almost all publicly traded firms in
the EU. In addition, private companies can voluntarily adopt IFRS in many member states.
Hence, IFRS adoption affects all accountants working for publicly-traded firms, voluntary IFRS
adopters as well as for audit firms that have any of these as clients.
Importantly, IFRS adoption is not the only source of regulatory harmonization in the
EU’s accounting profession. With Directive 2006/43, later amended by Directive 2008/30, the
4

For evidence on prior accounting standard differences, see Bae et al. (2008). There is no comparable study for
differences in auditing standards. However, about half the EU countries did not even translate national auditing
standards into English prior to regulatory harmonization. In addition, seven (eleven) countries had additional
national reporting (procedural) requirements that ISA did not have. This comparison understates the actual
differences in auditing rules because we do not consider legal audit requirements or more minor differences that
have also been harmonized (see Internet Appendix, Table IA2, for details).
5
Initially, some EU member states imposed labor mobility restrictions for citizens of new member states after its
enlargement in 2004. In principle, such restrictions should affect all professions, not just accountants. Nevertheless,
we provide sensitivity analyses, in which we restrict the sample and mobility to EU-15 countries only. See Table 5.

10

EU harmonized statutory auditing requirements. The main purpose of Directive 2006/43 was to
harmonize the audit process and establish a single market for audit services across the EU
member states (Heß and Stefani, 2012). Its provisions were substantial and ranged from
harmonization of educational requirements and ethical standards to granting the European
Commission the option to mandate the adoption of International Standards on Auditing (ISA)
throughout the EU. Auditing standards specify procedural and reporting requirements for
auditors regarding issues such as independence, documentation, certification, and sampling,
regardless of whether they audit private or public firms. As such the harmonization of auditing
standards has an even wider reach in terms of firms than IFRS adoption, affecting all external
auditors in the profession, but it does not directly affect accountants outside of auditing. The
European Commission has not yet mandated ISA adoption but, in anticipation of a mandate, all
member states have adopted ISA in some form—many around the time of IFRS adoption. 6
In sum, the accounting profession in the EU provides a powerful setting to estimate the
effect of regulatory harmonization on labor migration. Several of the above factors should make
it easier to identify and establish an effect of regulatory harmonization on labor migration, if one
exists. At the same time, these factors imply that the magnitude of the treatment effect for the
accounting profession may not generalize to other professions. Moreover, while the setting is
well-suited, it also poses a number of research-design challenges.
First, accounting harmonization in the EU has been an ongoing process for many years.
In fact, harmonization of national accounting standards and audit regulation began in corporate
law long before IFRS and ISA adoption with the 4th, 7th, and 8th Company Law Directives in
1978, 1983, and 1984, respectively. These early initiatives to harmonize accounting regulation
could reduce the effect of the more recent initiatives and hence reduce the power of the setting.
6

By 2012, only seven EU countries had not fully adopted ISA. See Internet Appendix, Table IA9a, for details.

11

However, it is important to recognize that national accounting and auditing standards were
formally different until IFRS and ISA adoption. From a labor market perspective, it is likely that
formal harmonization and knowledge of the detailed standards themselves matter a great deal,
even if national standards are similar in spirit or yield similar reporting outcomes.
Second, determining the timing of the potential treatment effect is challenging. For one,
labor mobility is likely to be a relatively slow moving construct, which should make any
response to harmonization more gradual. In addition, it is not obvious when regulatory
harmonization begins to affect labor mobility, despite the fact that the effective dates themselves
are sharply defined. 7 For instance, the first mandated IFRS financials were not disclosed until
2006, but accountants and auditors would already have done much of the work that goes into the
preparation of the financial statements and the audits in 2005. Thus, labor mobility could
increase even ahead of regulatory harmonization, especially if preparers, audit firms, and
universities train people in anticipation of IFRS and ISA adoption. At the same time, it may take
considerable time before people with the required knowledge are able to take advantage of the
reduction in economic barriers. Based on these institutional considerations, it seems reasonable
to expect effects from regulatory harmonization to begin at some point in 2005 but to gradually
increase in subsequent years. As we are unsure about the start date and as several of our analyses
require symmetric pre- and post-windows, we exclude the years 2005 to 2007 and compute the
average treatment effects from 2008 and until the end of our sample period in 2010. In
untabulated sensitivity analyses, we use the years 2006 to 2008 as well as 2006 to 2010 as the
post-treatment period, and find similar results.

7

Mandatory IFRS adoption applies to fiscal years beginning in or after January 2005. The adoption of Audit
Directive 2006/43 followed one year later in 2006.

12

A third design challenge is that the regulatory changes we study can have demand effects
that are unrelated to harmonization as well as “knock-on” demand effects that stem from
increased labor migration. The former are demand effects that would arise after regulatory
changes even when there is no harmonization (e.g., after the introduction of SOX in the U.S.).
We discuss these effects, and how we control for them, in Section 4.2. In addition, regulatory
harmonization can also have demand effects. For instance, increased cross-border migration
should contribute to the equalization of wages across EU countries, which in turn could spur the
demand for accounting services and further increase labor mobility. We do not attempt to
separate such knock-on demand effects in our analysis as their source is harmonization and
hence they should be included in the estimates.
3.

Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1

LFS Dataset
We base our analysis on the EU’s Labour Force Survey (LFS). The LFS dataset is

compiled by Eurostat, the statistical office of the EU. 8 The group of participating countries
comprises the 28 EU member states, three EFTA countries (Iceland, Norway and Switzerland)
and two EU candidate countries (Macedonia and Turkey). 9 The LFS dataset is based on quarterly
or annual interviews that are conducted by the national statistical offices of the participating
countries. The national statistical offices follow strict guidelines laid out in EU Regulation when
8

Researchers at academic institutions can gain access to the LFS data for scientific purposes after an approval
process. Eurostat provides detailed information on the LFS data and the application process for researchers on its
website: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/en/web/microdata/european-union-labour-force-survey.
9
We include Iceland, Norway, and Switzerland in the sample even though they are not EU members. Citizens of
these European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries have the right of free movement within the European
Economic Area (EEA), which includes 28 EU members, Iceland, and Norway. Switzerland is not a member of the
EEA but its citizens have the same free movement rights through bilateral agreements. Iceland and Norway have
adopted EU regulation that harmonizes accounting and auditing standards. In Switzerland, IFRS is not mandatory
(Nobes and Zeff, 2015) but audit and accounting standards have effectively been harmonized with the EU. The
results are not sensitive to including Switzerland in the sample. For simplicity, we refer to the three additional
countries as member states or EU countries. The dataset is reduced to 29 countries because the annual LFS files
provide no or very limited information from Croatia, Malta and the two EU candidates during our sample period.

13

they survey their populations. The guidelines ensure that the sample is representative of the
populations in each country and that the collection methods, questions, definitions, and
classifications are (almost) identical across countries. The standardized methodology
substantially improves the comparability of statistics across countries compared to data used in
previous studies. Indeed, lack of comparability has often hampered international migration
studies in the past, as they had to rely on disparate data sources with different definitions and
collection methods, e.g., population registers, border control, permit, or census data (Rendall et
al., 2003). In contrast, the LFS data allow us to estimate consistent migration measures across all
EU member states through time, which to our knowledge makes it unique.
Despite these important advantages, the LFS dataset also has drawbacks. In particular, it
is not a panel dataset that follows the same individuals through time but instead is a combination
of separate cross-sections, raising the concern that changes in sample composition over time
could affect our inferences. This concern is mitigated by Eurostat’s sampling techniques that are
specifically designed to ensure representativeness and comparability across years. In addition,
the LFS dataset offers a large set of demographic characteristics, which allow us to match
individuals on these characteristics over time (see Section 4.3 for details on our double-matched
analysis). Another potential issue with the dataset is that certain variables are provided to
researchers in an aggregated form only. For instance, the LFS dataset does not provide the
specific country of origin for migrants but instead provides regional information, which prevents
us from examining bilateral migration flows between countries.
LFS data are provided in quarterly and annual files. We conduct our analysis on the
annual files due to the limited availability of quarterly data in the first half of the sample period.
Our sample period starts in 2002, three years before the first fiscal year for which reporting
under IFRS was mandatory and four years before the EU adopted Directive 2006/43. Our sample
14

period ends in 2010. We do not include years before 2002 and after 2010 because the coding of
several key variables, notably the job codes, was different before and after these years. As
several migration metrics require an analysis with symmetric pre- and post-windows (see also
Footnote 14), our sample period focuses on the years 2002 to 2004 and 2008 to 2010,
respectively. We further restrict the sample to LFS respondents who are between 20 and 59 years
old, because this group is likely to be active in the workforce.
The resulting dataset comprises 10.3 million respondents from 29 countries with yearly
totals varying between 1.1 and 2.5 million. Eurostat computes a weighting factor for each
respondent based on his/her representativeness in the country’s population. The total weighted
number of respondents is about 1,672 million, when adding over all countries and all sample
years. The weighted number of respondents in a given year roughly maps into the countries’ total
population between the ages of 20 and 59 (see first two columns of Table 1 for further details).
3.2

Treatment and Control Samples
We identify our treatment and control groups through the LFS item ISCO3D, which

indicates the respondents’ job based on the current version of the International Standard
Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88) at the three-digit level. 10 Our treatment group
(“accountants”) consists of all respondents with ISCO3D equal to 241 which includes
accountants (ISCO-88 = 2411) but also personnel and career professionals (ISCO-88 = 2412)
and other business professionals such as account executives or market research analysts (ISCO88 = 2419). Hence, the treatment group includes non-accountants who are not directly affected
by regulatory harmonization in the accounting profession. The inclusion of non-accountants does
not pose a problem in our research design provided their fraction remains roughly constant

10

Item ISCO3D focuses on people who are in employment and is set to missing for respondents who are
unemployed, inactive, in military service, or younger than 15 years old.

15

through time. To gauge concerns about measurement error and the validity of this assumption,
we obtain aggregate statistics on the fraction of accountants (ISCO-88 = 2411) within the group
of professionals with ISCO3D = 241 through a special request to Eurostat. The statistics are
based on a sample of 16 countries over the period 2002 to 2010 and show that the fraction of
accountants in ISCO3D = 241 is by far the largest and amounts to roughly 50% and, more
importantly, varies little over time. Thus, the inclusion of non-accountants does not appear to be
an issue and, if anything, is likely to attenuate the observed treatment effect.
We construct three control groups. The first control group comprises legal professionals
(“legal pros”), which we define as all respondents with ISCO3D equal to 242. This group
includes lawyers (ISCO-88 = 2421), judges (ISCO-88 = 2422), and other legal professionals
such as coroners or notaries (ISCO-88 =

2429). Legal professionals are comparable to

accountants in that both professions require substantial education and expert knowledge to apply
a certain set of rules. As there are risks to choosing one benchmark profession based on
conceptual comparability, the second control group (“all pros”) consists of all other respondents
in the job code group “professionals,” which are all at the same professional level (as indicated
by the first digit of ISCO-88 = 2). This group includes lawyers, physicists, engineers, computing
professionals, and teachers, among others. We exclude architects, veterinary surgeons, and
healthcare professionals (ISCO3D = 214, 222, 223) from the “all pros” group because Directive
2005/36 entered into force in 2005 and granted these three professions automatic recognition of
their licenses to practice in all EU countries. Including them would likely violate the parallel
trends assumption. 11 The third control group (“biz people”) consists of respondents with other
business jobs, but at different professional levels. We use the following ISCO3D job codes to
11

Like other professions with national licensing requirements, accountants and auditors can apply for recognition of
a foreign license in any EU country. Recognition is, however, not automatic and may require taking a test. We
examine the potentially confounding effect of changes in licensing and recognition rules in the Internet Appendix
(see Sections IA6 and IA9).

16

define the group of business people: 121 (directors and chief executives), 122 (production and
operations department managers), 123 (other department managers), 131 (general managers),
341 (finance and sales associates), and 342 (business service agents and trade brokers).
Our treatment group of accounting professionals comprises 105,940 respondents from 26
countries over the sample period. 12 The number of respondents in the control group of legal
professionals (all professionals) [business people] is 39,480 (600,982) [748,313], when adding
over all countries and sample years (see Table 1 for further details).
We recognize various trade-offs in choosing a control group. For instance, legal
professionals are conceptually appealing but the group is relatively small, which limits matching.
In contrast, the group of all professionals provides a large sample of people working at the same
professional level. The latter is desirable but their jobs are in some cases quite different from the
jobs of accountants. The third group, in turn, comprises people that all work in business jobs but
at higher or lower job levels, which is not ideal. Since there are pros and cons to each group, we
estimate treatment effects using all three control groups.
In the Internet Appendix (Table IA3), we present the distribution of demographic
characteristics of accounting professionals and the three control groups. We focus on
demographic characteristics that prior literature has shown to affect migration, i.e., gender, age,
marital status, number of children, and education level (see Krieger, 2004, for an overview). The
demographic distributions for the accounting professionals and the three control groups are
remarkably similar, except for the educational level. Based on these statistics, legal professionals
and all professionals appear to be most comparable to the accounting professionals in terms of
demographic characteristics that previous research shows determine cross-border migration

12

The final sample comprises only 26 countries because Bulgaria, Poland and Slovenia do not provide ISCO3D
information at the three-digit level (i.e., we cannot distinguish treatment and control groups).

17

decisions. Hence, those two are our preferred control groups. But even the distributions for
accountants and business people are still quite similar. 13
3.3

Measuring Migration
For our first migration metric (NATBIRTH), we code respondents that have a foreign

nationality and were born outside the host country in which the survey was conducted as a
migrant (or mobile). This simple stock measure of migration is reliable and refers to data items
that are widely available in the LFS dataset. It is also the preferred migration metric in prior
studies using the LFS database (Martí and Ródenas, 2007; Bonin et al., 2008). Note that this
definition does not count individuals that moved to the host country a long time ago and in the
meantime have adopted its nationality, which is favorable in our setting considering that we
intend to study relatively recent mobility decisions around regulatory harmonization.
However, as a stock measure, NATBIRTH does not indicate when migration occurred.
This data limitation should not affect our difference-in-differences analysis as long as the rate of
earlier migration outside the analysis window does not systematically change over time.
Although we have no reason to believe that such systematic changes occurred, we construct a
second quasi-flow measure that mitigates this concern. Specifically, we use NATBIRTH but
count only migrants who recently changed their jobs (NATBIRTH_CHG). We identify job
changes through LFS item STARTIME (“time in months since the person started current
employment”) and define recent job changes as those that occurred (a) in/after 1999 for the pretreatment period, and (b) in/after 2005 for the post-treatment period.
The idea behind this refinement is that migrations due to accounting and auditing
harmonization typically involve a change of employment and hence we attempt to preclude

13

The larger discrepancies likely reflect the fact that business people work at higher (e.g., managers) or lower (e.g.,
associates) job levels than the accounting professionals, as indicated by the first digit of the ISCO3D.

18

earlier migrations from the stock measure. However, NATBIRTH_CHG is not perfect and not
necessarily better than NATBIRTH. The former still counts people as migrants who moved many
years ago but recently changed jobs within the host country. At the same time, NATBIRTH_CHG
does not count people that move to a different country within the same firm (e.g., on crossborder assignments, which are quite common in large audit firms).
The LFS dataset also allows the construction of metrics that amount to flow measures.
While these flow measures are conceptually desirable given the time dimension of our research
question, they have severe drawbacks, which we discuss in Section 5.1. Our main analysis
therefore focuses on the established stock measure, NATBIRTH, and our novel migration
measure, NATBIRTH_CHG, which has a time dimension to it. We also present sensitivity
analyses using two flow metrics despite their severe shortcomings (see Section 5.1).
3.4

Descriptive Statistics
In Table 2, we report descriptive statistics for the sample used in the regression analysis.

For this analysis, we impose two more sample restrictions relative to Table 1. First, as discussed
in Section 2, we exclude years 2005 to 2007 because (a) the exact starting point of regulatory
harmonization is ambiguous and (b) NATBIRTH_CHG requires symmetric pre- and posttreatment periods. 14 Second, we restrict the sample to respondents with at least an uppersecondary education. Respondents that have not obtained this educational level are rare among
the accounting professionals but also within most control groups, except for business people (see
Internet Appendix, Table IA3).
The analysis naturally restricts the sample to observations with non-missing information
on all control variables as well as on the mobility metrics. As shown in Table 2, information
14

Symmetry is necessary because, by construction, NATBIRTH_CHG increases over time. For instance, a foreigner
who is surveyed in 2008 counts as mobile in the post-treatment period only if the person has changed jobs in the last
three years. In 2009, however, a person counts as mobile if she has changed jobs in the last four years, resulting in
an upward trend as the window expands (relative to a fixed starting point).

19

indicating whether an individual has children is missing with some frequency in the LFS dataset,
as some countries do not provide this information in all survey years. To preserve a relatively
balanced sample across time, we treat missing information on the number of children as a
separate category when matching on demographics or creating fixed effects for them. 15 We also
combine upper-secondary and post-secondary education levels as well as tertiary and doctoral
education levels. The fraction of individuals with education at the post-secondary level and at the
doctoral level is very small (see Internet Appendix, Table IA3) and the data are too sparse to
create separate categories and the full set of interactions for these education levels. All of our
statistical analyses require that both NATBIRTH and NATBIRTH_CHG be non-missing. The
samples for the analyses using LFS weights are slightly smaller because the weighing factor is
missing for some individuals.
Taken together, the final sample for our main analyses comprises individuals from 26
countries for the years 2002 to 2004 and 2008 to 2010, who are between 20 and 59 years old, and
whose highest degree of education is at least at the upper secondary level. Table 2 reports the
number of observations for accounting professionals and the three control groups that meet the
above criteria and have non-missing control variables. Table 2 also reports the mean mobility
rates of accounting professionals, legal professionals, all professionals, and business people
using our main mobility metrics NATBIRTH and NATBIRTH_CHG. Accounting professionals
exhibit the highest mobility rates. However, these statistics include sample years after regulatory
harmonization and do not yet control for (or match on) demographic characteristics. We provide
a formal comparison of pre-treatment mobility rates in Section 4.

15

As we conduct the analysis within bins of certain demographics and within country, this design choice should be
innocuous and primarily help sample representativeness as well as power. For Ireland, we have the number of
children only for the post-treatment period, which we set to missing to allow matching with observations in the pretreatment period.

20

Table IA4 in the Internet Appendix also presents descriptive by-country migration
statistics for NATBIRTH and NATBIRTH_CHG. We provide these statistics separately for the
pre- and the post-treatment periods and based on a matched sample to facilitate comparisons with
our Section 4 analyses. Table IA4 shows considerable variation in both the fraction of migrants
as well as the changes in this fraction across host countries. We note that the fraction of migrants
is not higher in the post-treatment period for all countries, as one would probably expect.
Comparing the change in the migration rate for accountants with the rate for all professionals, 58
(58) percent of the countries exhibit a positive change for NATBIRTH (NATBIRTH_CHG).
However, most of the negative changes are close to zero, and when we count only absolute
changes that exceed 0.5 percentage points, then 76 (80) percent of the countries exhibit positive
changes for NATBIRTH (NATBIRTH_CHG).
4.

Effect of Regulatory Harmonization on Migration

4.1

Difference-in-Differences Analysis
We begin with a difference-in-differences analysis using individual-level regressions.

This design is useful in that many potential confounds “wash out” in one of the two differences.
For example, contemporaneous but unrelated regulatory changes that affect both the treatment
and the control groups wash out in the first difference. Similarly, time-invariant measurement
problems for one group wash out in the second difference.
Our identification strategy rests on the assumption that mobility trends for the treatment
group would have been parallel to those in the control groups had there been no regulatory
harmonization in the accounting profession. We therefore begin by graphing mobility rates over
time. Figure 1 compares aggregate mobility rates based on the NATBIRTH measure across
treatment and control groups over time (before matching). The graphs suggest that the mobility
21

rates of all groups move in concert during the years 2002 to 2004. In other words, the mobility
rates of accounting professionals and the three control groups behave similarly prior to
regulatory harmonization. The levels of the mobility rates are also similar for three of the groups
before harmonization. The mobility rates for the legal professionals are considerably lower
throughout the sample period (in the unmatched sample), but they still move remarkably in
parallel with the accounting professionals over the pre-treatment period. Thus, mobility patterns
over the pre-treatment period lend support to the parallel-trend assumption. After 2005, the
mobility rate of the accountants increases and does so more strongly than the mobility rates of
the three control groups. The relative increase is strongest against legal professionals and all
professionals, and less pronounced against business people. By 2010, the mobility rate of
accounting professionals is substantially above the rates of the control groups, which is
descriptively consistent with a mobility effect from regulatory harmonization. 16
We formally test for a mobility effect at the individual level. The granularity of this
analysis is a major advantage as it allows us to control for demographic characteristics of the
respondents that are unrelated to treatment but predicted to affect cross-border mobility.
Specifically, we include gender, marital status, age, education level, and the presence of one or
more children under the age of 15 living in the household, all measured at the time of the survey.
As these characteristics are all categorical, we control for them with fixed effects for all possible
combinations of the variables. In total, we include 192 fixed effects (one for each bin). The fixed
effects imply that we estimate the treatment effect within bin, i.e., for individuals with the same
demographic characteristics. Aside from finely controlling for individual characteristics that
affect mobility, the fully interacted fixed-effect structure avoids extrapolation and functional16

In the Internet Appendix, we graph the time trends in the aggregate mobility rates for the four groups from 2002
to 2013 (see Section IA5). Figure IA5 shows that the differences in mobility rates between the accountants and the
three control groups persist until 2013. We do not use the extended period due to the job code changes in 2011.

22

form assumptions for the control variables. As a result, the estimation is less susceptible to nonlinearities in the data (e.g., Cochran and Rubin, 1973; Rubin, 1973 and 1979), which is a
particular concern when working with categorical variables as in our setting.
We also include country-accountant and country-year fixed effects. The purpose of the
country-accountant fixed effects is to eliminate differences in mobility rates for accounting
professionals and the respective control groups across countries as well as to account for
differential frequencies in accounting professionals across countries. The country-year fixed
effects eliminate country-specific shocks as well as trends in mobility common to all professions
in a given country (e.g., due to shocks to economic growth or changes to the survey
methodology). Thus, in this regression design, the treatment effect is identified by differences in
the time-series variation in mobility rates between professions within countries and within bins
combining various demographic characteristics. We draw statistical inferences based on standard
errors clustered by country-job group with job group indicating either accounting professionals
or the respective control group. Since our sample comprises 26 countries, this approach yields 52
clusters, which strikes us as conservative. 17
In Table 3 Panel A, we present OLS regression results for each of the three different
control groups. 18 In the first six columns, we use NATBIRTH as our migration measure and
present regressions with and without weighing observations by the statistical weight provided for
17

However, the homogeneity assumption required for clustering standard errors becomes more important yet can be
tenuous as the number of clusters becomes small. We therefore follow the suggestions in Conley et al. (2016) and
also draw inferences using a Fama-MacBeth procedure as a robustness check. We group countries into six European
regions by geography and language. This grouping allows for even more cross-sectional dependence than the
country-job clustering. We then draw inferences in a Fama-MacBeth fashion based on six separate diff-in-diff
regressions, one for each region, and find that our inferences are similar (albeit at lower significance levels as is
expected with only five degrees of freedom). See also Internet Appendix IA4 for more details on the region results.
18
We estimate OLS regressions rather than logit or probit models to avoid an incidental parameter problem given
the heavy use of fixed effects. However, OLS regressions may be biased with a binary dependent variable. The
double-matched approach presented in Section 4.3 does not suffer from this potential problem. As a sensitivity test
we also estimate probit models. The inferences are consistent across the two estimation methods holding the sample
constant. The probit analysis yields statistically weaker results for the legal professionals but slightly stronger results
for the other two control groups.

23

each individual in the LFS dataset. In the last six columns, we present the results using our
refined migration measure, NATBIRTH_CHG. The relevant coefficient estimates for the
interaction term Accountant * Post are positive and always statistically significant for the first
two control groups. The estimates are also positive but only marginally significant in two of four
specifications when using business people as the control group. Overall, these findings are
consistent with the hypothesis that regulatory harmonization increases cross-border labor
migration.
In gauging the magnitude of the coefficients, we focus on regression estimates using LFS
weights, as the weights likely make the sample and hence the estimates more representative of
the EU population. The estimated treatment effect with LFS weights is generally around 70 basis
points and even larger when benchmarking against legal professionals. For NATBIRTH, these
estimates imply an 18% increase in cross-border migration of accounting professionals relative
to their pre-treatment migration rate and benchmarking against the two large control groups.
Using NATBIRTH_CHG, the corresponding percentage effect is around 30 percent given the
refined measure exhibits a lower pre-treatment migration rate. The fact that the percentage
effects are similar when benchmarking against all professionals and against business people
indicates that the statistically weaker results against business people are primarily a matter of
statistical power. The coefficient magnitudes and percentage treatment effects are similar albeit
slightly weaker in the regressions without LFS weights.
Arguably, an even better way to gauge the economic magnitude of our estimates is to
compute the increase in the total number of accounting professionals that migrate as a result of
regulatory harmonization. 19 Towards this end, we determine the average number of survey

19

For instance, this translation mitigates downward bias in the percentage effects that can arise from the fact that the
treatment group contains non-accountants, which presumably do not increase in mobility.

24

respondents from the accounting profession in any given year, invert the LFS weights to obtain
an estimate for the population of accountants, and then multiply this number with the regression
estimate for the increase in migration. Using coefficients from the LFS-weighted regressions in
Panel A, we estimate that the increase in the number of migrating accountants is between 16,000
and 18,000 individuals, but could be as large as 30,000 individuals when using the legal
professionals as a control group. 20 Such increases seem economically significant. We obtain very
similar estimates for the increase in migrating accounting professionals using both migration
measures. The consistency across these two measures is reassuring and supports our argument
that the difference-in-differences design strips out “stale” mobility that occurred earlier in life
and is unrelated to regulatory harmonization. Considering that the primary distinction between
NATBIRTH and NATBIRTH_CHG is that the latter has been better purged of stale mobility, the
two measures should provide similar treatment effects. 21
In sum, the results in Panel A provide consistent evidence that regulatory harmonization
in the accounting profession led to a substantial increase in cross-border migration. In the
remainder of Section 4, we focus on two issues that could confound this interpretation. First, we
examine to what extent demand effects induce an upward bias in our estimates. Second, we
address the concern that our analysis is not based on a panel, raising the possibility that changes
in sample composition drive our results. In the Internet Appendix, we discuss two further
concerns, which could amount to a violation of the parallel-trends assumption: differential
20

The population of accountants comprises about 2.3 million people in the sample countries according to our
estimates based on the number of respondents and their LFS weights. Multiplying this number with the relevant
coefficient estimate on the interaction term Accountant * Post yields an estimate for the increase in migration due to
regulatory harmonization over the post-treatment effect. For example, the second specification in Table 3, Panel A
(NATBIRTH, with LFS weights and all pros as control group), shows a coefficient estimate of 0.723. This translates
into an increase of about 16,600 migrating accountants (0.723 * 2.3 million / 100).
21
One could also consider the incremental explanatory power of the harmonization variable in explaining migration.
However, as many individual-level factors play into a migration decision, most of the variation comes from
individual characteristics, which we control for with an extensive fixed-effect structure. Hence, the incremental Rsquared for the harmonization indicator is not surprisingly close to zero.

25

changes in cross-border student mobility as well as in the recognition of occupational
qualifications. We find no evidence that such changes explain our results (see Section IA6).
4.2

Separating Regulatory Harmonization and Demand Effects
An important concern about the findings in Section 4.1 is that the documented increase

in cross-border migration reflects demand effects stemming from new regulation, rather than
regulatory harmonization per se. Regulatory changes can affect the demand for accounting
services and as a result increase job mobility even without harmonization. For instance, the
implementation of SOX likely increased the demand for accounting and auditing services for
some time. In addition, it is conceivable that SOX created new opportunities for accounting
professionals with certain skills (e.g., related to internal controls) and that these professionals
move to new firms if their services are of greater value elsewhere. This new matching of
employees and firms can also increase job mobility for some time. 22
We first note that we scale our migration measures by the number of professionals in the
country (and year). Such scaling captures at least some of the demand effects. For instance, if a
(non-harmonizing) regulatory shock like SOX increases the demand for accountants and does so
symmetrically for domestic and foreign accountants, then the construction of the mobility
measure already controls for the demand effect. However, demand shocks could be asymmetric.
Furthermore, the new matching need not imply an influx of people into the accounting
profession (i.e., the denominator does not have to increase). Thus, demand effects from
regulatory changes could still affect our results.

22

Consistent with these arguments and the notion that IFRS adoption also increases the demand for accounting
services, there is evidence that the cost of preparing financial statements (ICAEW, 2007) and audit fees (De George
et al. 2010) increase around IFRS adoption, although most of the effects are limited to the year of adoption. To limit
the influence of such demand effects, we exclude the sample years 2005 to 2007, which is the period over which EU
countries adopted IFRS and harmonized national audit standards with ISA.

26

To gauge this concern, we use the insight that demand effects also imply an increase in
domestic job mobility. For instance, the new matching of employees and firms after a SOX-like
regulatory change can take place across borders but also domestically. In contrast, supply-side
effects due to cross-border harmonization should primarily pertain to foreigners. We therefore
introduce a variable to control for domestic job mobility. If our results largely reflect demand
effects, then controlling for domestic job mobility should attenuate the coefficient of interest.
We create a variable that measures Domestic job mobility at the country-year-profession
level. The variable is the proportion of domestic people who recently changed their jobs in a
given year, country, and profession, which essentially captures disruptions of existing matches
and re-matching within a profession. We identify job changes through LFS item STARTIME
(“time in months since the person started current employment”) and define recent job changes as
those that occurred (a) in/after 1999 for the pre-treatment period, and (b) in/after 2005 for the
post-treatment period.
In Table 3, Panel B, we report the result controlling for Domestic job mobility for each of
the three control groups, both migration measures as well as with and without using the LFS
weights. The coefficients on Domestic job mobility are positive in all and statistically significant
in some specifications—consistent with concurrent increases in domestic job mobility and hence
demand effects around regulatory changes. More importantly, however, introducing this control
variable barely changes the estimated treatment coefficients and, if anything, strengthens the
results when using business people as a control group. Thus, the findings in Panel B are not
consistent with the concern that the results reflect demand effects. Such effects may be present
in the data but they do not appear to affect our coefficients of interest in a material way.
While the regressions controlling for domestic job mobility go a long way towards
separating demand and harmonization effects, we conduct additional tests using the country27

level correlations of labor migration inflows and outflows to specifically gauge the presence of
asymmetric demand shocks across countries (see Internet Appendix, Section IA7). If the
increase in migration around harmonization is driven by asymmetric demand shocks, countries
with relatively small demand shocks should act as “sources,” experiencing an increase in
outflows and decline in inflows, while countries with relatively large demand shocks act as
“sinks” having an increase in inflows and decrease in outflows, leading to a negative correlation
of country-level changes in inflows and outflows. Contrary to this, we find that changes in
country-level in- and outflows are positively associated for accountants relative to all
professionals. Indeed, using (without using) the LFS weights, the relative changes in in- and
outflows have the same sign for 83 (83) percent of the countries for which we have sufficient
data to calculate pre- and post-harmonization migration flows. The positive correlation is more
consistent with a harmonization effect than an asymmetric demand effect (see Tables IA7a and
IA7b for details). 23
Nevertheless, we acknowledge that it is difficult to separate supply and demand effects
entirely. They can be endogenously connected. As noted earlier, it is possible that increased
cross-border migration due to regulatory harmonization contributes to the equalization of wages
across EU countries, which would likely lower wages and in turn could spur the demand for
accounting services. In our view, it would be appropriate to include such knock-on demand
effects in the estimation of the treatment effect (as the source is harmonization). For this reason,
including domestic job mobility in the model could over-control and is not without costs.

23

Finally, we note that demand effects due to implementation or new matching should be of limited duration. Once
the new rules are implemented and the re-matching has taken place, labor migration rates should decrease. However,
when we extend Figure 1 to 2013, we find that the migration effect persists after 2010 and does not look like a
temporary demand effect (see Section IA5).

28

4.3

Double-Matched Difference-in-Differences Estimates
The LFS dataset consists of separate annual cross-sections of survey respondents. It is not

a panel dataset that follows individuals through time. Thus, changes in sample composition over
time can potentially bias the treatment effect and produce spurious inferences. For example,
suppose that, relative to the control group, accountants living in Sweden exhibit persistently high
mobility rates. If for some reason the sample composition changes over time such that Sweden is
overrepresented in the post-treatment period relative to the pre-treatment period, then such
changes could upward bias the estimated treatment effects in the regression analysis presented in
Sections 4.1 and 4.2. We note that the LFS weights mitigate this possibility but we perform a
“double-matched” difference-in-differences analysis to further alleviate this concern. The idea is
to form quadruplets of individuals with identical characteristics and then to compute the
difference-in-differences within each matched quadruplet, which eliminates sample composition
effects.
We implement this approach as follows: Within each country and year, we first match all
accounting professionals and all control group observations with the exact same characteristics
for gender, marital status, age, education level, and the presence of one or more children under
the age of 15 living in the household. We then match across time, linking pre-treatment
accounting professionals to post-treatment accounting professionals with the exact same
characteristics, and do the same for the control observations. We drop all observations that
cannot be matched. This double-matching yields a collection of quadruplets, each consisting of
accounting professionals and controls before and after harmonization that are jointly identical
except for their occupation (some are accountants and some are in control professions) and
survey year (some are pre-treatment and some are post-treatment). Thus, we have precisely the

29

variation required for a difference-in-differences analysis, but hold everything else constant. We
illustrate this design in Figure 2.
In order to implement the double-matched approach, we must specify a “year-pair”
linking a pre-treatment year with a particular post-treatment year. For each year t of the pretreatment period (2002-2004) we define year t+6 as the corresponding year (e.g., observations in
2002 are matched to observations in 2008). 24 For example, an accountant living in Germany in
2002 with a particular combination of demographic characteristics is included in the doublematched sample if and only if there is at least one lawyer (control) living in Germany in 2002
with identical characteristics and there is at least one lawyer and one accountant living in
Germany in 2008 with those same characteristics. For instance, as the LFS does not contain data
for Italy in the pre-treatment period, all observations for Italy drop out of this analysis. This
example illustrates why the double-matched approach eliminates sample composition changes.
Within-quadruplet estimation of the treatment effect requires that we equally weigh the
four components of a quadruplet. However, not all quadruplets are equally informative. There is
substantial heterogeneity in the number of individuals contained within each quadruplet. Small
countries and unusual demographic combinations (e.g., single men in their late 50s with young
children living in the household) produce potentially less informative difference-in-differences
estimates. To address this issue, we give each quadruplet a weight equal to the minimum sample
size in the quadruplet’s four components. The idea is that the information of the quadruplet is
ultimately constrained by the sample size of the four components. By defining the weight at the
level of the quadruplet, we ensure that the within-quadruplet estimate reflects an equal-weighted
24

In so doing, we again exclude years 2005-2007. By focusing on later post-treatment years, our results should be
less susceptible to temporary demand effects in mobility (e.g., if audit firms import workers to help with IFRS
implementation for a limited time). As a robustness test, we alternatively define year t+4 as the corresponding year
and hence exclude years 2009 and 2010 (as well as 2005). This alternative definition yields only slightly smaller
treatment effects that are statistically significant in most specifications. These attenuated results are consistent with
the gradual increase in the mobility rates of accounting professionals after 2005 documented in Figure 1.

30

difference-in-differences, but allow the informational value of each difference-in-differences to
vary across quadruplets. The reported treatment effect is hence a weighted average across the
effects for the quadruplets. We again draw statistical inferences based on standard errors
clustered by country-job group (48 clusters).
The double-matched approach is obviously very demanding. Comparing panels in Table
3 shows that we lose a substantial fraction of our sample due to double-matching. For this
reason, we focus on the control group of all professionals, which offers a large sample of
individuals at the same professional level and with similar demographic characteristics as the
accountants (see Internet Appendix, Table IA3). 25 At the same time, double-matching provides
tighter identification and also makes the pre-treatment mobility rates quite similar across
treatment and control groups.
Table 3, Panel C, presents the estimated treatment effects from the double-matched
difference-in-differences analyses. Again, we find positive and statistically significant increases
in cross-border labor migration after regulatory harmonization using both NATBIRTH and
NATBIRTH_CHG. Our estimates using the LFS weights indicate that cross-border migration of
accountants increases by 42 to 69 basis points relative to all professionals. The estimates without
LFS weights are similar (59 to 65 basis points). Weighted and unweighted estimates imply fairly
similar percentage increases in cross-border migration of accounting professionals relative to the
pre-treatment migration rates (20% and 11% for NATBIRTH; 22% and 19% for
NATBIRTH_CHG, respectively). These percentage effects are quite comparable to those
reported for the regression analysis in Table 3, Panels A and B, which is reassuring. 26 As before,

25

We report findings for the other control groups in the Internet Appendix, Table IA8. The effects are generally
larger in magnitude when using legal professionals, and smaller and less significant using business people.
26
In unreported tests, we gauge the sensitivity of the results to the inclusion of specific countries by implementing a
jackknife procedure, dropping each country in turn and computing separate treatment effects each time. The

31

we gauge the economic magnitude of the treatment effects by translating them into an absolute
increase in the number of accounting professionals that migrate as a result of regulatory
harmonization. We proceed analogously and invert the LFS weights to obtain population
estimates. The treatment effects imply an increase of roughly 10,000 to 16,000 accountants. 27
These numbers are slightly smaller than those reported in Section 4.1, but conceptually superior.
Finally, as isolating harmonization effects is a central challenge of our paper, we
conclude the double-matched analysis with an additional test that further mitigates the concern
that our results reflect demand effects that would arise even for non-harmonizing (SOX-like)
regulatory changes. In the spirit of the tests reported in Section 4.2, we estimate the effects
solely among people that recently changed their jobs. As a result of this sample restriction, we
essentially estimate the cross-border migration effects relative to domestic job mobility, which
should control for demand effects. We present the results in the last column of Table 3, Panel C.
The estimated treatment effects remain statistically significant and are even larger in
magnitude within the subsample of workers who recently changed jobs. Specifically, using the
LFS weights we find that cross-border migration of accountants increases by 137 basis points
after regulatory harmonization, relative to all other professionals. 28 Finding significant treatment
effects even in the subsample of domestic and foreign people that recently changed their jobs
further increases our confidence that regulatory harmonization caused the increase in crossborder labor migration for accounting professionals.

strongest attenuation occurs when we drop the Switzerland but the treatment effect decreases by only 20% and
remains statistically significant at the 1%-level.
27
For details on how to compute these numbers, see Footnote 20.
28
Since the population of accountants comprises about 942,000 people who recently changed their jobs according to
the number of respondents and their LFS weights, the estimated treatment effect implies an increase of roughly
13,000 migrating accountants (1.374 * 0.942 million / 100). This is in line with the estimates reported in our main
analysis based on the full sample

32

5.

Sensitivity Analyses and Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity in Treatment Effects
In this section, we examine alternative flow measures of migration as well as cross-

sectional heterogeneity in the treatment effects. The flow measures also allow us to examine
cross-sectional variation in the treatment effects based on the demographic characteristics of the
respondents because for the flow measures these characteristics are by design measured in close
proximity to the time of migration. For the stock-based measures, we examine cross-sectional
variation in the treatment effects based on institutional (country-level) characteristics.
5.1

Flow Labor Migration Measures and Cross-Sectional Differences by Demographics
Prior work using the LFS dataset prefers to use stock measures of migration due to major

concerns about the flow measures that can be constructed based on the LFS dataset (Martí and
Ródenas, 2007; Bonin et al., 2008; Skupnik, 2013). Our earlier analyses therefore follow the
prior literature and use a stock measure based on nationality and country of birth (NATBIRTH).
We also construct a novel quasi-flow measure (NATBIRTH_CHG), which starts from the stock
measure but counts only foreigners that recently changed jobs, making it more likely that
migration occurred recently. We have discussed the pros and cons of the two measures in Section
3.3 and noted that the difference-in-differences design addresses shortcomings of these
measures, provided these shortcomings are constant through time (or do not change
systematically with regulatory harmonization). While we have no indication of systematic
changes in the direction of our results, this section presents sensitivity analyses using two flow
measures that ensure migration occurs in a window around regulatory harmonization.
Importantly, we do not construct these two measures simply as changes in the stock of foreigners
but instead rely on different items from the LFS dataset to determine the time of migration.
We base the first flow measure (YEARESID) on the number of years for which an
individual who was born abroad (LFS item COUNTRYB) has been a resident in the host country
33

(LFS item YEARESID). YEARESID defines individuals as mobile if they were born abroad and
moved to the host country in/after 1999 (for sample years 2002 to 2004) or in/after 2005 (for
sample years 2008 to 2010). This measure allows us to determine the exact time of the migration,
both relative to the treatment (i.e., before or after regulatory harmonization) and relative to the
respondent’s age (i.e., we can rule out migrations during childhood). While these features of the
YEARESID measure are desirable for our identification strategy, there are also major drawbacks.
First, the measure mechanically increases over time and hence requires a symmetric pre- and
post-estimation window (see Footnote 14). Second, its construction implies relatively low
incidence rates, meaning that the number of survey participants who are foreigners and have
moved within the analysis window is low. The low incidence rate can cause a mini-domain
problem making survey-based estimates unreliable (Purcell and Kish, 1980). This issue arises in
our setting when we form bins of observations matched on demographic characteristics,
especially in countries with few observations in the LFS dataset (e.g., Luxembourg). Bins with
few observations might indicate a migration rate of zero in a given profession (and country),
even when the true migration rate for the profession is positive, simply because none of the
respondents in that profession (with certain characteristics) migrated in recent years. Similarly,
with low base migration rates, adding a single migrant could produce a large percentage change,
which in turn can make estimates of changes in the migration rates noisy.
For the second flow measure (COUNTR1Y), we use the question regarding the place of
residence one year before the survey (LFS item COUNTR1Y). 29 This measure also allows us to
determine the exact time of the migration and it has the desirable feature that respondent
29

We note that some of the mobility captured by COUNTR1Y is repatriation, that is, workers moving back to their
home countries after spending time abroad. However, harmonization could increase the number of accountants
returning to their home countries (e.g., after IFRS adoption, expatriates of German companies may no longer be
needed to help with German GAAP reporting in foreign subsidiaries). This return migration should be counted as
harmonization-induced cross-border migration. We obtain smaller but still economically meaningful treatment
effects when excluding repatriations from the COUNTR1Y analysis.

34

characteristics are measured close to the time of the move. The latter feature facilitates crosssectional tests using variation in demographic characteristics. As LFS data measure demographic
variables at the time the person is surveyed, rather than the time of the move, stock-based
measures do not necessarily have this feature, which makes cross-sectional analyses using
demographic characteristics problematic. 30
While COUNTR1Y may seem ideally suited for our analysis, it has several severe
drawbacks. First, it counts only very recent migration; a foreign resident who moved two or three
years prior to the survey is coded as non-mobile when using COUNTR1Y. As a consequence,
COUNTR1Y has even lower incidence (or migration) rates than YEARESID, exacerbating the
problems that we described earlier. 31 Second, and perhaps more importantly, the LFS sampling
techniques can systematically bias COUNTR1Y, which results in major discrepancies with
population registers (Martí and Ródenas, 2007). One reason for the discrepancies is that some
countries survey the same individuals for several quarters reaching into adjacent years. The lack
of sample replacement implies that a certain fraction of the answers regarding COUNTR1Y
change mechanically. For instance, an individual that moved in the first quarter of 2003 and is
surveyed for 6 quarters starting in the third quarter of 2003 has to change the answer to
COUNTR1Y by the second quarter of 2004. Martí and Ródenas (2007) show that the sample
replacement rates differ across countries and that the problem can be quite severe in some
countries (e.g., in Austria, Germany and Sweden). Third, in some countries and sample years, the

30

This is particularly true for people that moved a long time ago. When computing average treatment effects, the
design difference-out those that moved a long time ago. However, they could still skew cross-sectional tests. For
instance, if migrants are more likely to have children and marry after they move to a new foreign country relative to
the average respondent, then cross-sectional splits for NATBIRTH may not yield meaningful results. For this reason,
we perform cross-sectional splits based on demographic characteristics for the two flow measures only.
31
Illustrating the problem, we find that if we form bins for accountants and lawyers by country, year and personal
characteristics, 98% contain a migration rate of zero using COUNTR1Y.

35

data item to code COUNTR1Y has not been collected (see Table 1), creating gaps in the time
series, which is problematic for a study like ours that relies on changes over time.
Given the shortcomings of the flow measures, we use them for sensitivity tests only. For
the same reasons, we do not necessarily expect the coefficient estimates from these tests to map
into the earlier analyses using stock-based measures. To mitigate the mini-domain problem, we
use the control group of all professionals, which provides a large sample of individuals at the
same professional level as accountants and with similar demographics (Internet Appendix, Table
IA3). We also conduct several cross-sectional splits by demographic characteristics. These splits
serve two purposes. First, by showing that increases in migration occur in sub-populations that
should be more responsive to regulatory harmonization, we increase the confidence in our
findings. Second, by splitting into subsamples for which mobility rates are larger, we increase
power and hence mitigate the problems due to low incidence rates.
Based on prior empirical evidence, we expect single respondents without children to be
more mobile (Mincer, 1978) and therefore to be more likely to respond to regulatory
harmonization. We also expect young people (20-39 years old) and people that work for large
employers (50+ employees, in local unit) to be more responsive. Young people do most of the
technical work in audit firms and thus their jobs require the most detailed knowledge of rules.
Similarly, large audit firms have a higher fraction of large clients relative to small audit firms
and large clients are most likely to report under IFRS, both mandatorily and voluntarily (e.g., Le
Vourc’h and Morand, 2011). These considerations determine our split variables.
In Table 4, we present difference-in-differences estimates for various combinations of
these splits. We obtain each estimate using the same double-matched approach described in
Section 4.3. As expected, the mobility rates for the flow measures are lower than for NATBIRTH,
especially for COUNTR1Y. Consistent with our prediction that cross-border mobility is higher
36

for (1) singles without young children, (2) younger workers and (3) workers at larger firms, we
find that pre-treatment mobility rates increase as we introduce the three restrictions cumulatively.
Using pre-treatment averages for YEARESID (COUNTR1Y) with LFS weights, the mobility rate
climbs from 133 (18) basis points for the full sample to as high as 254 (58) basis points for the
most restricted subsample. Thus, we expect these restrictions to be effective in mitigating the
mini domain problem and increasing power.
In interpreting the treatment effects, we focus on LFS-weighted estimates as they adjust
for discrepancies in sample size across countries and/or across time by anchoring the weights in
countries’ populations. We find that the estimated treatment effects are insignificant for the full
sample, although for YEARESID the estimates are positive and sizeable relative to the pretreatment mobility rates. Thus, the statistical insignificance is likely explained by the minidomain problem, which reduces the reliability of the estimated treatment effects and is most
severe in the full sample. Indeed, when we restrict the analysis to subsamples with higher
migration base rates, treatment effects and statistical significance begin to increase. Using
YEARESID (COUNTR1Y), the estimated coefficients are significant in all subsamples and
indicate, for instance, that labor migration of single accountants without children increases by
roughly 46 (52) basis points relative to all other (matched) professionals. Further restricting to
younger, single workers without children working at large firms, the treatment effects indicate an
increase in cross-border labor migration by 173 and 77 basis points for YEARESID and
COUNTR1Y, respectively.
The estimated effects are quite large relative to the pre-treatment mobility rates. We also
gauge the economic magnitude of the estimates by computing the implied increase in the number
of migrants over the post-treatment period. Restricting the computations to statistically
significant coefficients, the flow measures yield an estimate between 3,000 and 5,000 individuals
37

using YEARESID and 6,000 and 10,000 for COUNTR1Y. 32 While these estimates are smaller
than those in Section 4.3, they are still economically meaningful. It is also important to keep in
mind that they apply to restrictive subsamples and hence have to be interpreted in that context.
In sum, the results for the flow measure in Table 4 corroborate our earlier findings using
stock-based migration measures. As expected, statistical power of the flow measures is low but
the relatively large percentage effects in subsamples that should be more responsive to regulatory
harmonization are reassuring. Overall, the evidence is consistent with the interpretation that
regulatory harmonization has a sizeable effect on cross-border migration of accountants.
5.2

Cross-Country Variation in Treatment Effects
Institutional differences across countries likely affect migration patterns. For instance,

prior research finds that East European citizens respond more strongly to economic shocks that
should lead to migration than Western European citizens (Dao et al., 2014). Such cross-country
differences may also shape migration responses to regulatory harmonization. In addition,
country-level differences in the extent of harmonization as well as with respect to explicit entry
barriers such as licensing rules can lead to cross-sectional variation in the treatment effects. We
explore such cross-country differences in this section.
5.2.1

Treatment Effects in East and West Europe
In 2004 and 2007, the EU was enlarged by in total twelve new, mainly Eastern European

member states (EU-10 and EU-2). 33 EU membership gave the citizens of the twelve new

32

As before, we gauge the economic magnitude by multiplying the treatment effect with an estimate for the relevant
population of accountants. For example, the population of accountants who are young singles without kids and
working at larger firms comprises about 275,000 people in the sample countries according to our estimates based on
the number of respondents and their LFS weights. Multiplying this number with the relevant treatment effect for
YEARESID (with LFS weights) yields an increase of about 4,750 migrating accountants due to regulatory
harmonization over the post-treatment period (1.731 * 275,000 / 100). Multiplying the population estimate with the
relevant treatment effect for COUNTR1Y (with LFS weights) yields an increase of about 2,100 migrating
accountants per year (0.771 * 275,000 / 100). This yearly effect translates into an increase of about 6,300 migrating
accountants over the post-treatment period (2,100 people * 3 years).

38

member states access to the labor markets of the EU-15 countries with certain restrictions for a
transition period (for details, see Zaiceva and Zimmermann, 2008; Skupnik, 2013). Prior
research finds that labor mobility among the mainly Western European countries that became EU
members before 2004 (EU-15) is relatively low compared to, for instance, the United States
(Bonin et al., 2008; OECD, 2014). Since the EU-15 has not had formal restrictions on labor
mobility for decades, a widespread conjecture is that EU-15 mobility rates are low because of
implicit barriers, such as language or culture, which are difficult to change. 34
It is therefore interesting to examine whether regulatory harmonization increased labor
mobility even within EU-15 countries. We present results from two specifications in Table 5. In
the first specification (EU-15 host countries only), we use the same design as in Table 3, Panel
A, but focus on the subsample of individuals surveyed in the EU-15. In the second specification
(EU-15 host and EU-15 source countries only), we also focus on respondents from EU-15 but in
addition, we count as migrants only those individuals who were born in the EU-15 and have an
EU-15 nationality. In both specifications, we focus on the more restrictive design that uses
NATBIRTH_CHG and controls for domestic job mobility.
We find that the treatment effects are very similar when we restrict the sample to EU-15
host countries (first three columns of Table 5). Restricting to EU-15 host and source countries,
we still find significant treatment effects, but they are slightly smaller in magnitude, consistent
with prior literature indicating lower within-EU-15 mobility and migration responses (cited
above). In light of this work, it is noteworthy that we find significant within EU-15 migration
effects after regulatory harmonization. This finding also eases the concern that EU enlargement
33

In 2004, the following countries became EU members: Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia (EU10). In 2007, Bulgaria and Romania became members (EU2).
34
Related to the role of culture and language, we estimate treatment effects within six regions that are defined based
on language and geography. The results show substantial regional differences in the response to accounting
harmonization. See Internet Appendix IA4.

39

and the removal of labor migration restrictions on workers from EU-10 and EU-2 countries are
responsible for the documented migration effects of accounting professionals.
5.2.2

Variation in Treatment Effects by the Extent of Harmonization and Licensing Rules
In this section, we explore cross-sectional variation in the estimated treatment effects. We

focus on variables related to the extent of harmonization and professional entry barriers.
However, we note that it is difficult to ex ante sign cross-sectional differences in the treatment
effects. One reason is that cross-sectional variation also affects the size of the profession in the
first place. In addition, cross-border migration is not the only margin along which the system can
adjust after the regulatory change. Consider, for instance, the prediction that countries with a
larger fraction of publicly-listed firms that need to report under IFRS should see a larger inflow
of migrants. While sensible, it is conceivable that these countries already had a much larger
accounting profession to begin with and hence even if they receive a larger number of migrants,
the relative effect of migration could be larger in countries with fewer publicly-traded firms
reporting under IFRS (and a smaller audit profession). Furthermore, countries with a larger
fraction of publicly-traded firms could also see a larger domestic inflow into the accounting and
auditing profession after IFRS adoption. As a result, it is again not clear that the inflow of
migrants (scaled by the size of the profession) is necessarily larger in countries with more
publicly-traded firms reporting under IFRS. It is also worth noting that at the country-level,
many institutional variables are highly correlated and difficult to separate.
With these limitations in mind, we explore cross-sectional variation along two
dimensions. We view the evidence as descriptive only. First, we explore proxies for the extent of
regulatory harmonization, i.e., the extent to which audit standards are being harmonized and the
size of public equity markets to GDP (which is related to how widespread IFRS adoption is in
the economy). Second, we explore proxies for the extent to which regulatory harmonization is
40

likely to affect migration to a country, i.e., the market share of Big 4 auditors and remaining
professional entry barriers in the form of licensing requirements. Due to their descriptive nature,
we present these analyses in the Internet Appendix only (see Section IA9).
The analyses indicate that the treatment effects tend to be larger in magnitude when
accounting and auditing harmonization is greater, i.e., in countries that fully adopted ISA and
have large equity markets (see Table IA9b, Panels A and B). The estimated treatment effects are
also larger in magnitude in countries with low licensing requirements and a high Big 4 auditor
market share (see Table IA9b, Panels C and D). In all cases and for all control groups, the results
directionally make sense but the differences in the treatment effects between the high and the
low groups are often not statistically significant. As the differences are often large in magnitude,
we find this evidence suggestive and descriptively useful.
6.

Conclusion
This paper examines the effect of international regulatory harmonization on cross-border

labor migration. The idea is that diversity in professional rules presents an economic barrier to
cross-border mobility and hence harmonization makes it easier for people to migrate. To analyze
this idea, we exploit an increase in harmonization for the accounting profession in the EU in
recent years, namely the mandate to report under IFRS and a directive that harmonized statutory
audits of companies’ financial statements.
Our identification strategy relies on the idea that regulatory harmonization primarily
affected the accounting profession. Thus, we perform a difference-in-differences analysis
comparing changes in mobility of accounting professionals around regulatory harmonization
with changes in mobility of other professions using three separate control groups: legal
professionals, all (other) professionals, and a combination of (other) business people. We control
41

for demographic characteristics that prior studies have shown as related to migration decisions
(i.e., gender, marital status, age, education level, and the presence of children), including all
possible interactions of these characteristics. In addition, we estimate the effects within country
and year to account for unrelated changes and shocks affecting labor mobility of professionals.
To further tighten our design, we perform a double-matched difference-in-differences analysis
that pairs individuals with the same characteristics from the same country before and after
harmonization.
We find that, after regulatory harmonization, cross-border labor migration in the
accounting profession increases by roughly 20% to 22% of the pre-treatment mobility rate,
relative to all other professionals. This percentage increase translates into an increase in the total
number of migrants by 10,000 to 16,000 accounting professionals in our double-matched
specifications. We document this increase using several mobility measures and show that it is
sustained over time.
Importantly, we obtain significant treatment effects even after controlling for changes in
domestic job mobility as well as among individuals that recently changed their jobs. It is
therefore unlikely that our results merely reflect changes in the demand for accounting services,
rather than regulatory harmonization. Demand effects due to new regulation should be limited in
time and affect both domestic and foreign professionals. We also show that the increase in crossborder migration exists when we limit the analysis to EU-15 host and source countries. Thus, our
results do not reflect EU enlargement or a migration wave from Eastern to Western Europe.
Finally, we provide descriptive evidence suggesting that the migration effects are stronger when
there is more harmonization, licensing rules are less strict, and Big-4 auditors have a larger
market share, consistent with regulatory harmonization driving our results.

42

Overall, we conclude that diversity in rules and regulations constitutes an important
economic barrier to cross-border labor migration. More specifically, our results imply that
accounting and auditing harmonization can reduce this barrier and have a meaningful effect on
cross-border migration. Regulatory harmonization could therefore be an important policy
instrument to improve cross-border mobility and, ultimately, the efficiency of international labor
markets. However, we acknowledge that our findings are limited to the accounting profession,
which may be more responsive to regulatory harmonization than other professions. It is also
possible that the financial crisis, which partially overlaps with our sample period, exacerbated
unemployment and/or wage differentials across the EU, which in turn increased the magnitude of
the treatment effect of regulatory harmonization (relative to what it would have been without the
crisis). Finally, we emphasize that the LFS dataset has several drawbacks in measuring crossborder mobility around regulatory harmonization and in identifying accounting professionals.
For all these reasons, readers should interpret the magnitude of the estimated treatment effects
carefully.

43

References
Armstrong, C.S., Guay, W.R., Weber, J.P., 2010. The role of information and financial reporting
in corporate governance and debt contracting. Journal of Accounting and Economics 50,
179–234.
Ball, R., Robin, A., Wu, J.S., 2003. Incentives versus standards: properties of accounting income
in four East Asian countries. Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, 235–270.
Balsam S., Gordon, E. A., Li, X., 2015. Mandatory Disclosure Reform, Monitoring, and
Executive Compensation. Working paper, Temple University.
Bakija, J., Slemrod, J., 2004. Do the rich flee from high state taxes? Evidence from federal estate
tax returns. Working paper, Williams College, University of Michigan.
Barth, M.E., 2006. Research, standard setting, and global financial reporting. Foundations and
Trends in Accounting 1, 71–165.
Bonin, H., Eichhorst, W., Florman, C., Hansen, M.O., Skiöld, L., Stuhler, J., Tatsiramos, K.,
Thomasen, H., Zimmermann, K.F., 2008. Geographic mobility in the European Union:
Optimising its economic and social benefits. IZA Research Report No. 19, Institute for the
Study of Labor.
Borjas, G.J., 1987. Self-Selection and the earnings of immigrants. American Economic Review
77, 531–553.
Brüggemann, U., Hitz, J.-M., Sellhorn, T., 2013. Intended and unintended consequences of
mandatory IFRS adoption: a review of extant evidence and suggestions for future research.
European Accounting Review 22, 1–37.
Burgstahler, D.C., Hail, L., Leuz, C., 2006. The importance of reporting incentives: earnings
management in European private and public firms. The Accounting Review 81, 983–1016.
Christensen, H.B., Hail, L., Leuz, C., 2013. Mandatory IFRS reporting and changes in
enforcement. Journal of Accounting and Economics 56, 147–177.
Cochran, W.G., Rubin, D.B., 1973. Controlling bias in observational studies: A review. The
Indian Journal of Statistics 35, 417–446.
Conley, T., Goncalves, S. and Hansen, C., 2016, Performing statistical inference with
dependence: a review. Working paper, Western University, University of Chicago.
Conway, K.S., Houtenville, A.J., 1998. Do the elderly vote with their feet? Public Choice 97,
663–685.
Conway, K.S., Houtenville, A.J., 2001. Elderly migration and state fiscal policy: Evidence from
the 1990 Census migration flows. National Tax Journal 54, 103–123.
Coomes, P.A., Hoyt, W.H., 2008. Income taxes and the destination of movers to multistate
MSAs. Journal of Urban Economics 63, 920–937.
d'Addio, A.C. and Cavalleri, M.C., 2015. Labour Mobility and the Portability of Social Rights in
the EU. CESifo Economic Studies 61, 346-376.
Dao, M., Furceri, D. Loungani, P., 2014. Regional labor market Adjustments in the United States
and Europe. IMF Working Paper WP/14/26.
44

Daske, H., Hail, L., Leuz, C., Verdi, R., 2008. Mandatory IFRS reporting around the world: early
evidence on the economic consequences. Journal of Accounting Research 46, 1085–1142.
Daske, H., Hail, L., Leuz, C., Verdi, R., 2013. Adopting a label: heterogeneity in the economic
consequences around IAS/IFRS adoptions. Journal of Accounting Research 51, 495–547.
De George, E. T., Ferguson, C. B., Spear, N. A., 2013. How much does IFRS cost? IFRS
adoption and audit fees. The Accounting Review 88, 429–62.
Farhi, E., Werning, I., 2014. Labor mobility within currency unions. Working paper, Harvard
University, MIT.
FSAP, 1999. Financial Services Action Plan. Implementing the framework for financial markets:
action plan. Communication of the Commission, 232.
Hail, L., Leuz, C., Wysocki, P.D., 2010. Global accounting convergence and the potential
adoption of IFRS by the U.S. (part I): conceptual underpinnings and economic analysis.
Accounting Horizons 24, 355–394.
Healy, P.M., Palepu, K.G., 2001. Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the capital
markets: a review of the empirical disclosure literature. Journal of Accounting and
Economics 31, 405–440.
Heß, B., Stefani, U., 2012. Audit market regulation and supplier concentration around the world:
empirical evidence. Working paper, University of Konstanz.
Holen, A.S., 1965. Effects of professional licensing arrangements on interstate labor mobility
and resource allocation. Journal of Political Economy 73, 492-498.
ICAEW, 2007, EU implementation of IFRS and the Fair Value Directive. ICAEW, London.
Kleiner, M.M., 2000. Occupational Licensing. Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, 189–202.
Kleiner, M.M., Gay, R.S., Greene, K., 1982. Barriers to labor migration: The case of
occupational licensing. Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society 21, 383–
391.
Kleven, H.J., C. Landais, E. Saez, and E. Schultz, 2014. Migration and Wage Effects of Taxing
Top Earners: Evidence of the Foreigners’ Tax Scheme in Denmark. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 129, 333–78
Krieger, H., 2004. Migration trends in an enlarged Europe. European Foundation for the
Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, Dublin.
Kvaal, E., Nobes, C., 2010. International differences in IFRS policy choice: A research note.
Accounting and Business Research 40, 173–187.
Kvaal, E., Nobes, C., 2012. IFRS policy changes and the continuation of national patterns of
IFRS practice. European Accounting Review 21, 343–371.
Leuz, C., Wysocki, P., 2016. The economics of disclosure and financial reporting regulation:
Evidence and suggestions for Future Research. Journal of Accounting Research 54, 525622.
Le Vourc’h, J., Morand, P., 2011. Study on the effects of the implementation of the acquis on
statutory audits of annual and consolidated accounts including the consequences on the audit
market, Final report, ESCP Europe.
45

Madsen, P.E., 2011. How standardized is accounting? The Accounting Review 86, 1679–1708.
Martí, M., Ródenas, C., 2007. Migration estimation based on the labour force survey: an EU-15
perspective. International Migration Review 41, 101–126.
Massey, D. S., Arango, J., Hugo, G., Kouaouci, A., Pellegrino, A., Taylor, E., 1993. Theories of
international migration: A review and appraisal. Population and Development Review 19,
431–466
Mincer, J., 1978. Family migration decisions. Journal of Political Economy 86, 749-773.
Mundell, R.A., 1961. A theory of optimum currency areas. American Economic Review 51,
657–665.
Nobes, C. W., Zeff, S. A., 2015. Have Canada. Japan or Switzerland Adopted IFRS? Australian
Accounting Review, forthcoming.
OECD, 2014. Migration as an adjustment mechanism in the crisis? A comparison of Europe and
the United States. OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers No. 155.
Parey, M., Waldinger, F., 2011, Studying abroad and the effect on international labour market
mobility: Evidence from the introduction of ERASMUS. Economic Journal 121, 194–222.
Purcell, N.J., Kish, L., 1980. Postcensal estimates for local areas (or domains). International
Statistical Review 48, 3–18.
Rendall, M.S., Tomassini, C., Elliot, D.J., 2003. Estimation of annual international migration
from the Labour Force Surveys of the United Kingdom and the continental European Union.
Statistical Journal of the United Nations 20, 219–234.
Roy, A.D., 1951. Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford Economic Papers, New
Series 3, 135–146.
Rubin, D.B., 1973. Matching to remove bias in observational studies. Biometrics 29, 159-183.
Rubin, D.B., 1979. Using multivariate matched sampling and regression adjustment to control
bias in observational studies. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74, 318–328.
Sjaastad, L.A., 1962. The costs and returns of human migration. Journal of Political Economy
70, 80–93.
Skupnik, C., 2013. “Welfare Magnetism” in the EU-15? Why the EU enlargement did not start a
race to the bottom of welfare states. Working paper, Freie Universität Berlin.
Soderstrom, N.S., Sun, K.J., 2007. IFRS adoption and accounting quality: a review. European
Accounting Review 16, 675–702.
Stark, O., Bloom, D.E., 1985. The new economics of labor migration. American Economic
Review 75, 173–178.
Wu, J.S., Zhang, I.X., 2009. The voluntary adoption of internationally recognized accounting
standards and firm internal performance evaluation. The Accounting Review 84, 1281–1309.
Zaiceva, A., Zimmermann, K.F., 2008. Scale, diversity, and determinants of labour migration in
Europe. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24, 427-451.

46

TABLE 1
Description of LFS dataset
Host country

LFS Dataset
(2002-2004, 2008-2010)
Number of
respondents

LFS weighted
(in '000)

Treatment
(Accountants)

Control
(Legal pros)

Control
(All pros)

Control
(Biz people)

Number of
respondents

Number of
respondents

Number of
respondents

Number of
respondents

Coverage of mobility metrics
(years available)
Stock measures

Flow measures
all

Austria

394,442

27,436

2,880

1,710

22,771

40,448

all

Belgium

223,058

34,622

4,206

1,293

20,396

20,048

all

all

Bulgaria

126,625

25,379

0

0

0

0

2006-2010

2006-2010

Cyprus

86,654

2,491

1,567

485

5,877

5,917

all

all

Czech Republic

486,237

36,274

5,411

1,429

22,916

35,988

all

all

Denmark

190,995

17,640

4,678

554

17,205

16,351

all

all

Estonia

42,673

4,442

732

103

2,826

4,339

all

all

Finland

167,458

17,078

1,126

313

10,539

11,578

all

all [2002-2007]

France

833,687

193,451

876

2,390

57,215

71,881

all

+
all [2002-2010 ]

Germany

607,135

273,650

6,240

2,592

38,573

34,830

all

all

Greece

586,674

35,829

3,904

3,584

37,626

43,844

all

all

Hungary

601,543

33,850

5,111

1,552

29,546

37,487

all

all

Iceland

35,521

971

735

256

3,899

3,815

all

all [2002]

480,646

14,305

7,900

1,790

34,390

54,700

all

1,313,874

195,315

7,775

6,732

54,524

95,848

2005-2010

+
2002-2010 [none]
all

Ireland
Italy
Latvia

71,291

7,645

1,227

308

4,706

6,255

2004-2010

all

125,379

11,262

3,656

473

8,549

10,811

all

all

Luxembourg

56,960

1,594

2,202

530

5,367

3,923

all

all

Netherlands

353,578

54,360

8,604

2,243

36,428

44,193

all

all [2006-2010]

all

all [2002-2005]

2004-2010

2004-2010 [all]

Lithuania

Norway

91,248

15,270

1,079

290

5,501

8,766

Poland

559,474

130,259

0

0

0

0

Portugal

331,237

35,521

1,676

976

13,275

19,919

all

all

Romania

481,245

74,745

1,791

1,641

21,564

9,554

2004-2010

Slovakia

225,808

19,083

2,074

596

11,317

12,548

2003-2010

+
2004-2010 [2002-2010 ]
2003-2010

Slovenia

151,935

7,108

0

0

0

0

all

all [2008-2010]

Spain

473,571

152,741

1,858

2,448

26,578

32,834

all

all

Sweden

627,015

28,778

17,437

2,381

61,941

54,818

all

all [2006-2010]

Switzerland

202,076

25,438

5,249

1,071

19,170

9,446

all

all [2010]

United Kingdom

398,166

195,196

5,946

1,740

28,283

58,172

all

+
all [2002-2010 ]

10,326,205

1,671,730

105,940

39,480

600,982

748,313

Total

Table 1 presents details on the composition of our dataset at the country level. Our analysis is based on the EU’s Labor Force
Survey (LFS). The LFS dataset provides information from 29 European countries over the years 2002 to 2010. Our sample period
focuses on the years 2002 to 2004 and 2008 to 2010, respectively. In the second column, we report the total number of survey
respondents (raw and LFS weighted) in the LFS dataset who are between 20 and 59 years old. Our sample focuses on the
following professions: The treatment group comprises respondents with job code 241 (business professionals primarily
accountants). The control group comprises legal professionals (job code 242), all professionals (all job codes with first digit 2,
except 241, 214, 222 and 223) or business people (job codes 121, 122, 123, 131, 341 and 342). We report the raw number of
respondents for treatment and control groups in the middle of the table. Our sample is reduced to 26 countries, because Bulgaria,
Poland and Slovenia do not provide job codes at the three digit level (i.e., respondents with job codes 241 cannot be identified).
In the last two columns of the table, we report country-level statistics on the coverage of our mobility metrics. Stock-based
measures are NATBIRTH and NATBIRTH_CHG (see Table 2 for details). Flow measures are YEARESID and COUNTR1Y (see
Table 4 for details). Coverage details for COUNTR1Y are presented in parentheses if they differ from the coverage details for
YEARESID. The superscript + denotes gaps in the coverage time series (e.g., 2002-2010+ indicates that the mobility metric is
available for years 2002 and 2010 but not for all years in between).

47

TABLE 2
Descriptive statistics for the variables in regression analysis
Variables

LFS weighted (yes)
Obs.

Mean

LFS weighted (no)
Obs.

Mean

Mobility yes/no (NATBIRTH)
Treatment (Accountants)

97,821

4.96%

99,061

5.40%

Control (Legal pros)

35,541

2.46%

37,182

2.65%

Control (All pros)

526,678

4.42%

560,701

3.98%

Control (Biz people)

560,804

4.43%

600,772

3.56%

Treatment (Accountants)

97,821

2.86%

99,061

2.82%

Control (Legal pros)

35,541

1.36%

37,182

1.36%

Control (All pros)

526,678

2.24%

560,701

1.88%

Control (Biz people)

560,804

2.09%

600,772

1.60%

Domestic job mobility

97,821

39.62%

99,061

37.83%

Female yes/no

97,821

0.465

99,061

0.499

Age

97,821

38.927

99,061

39.861

Has kids yes/no

62,552

0.340

63,792

0.353

Single yes/no

97,821

0.369

99,061

0.342

Higher education yes/no

97,821

0.720

99,061

0.729

Mobility yes/no (NATBIRTH_CHG)

Control variables (Accountants)

Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the variables in the regression analysis in Table 3. In the second column, we present
LFS-weighted statistics (i.e., each observation is weighted with the statistical weight for the individual provided in the LFS
dataset). In the last column, we report statistics based on the raw number of survey respondents (i.e., not LFS weighted). Our
sample comprises individuals from 26 countries for the years 2002 to 2004 and 2008 to 2010, respectively. We focus on
individuals who are between 20 and 59 years old, and whose highest degree of education is at least at the upper secondary level.
In addition, we require non-missing information on all control variables as well as on the mobility metrics NATBIRTH and
NATBIRTH_CHG. NATBIRTH defines respondents as migrants (or mobile) if they have a foreign nationality and were born
outside the host country in which the survey was conducted. NATBIRTH_CHG is based on NATBIRTH but, as a further
requirement, defines only those respondents as migrants who recently changed their jobs. We define recent job changes as those
that occurred (a) in/after 1999 for the pre-treatment period (2002 to 2004), and (b) in/after 2005 for the post-treatment period
(2008 to 2010). The treatment group comprises accountants. The control group comprises legal professionals, all professionals or
business people. For details on the composition of treatment and control groups, see Table 1. The upper (middle) part of Table 2
shows statistics on the mobility metric NATBIRTH (NATBIRTH_CHG). The lower part presents statistics on the following
control variables for the treatment group of accountants: Domestic job mobility is the proportion of domestic people in a
particular job code who recently changed their jobs in a given year, country, and profession. Recent job changes are again
defined as those that occurred (a) in/after 1999 for the pre-treatment period, and (b) in/after 2005 for the post-treatment period.
Female yes/no is a binary variable and equals one if the individual is female, and zero otherwise. Age is the age of the individual
measured by the middle value of 5-year bins. Has kids yes/no is a binary variable and equals one if the individual has one or more
children under the age of 15 living in the same household at the time of the survey, and zero otherwise. Single yes/no is a binary
variable and equals one if the individual is single, and zero otherwise (married, divorced or widowed). Higher education yes/no is
a binary variable and equals one if the highest degree of the individual is at the tertiary or doctoral level, and zero if it is at the
upper or post-secondary level.

48

TABLE 3
Difference-in-differences analysis of cross-border mobility effects from regulatory harmonization
Panel A: Baseline regressions
Dependent variable: Mobility yes/no (NATBIRTH)

Independent variables
Accountant * Post
Control group

R-squared

LFS weighted (yes)

LFS weighted (no)

1.309**

0.738**

0.716

0.694**

0.830***

0.452*

1.127**

0.767**

0.669*

0.622**

0.703***

0.330

(2.34)

(2.05)

(1.64)

(2.53)

(3.76)

(1.75)

(2.05)

(2.53)

(1.92)

(2.42)

(2.86)

(1.44)

Legal pros

All pros

Biz people

Legal pros

All pros

Biz people

Legal pros

All pros

Biz people

Legal pros

All pros

Biz people

Fixed effects
Observations

Dependent variable: Mobility yes/no (NATBIRTH_CHG)

LFS weighted (no)

LFS weighted (yes)

Bin

Bin

Bin

Bin

Country * Accountant

Country * Accountant

Country * Accountant

Country * Accountant

Country * Year

Country * Year

Country * Year

Country * Year

133,362

624,499

658,625

136,243

659,762

699,833

133,362

624,499

658,625

136,243

659,762

699,833

0.10

0.05

0.04

0.24

0.13

0.10

0.06

0.04

0.03

0.12

0.07

0.06

Panel B: Baseline regressions with domestic job mobility control
Dependent variable: Mobility yes/no (NATBIRTH)

Independent variables
Accountant * Post
Domestic job mobility
Control group

LFS weighted (yes)

LFS weighted (no)

0.730**

0.776*

0.670**

0.810***

0.550**

1.083*

0.753**

0.747**

0.608**

0.695***

(2.19)

(2.07)

(1.80)

(2.45)

(3.88)

(2.04)

(1.99)

(2.58)

(2.32)

(2.47)

(2.98)

(1.91)

0.047

0.013

0.078*

0.046

0.020

0.060*

0.029

0.023

0.102***

0.046

0.008

0.072**

0.447*

(1.19)

(0.39)

(1.97)

(1.09)

(0.72)

(1.86)

(0.87)

(0.72)

(3.15)

(1.17)

(0.25)

(2.40)

Legal pros

All pros

Biz people

Legal pros

All pros

Biz people

Legal pros

All pros

Biz people

Legal pros

All pros

Biz people

Bin

Bin

Bin

Bin

Country * Accountant

Country * Accountant

Country * Accountant

Country * Accountant

Country * Year
R-squared

LFS weighted (yes)

1.232**

Fixed effects
Observations

Dependent variable: Mobility yes/no (NATBIRTH_CHG)

LFS weighted (no)

Country * Year

Country * Year

Country * Year

133,362

624,499

658,625

136,243

659,762

699,833

133,362

624,499

658,625

136,243

659,762

699,833

0.10

0.05

0.04

0.24

0.13

0.10

0.06

0.04

0.03

0.12

0.07

0.06

Panels A and B of Table 3 present results from OLS regressions that test for differences in mobility trends between the treatment group (accountants) and the control groups (legal
professionals, all professionals or business people). Our sample comprises individuals from 26 countries for the years 2002 to 2004 and 2008 to 2010, respectively. The dependent
variable is a binary variable and equals one if the individual is mobile according to the relevant mobility metric (NATBIRTH or NATBIRTH_CHG), and zero otherwise. The
independent variables are defined as follows: Accountant is a binary variable equal to one for individuals from the treatment group (job code 241), and zero for individuals from
the relevant control group. Post is a binary variable equal to one for years 2008 to 2010, and zero for years 2002 to 2004. We include fixed effects to control for differences in
individuals’ characteristics (Bin), country-specific mobility differences between the treatment and the control group (Country*Accountant) and country-specific mobility trends
(Country*Year). Bin introduces 192 separate fixed effects, one for each combination of the control variables: gender, age, presence of children, marital status, and education level
(see Table 2 for details). These fixed effects control for the full set of interactions between all control variables. Panel A (Panel B) present results from the baseline regressions
(with Domestic job mobility as additional control). Domestic job mobility is the proportion of domestic people in a particular job code who recently changed their jobs in a given

49

TABLE 3 (continued)
year and country (see Table 2 for details). In the first six columns of Panels A and B, we use NATBIRTH as migration measure and present regression results with and without
weighing observations by the statistical weight provided for each individual in the LFS dataset. In the last six columns of Panels A and B, we present the results using
NATBIRTH_CHG, both with and without LFS weights. NATBIRTH defines respondents as mobile if they have a foreign nationality and were born outside the host country in
which the survey was conducted. NATBIRTH_CHG is based on NATBIRTH but, as a further requirement, defines only those respondents as migrants who recently changed their
jobs (see Table 2 for details). The table reports OLS coefficient estimates and t-statistics (in parentheses). We multiply the coefficient estimates by 100 for expositional purposes.
The t-statistics are based on robust standard errors with one-way clustering by country-job group. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (twosided), respectively.

50

TABLE 3 (continued)
Panel C: Double matched diff-in-diff analysis
Full sample
Double matched
diff-in-diff analysis

Mobility rate: NATBIRTH

Only recent job changers
Mobility rate: NATBIRTH_CHG

Mobility rate: NATBIRTH

Pre-period
(1)

Post-period
(2)

Difference
(2) - (1)

Pre-period
(1)

Post-period
(2)

Difference
(2) - (1)

Pre-period
(1)

Post-period
(2)

Difference
(2) - (1)

(a) Treatment (Accountants)

3.402

5.118

1.717

1.924

2.919

0.994

4.540

7.467

2.927

(b) Control (All pros)

3.940

4.965

1.026

2.050

2.621

0.571

5.388

6.941

1.553

Difference (a) - (b)

-0.538

0.153

0.691***
(4.02)

-0.126

0.297

0.423**
(2.83)

-0.849

0.526

1.374***
(3.06)

LFS weighted (yes)

Observations

482,603

482,603

135,776

LFS weighted (no)
(a) Treatment (Accountants)

6.013

7.605

1.592

3.098

4.205

1.107

7.808

10.205

2.397

(b) Control (All pros)

6.066

7.010

0.944

3.063

3.581

0.518

8.793

10.442

1.649

Difference (a) - (b)

-0.053

0.595

0.648***
(2.66)

0.035

0.624

0.589*
(1.89)

-0.985

-0.237

0.749*
(1.97)

Observations

498,950

498,950

137,827

Panel C of Table 3 presents results from a double matched difference-in-differences analysis that tests for differences in mobility trends between the treatment group (accountants)
and the control group of all professionals. The sample comprises individuals from 24 countries for the years 2002 to 2004 and 2008 to 2010 (Italy drops out due to missing
mobility metrics in the pre-treatment period; Romania drops out because job codes are only available at the three digit level in the pre-treatment period). The sample is restricted to
pairs of treatment and control group individuals with the same characteristics for a year in the pre-treatment period and a year in the post-treatment period (see Figure 2 for details
on the double matched difference-in-differences approach). We match on gender, age, presence of children, marital status, and education level (see Table 2 for details). The left
(middle) part of the table presents results based on the full sample using NATBIRTH (NATBIRTH_CHG) as mobility metric. NATBIRTH defines respondents as mobile if they have
a foreign nationality and were born outside the host country in which the survey was conducted. NATBIRTH_CHG is based on NATBIRTH but, as a further requirement, defines
only those respondents as migrants who recently changed their jobs (see Table 2 for details). The right part of the table also uses NATBIRTH as mobility metric but focuses on the
subsample of people who recently changed jobs. We define recent job changes as those that occurred (a) in/after 1999 for the pre-treatment period (2002 to 2004), and (b) in/after
2005 for the post-treatment period (2008 to 2010). The table reports the mobility rate in percent for each cell in the difference-in-differences analysis (treatment and control; pre
and post) and presents results both with and without LFS weights. The treatment effect is the weighted average of the quadruplet treatment effects using the minimum number of
individuals from treatment or control entering the quadruplet as a weight. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on robust standard errors with one-way clustering by countryjob group. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-sided), respectively. ^ indicates statistical significance at the 10% level (one-sided).

51

TABLE 4
Difference-in-differences analysis of cross-border mobility effects using flow-based metrics

Double matched
diff-in-diff analysis

Full sample

Singles
without kids

Young singles
without kids

Young singles
without kids at big employer

LFS weighted
(yes)

LFS weighted
(no)

LFS weighted
(yes)

LFS weighted
(no)

LFS weighted
(yes)

LFS weighted
(no)

LFS weighted
(yes)

LFS weighted
(no)

Pre-treatment mobility

1.330

2.351

1.621

2.314

1.674

2.483

2.538

3.652

Treatment effect

0.267
(1.10)

0.107
(0.55)

0.458^
(1.56)

0.168
(0.93)

0.501*
(1.72)

0.277^
(1.50)

1.731***
(6.02)

0.798**
(2.32)

480,241

496,620

84,724

86,717

71,769

73,358

22,747

23,297

Pre-treatment mobility

0.185

0.199

0.424

0.399

0.422

0.434

0.583

0.526

Treatment effect

0.101
(1.48)

0.041
(0.41)

0.521***
(2.99)

0.367*
(1.75)

0.566**
(3.06)

0.417*
(1.77)

0.771***
(5.05)

0.427
(0.80)

365,627

366,997

70,736

70,972

60,791

60,987

18,296

18,303

Mobility rate: YEARESID

Observations
Mobility rate: COUNTR1Y

Observations

Table 4 presents results from the double matched difference-in-differences analysis with two alternative mobility metrics (YEARESID and COUNTR1Y). The sample comprises
individuals from 26 countries for the years 2002 to 2004 and 2008 to 2010, respectively (25 countries for COUNTR1Y because this item is not available for Ireland). The research
design is the same as in the analysis presented in Panel C of Table 3. All results in this table are based on tests that use all professionals as the control group. The alternative
mobility metrics are as follows: YEARESID defines individuals as mobile if they were born abroad and moved to the host country in/after 1999 (for sample years 2002 to 2004) or
in/after 2005 (for sample years 2008 to 2010). COUNTR1Y defines individuals as mobile if they moved to the host country within the last year. We report results for the full
sample as well as for the following subsamples: Singles without kids focuses on individuals who are single (Single yes/no = 1) and who do not have children aged less than 15
years living in the same household (Has kids yes/no = 0). Young singles without kids focuses on singles without children who are less than 40 years old (20 <= Age< 40). Young
Singles without kids at big employer focuses on young singles without children who work for a firm with more than 50 employees (LFS item SIZEFIRM measured at local unit).
The table reports pre-treatment mobility rates in percent for the treatment group, minimum-sample weighted treatment effects as defined in Figure 2, t-statistics (in parentheses) as
well as the number of quadruplets and observations in these quadruplets. We report these statistics both with and without LFS weights. The t-statistics are based on robust standard
errors with one-way clustering by country-job group. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-sided), respectively. ^ indicates statistical
significance at the 10% level (one-sided).

52

TABLE 5
Migrations to and within EU-15 around regulatory harmonization
Dependent variable: Mobility yes/no (NATBIRTH_CHG)

Independent variables
Accountant * Post
Domestic job mobility
Control group

EU-15 host countries only
1.122*

0.775**

(1.80)
0.039

0.821**

0.640**

(2.32)

(2.28)

0.031

0.130***

(0.90)

(0.70)

Legal pros

All pros

Fixed effects
Observations
R-squared

EU-15 host and EU-15 source countries only
0.518**

0.541**

(2.62)

(2.51)

(2.51)

0.029

-0.004

0.030

(3.56)

(1.28)

(-0.21)

(1.40)

Biz people

Legal pros

All pros

Biz people

Bin

Bin

Country * Accountant

Country * Accountant

Country * Year

Country * Year

98,075

468,711

493,418

98,075

468,711

493,418

0.06

0.03

0.03

0.07

0.02

0.02

Table 5 presents for two sets of specifications on migrations to and within EU-15 countries: The first set of regressions is
restricted to the subsample of survey individuals from EU-15 host countries. The second set of regressions is restricted to
individuals from EU-15 host countries and, in addition, to migrants from EU-15 source countries (i.e., the dependent variable
equals one only if a mobile individual was born inside the EU-15 and has a EU-15 nationality). The research design is the same
as in the regression analysis presented in Panel B of Table 3. All regression results in this table are based on LFS weighted
observations. The table reports OLS coefficient estimates and t-statistics (in parentheses). We multiply the coefficient estimates
by 100 for expositional purposes. The t-statistics are based on robust standard errors with one-way clustering by country-job
group. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-sided), respectively.

53

FIGURE 1
Mobility trends at aggregate level

Mobility rate (NATBIRTH)
6.00%
before regulatory

harmonization



after regulatory
harmonization

5.00%

4.00%

3.00%

2.00%

1.00%
2002

2003

2004
Accountants

2005

2006

Legal pros

2007
All pros

2008

2009

2010

Biz people

Figure 1 compares mobility rates between the treatment group (accountants) and the control groups (legal professionals, all
professionals and business people) over time. The analysis is based on the mobility metric NATBIRTH. This metric defines
individuals as migrants (or mobile) if they were born outside the host country and have a foreign nationality. The graph shows
aggregate mobility rates for the sample used in the main regression analysis (see Table 3, Panel A) over the period 2002 to 2010.
To make mobility rates representative of the population, the aggregate mobility rates in this graph are weighted averages using
the statistical weight the LFS dataset provides for each individual.

54

FIGURE 2
Description of double matched difference-in-differences approach

Example of quadruplet:
Single males, in Germany, between 25-29 years old, without kids, with university degree
Second difference (post - pre)

(c.pre) Control
professionals
First
difference:

Exact
match

a.pre - c.pre

(a.post) Accounting
professionals

a.post-a.pre

Exact
match

Exact
match

First difference (a - c)

(a.pre) Accounting
professionals

Second
difference:

Exact
match

(c.post) Control
professionals
a.post - c.post

c.post-c.pre

Treatment effect for
one quadruplet is
diff.-in-diff.
(TEi)

Figure 2 illustrates the double-matched difference-in-differences approach. Within each country and year, we first match all
accounting professionals and all control observations. We further match pre-treatment observations in year t to post-treatment
observations in year t+6 (e.g., observations in 2004 to observations in 2010). Along both dimensions, we perform an exact match
on gender, marital status, age, education level, and the presence of one or more children under the age of 15 living in the
household (see Table 2 for details). This approach yields two sets of accounting professionals and two sets of control
professionals (one pre- and one post-treatment), which share the exact same characteristics (illustrated by the four boxes above).
We define these four sets as a quadruplet and compute the difference-in-differences (or treatment effect) within each quadruplet.
The total treatment effect is the weighted average over all quadruplets, i.e., ΣwiTEi, where TEi is the treatment effect for
quadruplet i and wi is the weight assigned to quadruplet i. We use the minimum sample in any of the four boxes in each
quadruplet i as weight because the information in the quadruplet is ultimately constrained by the smallest sample size of the four
boxes.

55

For Online Publication
Internet Appendix for “The Effect of Regulatory Harmonization on Cross-border Labor
Migration: Evidence from the Accounting Profession”
This appendix provides supplemental discussion and analysis for our manuscript “The Effect of
Regulatory Harmonization on Cross-border Labor Migration: Evidence from the Accounting
Profession.” We summarize the content as follows:
Section IA1: Quotes Regarding Labor Mobility from Comment Letters to the European
Commission’s Consultation on the Impact of IAS Regulation in the EU
Section IA2: Differences between National Audit Standards and ISA
Section IA3: Distribution of Key Characteristics for Treatment and Control Groups
Section IA4: Descriptive Statistics on Mobility by Country
Section IA5: Mobility Trends for Extended Period from 1998 to 2013
Section IA6: Assessing Alternative Explanations
Section IA7: Correlation in Country-level Migration In- and Outflows
Section IA8: Double-Matched Legal Professionals and Business People
Section IA9: Cross-Sectional Variation in the Treatment Effect

56

Section IA1: Quotes Regarding Labor Mobility from Comment Letters to the European
Commission’s Consultation on the Impact of IAS Regulation in the EU
To provide anecdotal evidence that regulatory harmonization increases labor migration, we
collected and read comment letters to the European Commission for its Consultation on the
Impact of IAS Regulation in the EU. These letters, which were written in 2014, provide
essentially an ex-post assessment of IFRS adoption. In Table IA1, we provide excerpts and
quotes from these letters with respect to labor mobility. The table shows that various groups
claim that the use of IFRS (or a common language) has helped the mobility of accountants in the
EU. While this evidence is clearly more anecdotal in nature, it supports the plausibility of our
findings and common standards being the mechanism.

TABLE IA1
Quotes from comment letters to the European Commission for its Consultation on the Impact of
IAS Regulation
Organization

Quote

Panel A: Audit Firms
[T]he common language of IFRS has also helped mobility of accountants across the EU.
EY and its clients are able to move people around and recruit from beyond our national
EY
boundaries, using people more effectively, reducing costs and helping to foster a more
integrated community.
...we would list increased mobility of people knowledgeable in IFRS as an additional
KPMG IFRG Limited
benefit of IFRS implementation.
...the adoption of IFRS as the global accounting language has enhanced global mobility of
BDO IFR Advisory Ltd
employees within multinational organisations.
...the use of a single accounting language helps for the mobility of skilled workers within
Deloitte and Associés
the the EU and globally.
Grant Thornton International The Regulation is also directionally conducive to a free market in accounting services
Ltd
across the EU and enhances the mobility of qualified accountants.
Panel B: Non-audit Firms
RSM International

...use of IFRS increases the global mobility of expertise and resources, thus contributing to
quality of international groups’ internal processes and control.

Nestle S.A.

[IFRS] has facilitated communication with lenders and investors. It has enhanced internal
mobility and lowered training costs, as staff can access local training for IFRS basics.

HSBC Holdings PLC

There are tangible and intangible benefits to being able to apply IFRS to local and group
reporting across a large, international group in terms of cost savings and in improved
understanding and communication and finance staff mobility.
(continued)

57

TABLE IA1 (continued)
Panel C: Organizations of Auditors or Finance Professionals
…the development of IFRS as the single accounting language, has permitted greater
mobility for accounting staff between companies and between countries. It has also
allowed for easier and improved training and education of accountants.
FEE – Federation of European FEE believes that the use of international standards increases the mobility of expertise and
Accountants
resources across different jurisdictions.
Financial Accounting and
There is a major advantage in providing global education in accounting across EU
Reporting Special Interest
universities and also in facilitating training of professional accountants across the EU, all
Group (FARSIG
of which is consistent with the EU aims of mobility of labour.
100 Group of Finance
...the adoption of a single accounting language [i.e., IFRS] by listed companies has
Directors
improved the mobility of finance professionals across the EU.
International Swaps and
It has also significantly increased the transferability and career mobility of accountants
Derivatives Association Inc and other finance professionals across the EU and globally by providing them with a
(ISDA)
common language applicable for financial reporting of all EU companies.
ACCA

Table IA1 presents selected quotes from comment letters sent to the European Commission for its Consultation on the Impact of
IAS Regulation. The comment period began in August 2014 and ended in November 2014 (i.e., more than eight years after IFRS
became mandatory). All selected quotes are from qualitative responses to the open ended question no. 19: “Do you see other
benefits from applying IFRS as required under the IAS Regulation?”

58

Section IA2: Differences between National Audit Standards and ISA
In this section, we report descriptive evidence on country-level differences between national
auditing standards and International Standards on Auditing (ISA) prior to harmonization.
Column (1) in Table IA2 reports whether there was an English translation of national audit
standards in 2005. Among the 29 European countries covered by the LFS dataset, an English
translation was available in 12 countries. Yet, it is worth noting that the English translations in
these 12 countries were not always up to date and that national standards in local language
generally took precedence. Column (2) reports the number of additional reporting requirements
included in national auditing standards that were not part of ISA prior to harmonization. Among
the 29 countries, 7 countries had additional national reporting requirements. Column (3) reports
the number of additional procedural requirements included in national auditing standards that
were not part of ISA prior to harmonization. Among the 29 countries, 11 countries had additional
national procedural requirements.
Note that the evidence in Table IA2 understates actual differences for two reasons. First, the
table focuses on differences between auditing standards, yet audit requirements stem also from
laws or regulation that have been subject to EU harmonization efforts. For simplicity, we do not
tabulate differences that result from such laws or regulation. This table merely serves as evidence
that there were significant differences (and is not meant to be a comprehensive dataset of these
differences). Second, the source documents that we use to create Table IA2 were initially created
to inform policy makers about the decision to mandate ISA in the EU and as such they focus
only on significant differences. However, as we discuss in the main text of the study, formal (or
more minor) differences could matter and impose barriers to migration as well.

59

TABLE IA2
National auditing standards versus ISA

Country

English in 2005?
Yes=1

No.of Significant
No. of Significant
Additional National Additional National
Reporting in 2003 Procedures in 2003

(1)

(2)

(3)

Austria

0

0

0

Belgium

0

1

0

Bulgaria

1

0

0

Cyprus

1

0

0

Czech Republic

1

0

3

Denmark

0

0

7

Estonia

1

0

0

Finland

1

0

0

France

0

0

0

Germany

0

4

8

Greece

0

0

2

Hungary

0

0

0

Iceland

1

0

0

Ireland

1

2

10

Italy

0

0

6

Latvia

1

0

0

Lithuania

0

0

0

Luxembourg

0

0

0

Netherlands

0

1

12

Norway

0

0

0

Poland

0

1

5

Portugal

0

1

2

Romania

1

0

0

Slovakia

1

0

0

Slovenia

1

0

0

Spain

0

0

0

Sweden

0

0

0

Switzerland

0

0

1

United Kingdom

1

2

10

Table IA2 presents descriptive statistics at the country level on the differences between national auditing standards and ISA prior
to regulatory harmonization. Column (1) indicates countries with an English translation of national auditing standards in 2005.
We obtain data on the language of national audit standards from answers to IFAC’s Compliance Program Responses and Action
Plans (Section 9A). Column (2) [(3)] reports the number of significant reporting [procedural] requirements in national auditing
standards that do not exist in International Auditing Standards. We cannot publicly reveal the source of the data in Columns (2)
and (3) for contractual reasons but have identified the source to the Editor in compliance with JAR’s data policy.

60

Section IA3: Distribution of Key Characteristics for Treatment and Control Groups
In Table IA3, we provide descriptive statistics for key characteristics of the individuals in the
treatment group (accounting professionals) and the control groups (legal professionals, all
professionals and business people). The statistics are based on the raw number of survey
respondents in the LFS dataset who are between 20 and 59 years old over the sample period
(years 2002 to 2004 and 2008 to 2010, respectively). The LFS dataset provides information from
29 European countries. The final sample comprises a subset of 26 countries (see Table 1 for
further details).

TABLE IA3
Distribution of key demographic characteristics for treatment and control groups
Panel A: Gender
Gender

Accountants
Obs.

Legal pros

Share

Obs.

All pros

Share

Obs.

Biz people

Share

Obs.

Share

Male

53,314

50%

19,915

50%

261,759

44%

478,454

64%

Female

52,626

50%

19,565

50%

339,223

56%

269,859

36%

Total

105,940

100%

39,480

100%

600,982

100%

748,313

100%

The LFS dataset provides information on the gender of the survey respondents (item SEX).

Panel B: Age
Age

Accountants
Obs.

Legal pros

Share

Obs.

All pros

Share

Obs.

Biz people

Share

Obs.

Share

20-24

4,572

4%

788

2%

20,344

3%

27,608

4%

25-29

13,762

13%

4,894

12%

69,734

12%

64,112

9%

30-34

17,049

16%

7,255

18%

86,222

14%

93,097

12%

35-39

17,816

17%

7,319

19%

91,212

15%

118,186

16%

40-44

16,469

16%

6,358

16%

91,532

15%

127,704

17%

45-49

14,196

13%

5,243

13%

89,746

15%

123,035

16%

50-54

12,026

11%

4,361

11%

85,253

14%

109,032

15%

55-59

10,050

9%

3,262

8%

66,939

11%

85,539

11%

Total

105,940

100%

39,480

100%

600,982

100%

748,313

100%

The LFS dataset provides information on the age (measured in bins of 5 years) of the survey respondents (item AGE).

61

TABLE IA3 (continued)
Panel C: Marital status
Marital
status

Accountants
Obs.

Legal pros

Share

Obs.

All pros

Share

Obs.

Biz people

Share

Obs.

Share

Divorced

8,312

8%

2,480

6%

47,773

8%

63,647

9%

Single

36,060

34%

14,043

36%

199,718

33%

193,849

26%

Married

61,526

58%

22,941

58%

353,100

59%

490,579

66%

Missing

42

0%

16

0%

391

0%

238

0%

105,940

100%

39,480

100%

600,982

100%

748,313

100%

Total

The LFS dataset provides information on the marital status of the survey respondents (item MARSTAT).

Panel D: Number of children
Number
of children

Accountants
Obs.

Legal pros

Share

Obs.

All pros

Share

Obs.

Biz people

Share

Obs.

Share

0

43,827

41%

20,589

52%

289,753

48%

364,656

49%

1

12,094

11%

5,926

15%

80,311

13%

115,246

15%

2

9,695

9%

5,106

13%

62,679

10%

88,314

12%

3

1,850

2%

1,041

3%

13,235

2%

17,699

2%

4

230

0%

138

0%

1,976

0%

2,468

0%

5 or more

40

0%

25

0%

383

0%

456

0%

Missing

38,204

36%

6,655

17%

152,645

25%

159,474

21%

Total

105,940

100%

39,480

100%

600,982

100%

748,313

100%

The LFS dataset provides information on the number of children (aged less than 15 years) in the household of the survey
respondents based on the items QHHNUM (serial number of household), HHLINK (relationship to reference person in
household), and AGE.

Panel E: Level of education
Level of
education

Accountants
Obs.

Legal pros

Share

Obs.

All pros

Share

Obs.

Biz people

Share

Obs.

Share

Pre-primary

10

0%

10

0%

140

0%

898

0%

Primary

171

0%

15

0%

879

0%

30,123

4%

Lower secondary

2,418

2%

125

0%

8,051

1%

89,679

12%

Upper secondary

23,324

22%

978

2%

70,621

12%

325,422

43%

Post secondary

4,548

4%

228

1%

16,498

3%

35,836

5%

Tertiary

72,818

69%

35,658

90%

473,722

79%

255,928

34%

Doctoral

1,910

2%

2,296

6%

28,325

5%

5,629

1%

Missing

741

1%

170

0%

2,746

0%

4,798

1%

105,940

100%

39,480

100%

600,982

100%

748,313

100%

Total

The LFS dataset provides information on the highest level of education that the survey respondent obtained (item
HATLEVEL). This item is based on the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) from 1997.

62

Section IA4: Descriptive Migration Statistics by Country
This section provides country-specific migration statistics for accountants as well as changes in
these rates over time. The statistics are based on the double-matched sample from Table 3, Panel
C (see manuscript) with LFS weights. Table IA4 reports descriptive statistics for the pretreatment period (2002-2004), the post-treatment period (2008-2010), changes from the pre- to
the post-period, and changes from the pre- to the post-period of accountants relative to all
professionals. We report these statistics for our migration metrics NATBIRTH and
NATBIRTH_CHG. The descriptive statistics show that there is considerable cross-sectional
variation in the fraction of migrants across host countries. Small host countries such as
Luxembourg and Switzerland exhibit the highest migration base rates. The rates are the lowest in
Eastern European countries such as Latvia, Lithuania, and Slovakia. This cross-country variation
in mobility is largely in line with the statistics presented in Münz (2007). As one would expect,
the fraction of migrants is not always higher in the post-treatment period for all countries. The
average change from the pre- to the post-period across countries is 1.60 (1.28) percentage points
for NATBIRTH (NATBIRTH_CHG). When we compare these changes for accountants relative to
all professionals, the change in the country-level average drops to 0.78 (0.79) percentage points
for NATBIRTH (NATBIRTH_CHG), which is (only a descriptive statistic but) close to the
changes documented in Table 3, Panel C in the manuscript when using the double-matched
approach. We further use a t-test to assess the statistical significance of these results and find that
the average changes are positive and significant, at the 5%-level, for both NATBIRTH and
NATBIRTH_CHG.
Table IA4 shows that certain, in particular smaller, countries exhibit strong increases in migrants
(e.g., Austria, Cyprus, Luxembourg, and Switzerland), which seems plausible. These countries
have a high fraction of firms that operate internationally and therefore are able to exploit
regulatory harmonization. For instance, Nestle S.A., headquartered in Switzerland, argue in a
comment letter to the European Commission from March 2014 that IFRS adoption has
“enhanced internal mobility” of their workforce (see Table IA1). Iceland is the only country that
exhibits a larger and consistently negative change, which likely reflects the fact that its financial
sector was hit particularly hard by the financial crisis during the post-treatment period.
As reported in Footnotes 17 and 34, we also estimate treatment effects within six regions, for the
primary purpose of gauging the robustness of our inferences for cross-sectional dependencies.
However, this analysis also provides insights into regional heterogeneity in the treatment effects.
Unlike the descriptive statistics in Table IA4, these regional analyses use the same difference-indifferences design as the regressions reported in Table 3, Panels A and B. We divide the EU
countries into six groups based on geography and language: West (BE, FR, LU and NL), Middle
(AT, CH and DE), East (CZ, EE, HU, LT, LV, RO and SK), South (CY, ES, GR, IT and PT),
Scandinavia (DK, FI, IS, NO and SE), and English (UK, IE). Among these regions, we find the
strongest treatment effects for the English-speaking region (UK, IE), consistent with the
expectation that for these countries language poses a lower barrier to migration. However,
63

controlling for demand effects, there are also strong treatment effects in the West, the South and,
in unweighted regressions, for the Middle. The latter illustrates that one has to exercise caution
when interpreting Table IA4 because some countries that exhibit larger pre-post differences
below, such as Austria and Switzerland, receive relatively small weights in the LFS-weighted
regressions presented in Table 3 (Panels A and B). The East is the only region for which we do
not find significantly positive treatment effects in any of the specifications. This finding
comports with the fact that we essentially measure migration into a country as well as the
broader migration pattern from Eastern countries to the rest of the EU shown in prior work,
which likely reflects the economic situation in Eastern countries coupled with EU enlargement.

64

TABLE IA4
Country-specific mobility statistics
NATBIRTH
Host country

NATBIRTH_CHG

2002-2004
(Pre)

2008-2010
(Post)

Diff
(Post-Pre)

Austria

6.69%

13.80%

7.12%

Belgium

6.55%

6.21%

-0.33%

Cyprus

5.73%

9.83%

4.10%

Czech Republic

1.11%

0.78%

-0.33%

Denmark

1.76%

2.28%

0.52%

Estonia

4.29%

1.22%

-3.07%

Finland

0.28%

0.21%

-0.06%

France

3.29%

3.99%

Germany

3.31%

4.45%

Greece

1.70%

1.66%

Hungary

0.46%

0.22%

Iceland

2.76%

Ireland

Diff relative
all pros

2002-2004
(Pre)

2008-2010
(Post)

Diff
(Post-Pre)

Diff relative
all pros

3.71%

1.76%

7.62%

5.86%

3.27%

-1.05%

3.51%

3.15%

-0.36%

-0.31%

4.75%

3.36%

5.92%

2.56%

3.07%

-0.48%

0.58%

0.39%

-0.19%

-0.33%

0.70%

1.25%

1.38%

0.13%

0.28%

-1.48%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.51%

-0.42%

0.09%

0.00%

-0.09%

-0.20%

0.70%

0.63%

1.14%

3.06%

1.92%

1.73%

1.14%

-0.28%

1.78%

1.92%

0.14%

-0.30%

-0.05%

0.02%

1.09%

0.24%

-0.85%

-0.97%

-0.25%

-0.48%

0.26%

0.22%

-0.04%

-0.14%

0.96%

-1.81%

-1.41%

2.76%

0.27%

-2.49%

-2.06%

5.35%

9.27%

4.40%

1.61%

4.09%

5.81%

1.71%

1.03%

Latvia

0.00%

2.63%

2.63%

-0.60%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

-1.81%

Lithuania

0.18%

0.56%

0.38%

1.48%

0.00%

0.56%

0.56%

0.97%

Luxembourg

64.76%

75.26%

10.50%

4.63%

27.64%

38.30%

10.66%

7.12%

Netherlands

1.94%

2.60%

0.65%

0.70%

0.51%

1.38%

0.87%

0.92%

Norway

1.27%

4.18%

2.91%

2.37%

0.67%

2.54%

1.87%

0.45%

1.17%

1.68%

0.51%

0.95%

1.17%

1.59%

0.42%

0.73%

0.00%

0.26%

0.26%

-0.04%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

-0.15%

Spain

3.89%

5.53%

1.64%

0.61%

1.96%

4.51%

2.55%

1.94%

Sweden

3.00%

3.32%

0.32%

-0.24%

1.65%

1.67%

0.02%

-0.45%

17.34%

18.45%

1.11%

1.11%

9.22%

11.23%

2.01%

2.34%

United Kingdom

4.71%

10.02%

5.31%

1.84%

3.21%

6.67%

3.46%

1.31%

Total

5.90%

7.47%

1.60%

0.78%**

2.82%

4.10%

1.28%

0.79%**

Bulgaria

Italy

Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia

Switzerland

(2.22)

(2.04)

Table IA4 reports country-level statistics on mobility in the pre-treatment period (2002 to 2004), post-treatment period (2008 to
2010), the change in mobility from the pre- to the post-period, and the change in mobility from the pre- to the post-period for
accountants relative to all professionals. All statistics are calculated based on the double-matched sample used in Table 3, Panel
C of the manuscript. These statistics cannot be calculated for some countries because job codes are not available at the three digit
level (Bulgaria, Poland and Slovenia) or because of missing data in the pre-treatment period (Italy and Romania). The t-statistics
at the bottom of the table (in parentheses) are based on robust standard errors with one-way clustering by country-job group. ***,
**, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels (two-sided), respectively.

65

Section IA5: Mobility Trends for Extended Period from 2002 to 2013
In our analyses in the manuscript, the sample period ends in 2010 because job codes change in
2011. As it is important to show that the documented cross-border mobility effects are persistent,
we use data from the latest LFS release to extend the time series in Figure 1 until 2013. To adjust
for changing job codes in 2011, we subtract the mobility change from 2010 to 2011 for
accounting professionals and each of the control groups from the migration numbers of 2012 and
2013. We report graphs using the extended time-series in Figure IA5. The figure shows that the
effect persists beyond 2010. However, given that the adjustment for the change in job codes is
not perfect, we do not think that it is appropriate to extend the sample beyond 2010 in our
primary analyses.

FIGURE IA5
Mobility trends at aggregate level from 2002 to 2013
Mobility rate (NATBIRTH))

Adjusted for
changes in job
codes in 2011

7.00%

6.00%

5.00%

4.00%

3.00%

2.00%

1.00%
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Accountants

2007
Legal pros

2008
All pros

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Biz people

Figure IA5 compares mobility rates between the treatment group (accountants) and the control groups (legal professionals, all
professionals, and business people) over time. To adjust for changing job codes in 2011, we subtract the mobility change from
2010 to 2011 for accounting professionals and each of the control groups from the migration numbers of 2012 and 2013. The
analysis is based on the mobility metric NATBIRTH. This metric defines individuals as migrants (or mobile) if they were born
outside the host country and have a foreign nationality. To make mobility rates representative of the population, the aggregate
mobility rates in this graph are weighted averages using the statistical weight the LFS dataset provides for each individual.

66

Section IA6: Assessing Alternative Explanations
Our difference-in-differences estimation combined with matching of individuals of various
professions by country (and year) implies a within-bin and within-country comparison across
professions. This approach alleviates many concerns about concurrent events that are unrelated
to accounting harmonization, provided these events apply to all professionals in a given country
(and year). However, events and/or institutional changes that differentially affect the mobility
rates of accounting professionals and of the control groups over time could affect our analysis.
Such events or institutional changes essentially violate the parallel-trends assumption. In this
section, we explore two potential violations and alternative explanations: (i) differential changes
in cross-border student mobility and (ii) differential responses to changes in the recognition of
professional qualifications.
Cross-Border Student Mobility
One concern arises from potentially differential trends in student mobility. Prior literature shows
that studying abroad increases the likelihood that an individual works abroad later in life (e.g.,
Parey and Waldinger, 2011). Moreover, it is possible that cross-border student mobility differs
across study subjects. For instance, if the fraction of business students that study abroad
increases earlier than the fraction of law students, then such differential trends could be an
alternative explanation for our findings. The launch of the Bologna Process in 1999 adds to this
concern. The Bologna Process aims to facilitate mutual recognition of degrees and student
mobility through exchange programs. If business schools, which educate the majority of
accounting professionals, were more responsive to the Bologna Process than law schools, then
the parallel-trends assumption would be invalid.
The concern about differential student mobility trends seems particularly pertinent for the control
group consisting of legal professionals. Individuals in the business people control group and the
accounting professionals likely have similar educational backgrounds. In fact, the use of business
people as a control group could be seen as another way to mitigate the concern. As the control
group consisting of all professionals spans a large set of educational backgrounds, it is unlikely
that differential student mobility trends across treatment and control groups line up such that they
induce our results. Thus, the first sensitivity test focuses on accounting and legal professionals.
The second sensitivity test explores this alternative explanation for all three control groups.
First, we obtain data on the number of students participating in the European Community Action
Scheme for the Mobility of University Students (ERASMUS) and hence visiting another
European country during their studies. 35 The total number of participating students increases
over time, as expected. To assess the relative trends, we compute the proportion of business and
law students relative to the total number of ERASMUS students and inspect the trends over time.
35

ERASMUS was created in 1987. It is the largest student exchange program in Europe. By 2013, over 3 million
students have participated in the program.

67

Figure IA6 shows that between 2000 and 2010 the relative proportions of business and law
students that participate in the ERASMUS program remain fairly constant over time. 36
Second, in first three columns of Table IA6, we include the number of years since graduation
(i.e., the difference between the sample year and the graduation year of the individual) as an
additional control variable. Together with the country-year fixed effects, this variable controls
for differences in mobility that are explained by differences in the year of graduation across
treatment and control groups (which in turn could be related to differential student mobility). The
estimated treatment effects after including this control variable are very similar to those reported
in the main analyses in Table 3 of the manuscript.
Finally, in the last column of Table IA6, we include the share of business and law students
among all ERASMUS students at host country-year level for accountants and legal professionals,
respectively, as an additional control variable (with a two year lag to account for the likely time
lag between studying abroad and seeking employment). Again, the estimated treatment effect
after including this control variable is very similar to the treatment effect we report in Table 3 of
the manuscript.
In sum, there is little evidence that differential trends in student mobility over time explain our
results.
Recognition of Professional Qualifications
Another concern arises from differential trends in the recognition of professional qualifications
obtained in other EU member states. The EU has taken several regulatory initiatives aimed at
promoting the free movement of professionals, including those in the accounting profession,
since 1988 (Directive 89/48). During our sample period, the EU enacted Directive 2005/36,
which confers individuals that obtained their professional qualifications in one EU member state
access to the same profession in another member state. This directive came into force in 2007,
although individual member states implemented some of the provisions after this date. Thus,
Directive 2005/36 and related prior EU directives offer a path to temporary or permanent
recognition of a professional qualification from another EU member state.
To the extent that the accounting profession is more responsive to such regulatory changes than
our control professions, the parallel-trends assumption could be violated. That is, the increased
mobility of accounting professionals relative to other professions could be due to changes in the
explicit recognition of foreign professional qualifications rather than the harmonization of
accounting and auditing standards. To address this concern, we obtain data on the number of
individuals applying for the recognition of a professional qualification. We compare the number
36

The ERASMUS program data have two drawbacks. They cover only a specific exchange program (albeit the
largest) and they do not allow us to scale the number of participating students with the total number of (foreign and
domestic) students in an area. Therefore, Figure IA6 also presents data on the proportion of all foreign students at
German universities scaled by the total number of students in the respective field of study, i.e., business, law and
economics over the period from 1990 to 2013. While these proportions change substantially over time, the trends are
again similar across fields of study. The drawback of this dataset is that it covers only one country.

68

of these applications from accounting professionals (in this dataset narrowly defined as
accountants and auditors) and other professionals.
Each year an average of 94 accounting professionals across the EU applied for the recognition of
a professional qualification from another EU member state over our sample period (only 6%
percent of these received a negative answer). This number is relatively small and much too small
to influence our estimated treatment effects (which are at least two orders of magnitude larger). 37
Moreover, the number of applications by accounting professionals is much smaller than the
number of applications by legal professionals (also narrowly defined as lawyers, barristers and
solicitors). Importantly, we do not see a change in the frequency of applications for recognition
in our sample countries around years 2005 to 2007. Thus, although there were changes in the
regulation of professional qualifications around the time of IFRS and ISAs adoption, these
changes cannot explain the results in our main analyses.

37

On top of that, two-thirds of the 94 applications are submitted in Cyprus and Romania for qualifications obtained
in the UK. In Cyprus, the accounting qualification is identical to the UK ACCA qualification. Romania also
automatically accepts the UK qualification in place of its national qualification. Hence, the likely explanation for the
high number of applications for the recognition of UK qualifications in Cyprus and Romania is that their citizens
take the exam in the UK and then apply for recognition in their home country. Cyprus and Romania do not enter our
main analyses (due to lack of LFS data) and hence these applications are not relevant for our analysis.

69

FIGURE IA6
Mobility trends for business and law students
Percentage of all Erasmus students
30.0%

25.0%

20.0%

15.0%

10.0%

5.0%

0.0%
2000-01

2001-02

2002-03

2003-04

2004-05

Business students

2005-06

2006-07

2007-08

2008-09

Law students

Proportion of foreign students at German universities
16%

14%

12%

10%

8%

6%

4%

2%

0%
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Business Administration

Law

Economics

Figure IA6 presents statistics on student mobility over time. The upper graph shows the proportion of business and law students
in the group of students who went abroad with the ERASMUS program (i.e., European Community Action Scheme for the
Mobility of University Students) during academic years 2000-01 to 2008-09. This dataset was provided by the German Academic
Exchange Service (DAAD). The lower graph shows the proportion of all foreign students at German universities relative to
number of total students (foreign and domestic) in the respective fields: business administration, law and economics over the
period 1990 to 2013. These data were obtained from the website of the Federal Statistical Office of Germany (www.destatis.de).

70

TABLE IA6
Controlling for years since graduation
Independent variables

Dependent variable: Mobility yes/no (NATBIRTH_CHG)

Accountant * Post

1.113*

0.827***

0.805**

1.038*

(1.89)

(2.70)

(2.29)

(1.97)

-0.087*

-0.091***

-0.075***

(-1.84)

(-2.78)

(-4.14)

Years since graduation
Student mobility

-0.043
(-1.00)

Domestic job mobility
Control group

0.033

0.031

0.103***

0.029

(0.98)

(0.88)

(3.16)

(0.85)

Legal pros

All pros

Biz people

Legal pros

Bin
Fixed effects

Country * Accountant
Country * Year

Observations
R-squared

123,780

579,102

601,207

127,639

0.07

0.04

0.03

0.06

Table IA6 presents results from sensitivity analyses related to differential student mobility trends. The sample comprises
individuals from 26 countries for the years 2002 to 2004 and 2008 to 2010, respectively. The research design is the same as in the
regression analysis presented in Panel B of Table 3 (NATBIRTH_CHG). Results are reported using LFS-weighted regressions
and controlling for domestic job mobility as well as two additional control variables: Years since graduation is defined as the
difference between the sample year and the graduation year of the respondent. Student mobility is the share of students in the
respective field among all ERASMUS students at host country-year level. In constructing this variable, we use business students
for accountants and law students for legal professionals.

71

Section IA7: Correlation in Country-level Migration In- and Outflows
Our analysis deliberately scales by the number of professionals in the country and year. Such
scaling captures some demand effects. For instance, if a (non-harmonizing) regulatory shock
increases the demand for accountants and does so symmetrically for domestic and foreign
accountants, then the demand effect is already controlled for in the construction of the mobility
measure. However, a regulatory change could also lead to asymmetric demand shocks across the
EU countries. For instance, it is conceivable that IFRS adoption leads to more demand in some
countries than others irrespective of harmonization. In this scenario, countries with relatively
small demand shocks should act as “sources,” having increases in outflows and declines in
inflows, while countries with relatively large demand shocks act as “sinks,” having increases in
inflows and declines in outflows. Thus, under the asymmetric demand story, changes in inflow
and outflow rates for accountants relative to control groups will be negatively correlated because
sources (sinks) will have decreased (increased) inflows and increased (decreased) outflows. In
contrast, under the harmonization story, relative changes in inflow and outflow rates will be
positively correlated because harmonization allows mobility in both directions.
Testing this hypothesis is difficult with LFS data as it requires inflow and outflow data by
country. As explained in Section 3, the LFS dataset comes with a host country perspective,
surveying people that are located in a given country. It does not allow tracking of individuals,
and origin information for migrants is limited to the LFS variable COUNTR1Y (country of
residence last year). Despite the limitations of COUNTR1Y (see Sections 3.3 and 5.2), we can
construct the following flow measures: INFLOW is the proportion of people living in country X
who did not live in country X in the prior year (but lived elsewhere in the EU); and OUTFLOW
is the proportion of people not living in country X (but elsewhere in the EU) who lived in
country X in the prior year. Since the COUNTR1Y variable is sparsely populated, we can
construct the measures for only 18 countries.
We use a difference-in-differences design by benchmarking pre- versus post-treatment changes
(2002 to 2004 versus 2008 to 2010) in accountants’ inflow and outflow rates against changes in
the inflow and outflow rates of all professionals, both at the country-level. Table IA7a reports
results from rank regressions. We find that relative changes in accountants’ inflows are
positively correlated with relative changes in accountants’ outflows. This result is consistent with
the harmonization explanation. In Table IA7b, we cross-tabulate all 18 countries based on the
sign of their relative inflow and outflow changes. We find that 15 out of 18 countries have either
both positive inflow and outflow changes or both negative inflow and outflow changes relative to
all professionals, both with LFS weights (Panel A) and without LFS weights (Panel B).
Taken together, the results in Tables IA7a and IA7b do not support the asymmetric demand
shock explanation.

72

TABLE IA7a
Correlation in country-level migration in- and outflows of accounting professionals
relative to all professionals

Independent variables

Outflow Diff-in-Diff Rank
Constant
Observations
R-squared

Dependent variable:
Inflow Diff-in-Diff Rank
LFS weighted
(yes)

LFS weighted
(no)

0.822***

0.575**

(5.78)

(2.81)

1.686

4.039*

(1.10)

(1.82)

18

18

0.66

0.33

Table IA7a presents the association between country-level changes in accountants’ inflow rates and changes in accountants’
outflow rates. Using a difference-in-differences design, we benchmark pre- versus post-treatment changes (2002 to 2004 versus
2008 to 2010) in accountants’ inflow and outflow rates against changes in the inflow and outflow rates of all professionals. The
unit of observation is the host country. Due to the kurtosis of the difference-in-difference estimates, we perform a ranked
regression instead of OLS. We present results both with and without LFS weights. Inflow and outflow rates are estimated using
the COUNTR1Y variable.

73

TABLE IA7b
Cross-tabulation of countries with positive and negative in- and outflows of accounting
professionals relative to all professionals
Panel A: LFS weighted (yes)
Positive
Negative
Outflow Dif-in- Outflow Dif-indif
dif

Total

Positive Inflow Dif-in-dif

8

1

9

Negative Inflow Dif-in-dif

2

7

9

Total

10

8

18

Panel B: LFS weighted (no)
Negative
Positive
Outflow Dif-in- Outflow Dif-indif
dif

Total

Positive Inflow Dif-in-dif

7

1

8

Negative Inflow Dif-in-dif

2

8

10

Total

9

9

18

Table IA7b presents cross-tabulations comparing the sign of changes in accountants’ inflow rates and with the sign of changes in
accountants’ outflow rates. Using a difference-in-differences design, we benchmark post-treatment changes (2002 to 2004 versus
2008 to 2010) in accountants’ inflow and outflow rates against changes in the inflow and outflow rates of all professionals. The
unit of observation is the host country. We present results both with (Panel A) and without LFS weights (Panel B). Inflow and
outflow rates are estimated using the COUNTR1Y variable.

74

Section IA8: Double-Matched Analysis using Legal Professionals and Business People
In Table IA8, we report the double-matched difference-in-difference analyses for accountants
against two alternative control groups: legal professionals and business people. The sample
selection criteria, double-matching procedure and the specifications shown are identical to those
reported in Table 3C of the manuscript.
Panel A presents the results relative to legal professionals, while Panel B presents results relative
to business people. Results relative to business people are weaker than those relative to all pros
(see Table 3, Panel C) or legal pros, especially for the analyses that do not use the LFS weights.
The reason for this finding is the inclusion of Ireland, which comprises roughly 8% of the sample
of business people, but only represents approximately 1.5% of the population. Compounding this
issue is the fact that the distribution of job codes within business people (in particular, their job
levels) differs substantially for Ireland relative to the distribution of job codes within business
people for the EU as a whole. In untabulated analyses, we drop Ireland and find that our
difference-in-differences results using business people as a control group become substantially
stronger (and more in line with those reported for the other two control groups), both in terms of
magnitude and statistical significance.

TABLE IA8
Double matched difference-in-differences analysis of cross-border mobility effects from
regulatory harmonization using legal and business professionals as control groups
Panel A: Legal pros as control group
Full sample
Double matched
diff-in-diff analysis

Mobility rate: NATBIRTH

Only recent job changers
Mobility rate: NATBIRTH_CHG

Mobility rate: NATBIRTH

Pre-period
(1)

Post-period
(2)

Difference
(2) - (1)

Pre-period
(1)

Post-period
(2)

Difference
(2) - (1)

Pre-period
(1)

Post-period
(2)

Difference
(2) - (1)

(a) Treatment (Accountants)

3.216

4.969

1.753

1.773

2.834

1.061

3.922

7.231

3.309

(b) Control (Legal pros)

1.882

2.551

0.669

0.898

1.425

0.528

1.959

3.170

1.211

2.418

1.084***
(3.29)

1.409

0.533*
(1.80 )

4.061

2.098***
(4.17)

LFS weighted (yes)

Difference (a) - (b)

1.333

Observations

0.876

78,624

1.963

78,624

23,449

LFS weighted (no)
(a) Treatment (Accountants)

5.318

7.293

1.975

2.769

3.968

1.199

6.833

10.531

(b) Control (Legal pros)

3.332

4.295

0.963

1.798

2.422

0.624

5.051

5.900

0.849

2.998

1.014**
(2.37)

1.546

0.575**
(2.01)

4.631

2.849***
(2.70 )

Difference (a) - (b)
Observations

1.986

80,432

0.971

80,432

1.782

3.698

23,794

75

TABLE IA8 (continued)
Panel B: Biz people as control group
Full sample
Double matched
diff-in-diff analysis

Mobility rate: NATBIRTH

Only recent job changers
Mobility rate: NATBIRTH_CHG

Mobility rate: NATBIRTH

Pre-period
(1)

Post-period
(2)

Difference
(2) - (1)

Pre-period
(1)

Post-period
(2)

Difference
(2) - (1)

Pre-period
(1)

Post-period
(2)

Difference
(2) - (1)

(a) Treatment (Accountants)

2.923

4.833

1.910

1.594

2.774

1.181

4.386

7.439

3.053

(b) Control (Biz people)

3.431

4.784

1.352

1.658

2.496

0.838

5.096

7.561

2.465

0.049

0.557**
(1.72)

0.278

0.342
(1.27)

-0.122

0.589**
(2.62)

LFS weighted (yes)

Difference (a) - (b)

-0.508

Observations

-0.064

453,481

-0.711

453,481

118,548

LFS weighted (no)
(a) Treatment (Accountants)

5.264

6.799

1.535

2.743

3.765

1.022

6.754

9.183

(b) Control (Biz people)

5.655

6.946

1.291

2.705

3.639

0.934

7.745

9.609

1.864

-0.147

0.244
(0.84)

0.126

0.089
(0.47)

-0.426

0.566
(1.18)

Difference (a) - (b)
Observations

-0.391

470,994

0.038

470,994

-0.991

2.429

121,466

Table IA8 presents results from a double matched difference-in-differences analysis that tests for differences in mobility trends
between the treatment group (accountants) and the control groups of legal professionals (Panel A) and business people (Panel B).
The research design is the same as in Table 3, Panel C of the manuscript.

76

Section IA9: Cross-Sectional Variation in the Treatment Effect
In this section, we report the results of a descriptive analysis of the cross-sectional variation in
the treatment effects with respect to certain country characteristics. We describe but do not
tabulate the analysis in Section 5.2.2 of the manuscript. There are two important caveats to this
analysis.
First, it is difficult to make signed predictions for the cross-sectional effects. The reason is that
cross-country variation also affects the size of the profession in the first place. In addition,
migration is not the only margin along which the system can adjust after the regulatory change.
Take the prediction that countries with a larger fraction of publicly-listed firms that need to
report under IFRS should see a larger inflow of migrants. While sensible, it is also conceivable
that these countries already had a much larger audit profession to begin with and hence even if
they receive a larger number of migrants, the relative effect of migration could be larger in
countries with fewer publicly-traded firms reporting under IFRS (and a smaller audit profession).
Furthermore, in countries with a larger fraction of publicly-traded firms, IFRS adoption could
also lead to a larger inflow of domestic people into the accounting and auditing profession. As a
result, it is not clear that the effect (as measured by us) is necessarily larger in these countries.
Second, identification in these tests is based on cross-sectional variation in country
characteristics. However, at the country level, many variables are highly correlated (for
endogenous reasons) and hence it is difficult to isolate the effect of any particular factor.
For these two reasons, we view the tests below as primarily descriptive in nature. We have
identified and collected data for several constructs for which we can make reasonable predictions
(still acknowledging the concern discussed above). Our split variables capture (i) the extent to
which standards are harmonized and (ii) to which regulatory harmonization is likely to affect
migration. We proxy for the extent of harmonization with the degree of harmonization of audit
standards and the share of the economy that is subject to mandatory IFRS (two first proxies
discussed below). We proxy for the extent to which regulatory harmonization is likely to affect
migration with the strength of licensing rules and the market share of Big-4 auditors (two last
proxies discussed below).
Degree of Regulatory Harmonization of Auditing Standards
To capture the harmonization of auditing standards, we focus on changes in standards that have
occurred over the sample period. Specifically, we classify countries as “high harmonization”
countries if they are full ISA adopters by 2012. We expect migration inflows to be greater in
countries with high harmonization.
Share of Market Subject to Mandatory IFRS
Unlike auditing standards that apply to all firms, IFRS adoption affected primarily publicly listed
firms in most countries. Thus, we can use the market capitalization of listed firms to GDP as a
77

size-weighted measure for the degree to which the accounting standard harmonization affected a
country. We classify those countries with an above median market capitalization of listed firms
to GDP as “high harmonization” countries. We expect migration inflows to be greater in
countries with high harmonization.
Licensing Rules
Licensing rules constitute a barrier to migration that still exists after IFRS and ISA adoption. We
measure the extent of this barrier by coding variation in three national licensing-requirements: 1)
whether a candidate needs at least three years of practical experience, 2) whether there is a final
qualifying exam, and 3) whether the practical experience must be completed before the final
qualifying exam. If the answer is yes to at least two of these three questions, we classify the
country as a “high licensing requirements” country. We expect migration inflows to be lower in
countries with high licensing requirements.
Market Share of Big-4 Auditors
The audit market is characterized by a few large firms. For these Big-4 auditors, IFRS and ISA
are likely to be much more important because they are set up as international networks, which
can facilitate cross-border labor migration (see discussion in Section 2 of the manuscript). Put
differently, regulatory harmonization is likely more important to the Big-4 and their networks are
likely better able to take advantage of regulatory harmonization. 38 Based on this logic, we split
countries by the median market share of Big-4 auditors and classify those above the median as
high Big-4 market share countries. We expect migration inflows to be greater in countries with a
high Big-4 market share.
Table IA9a reports descriptive statistics on the institutional variables. In Table IA9b, we report
results for regressions in which we include the interaction between the coefficient of interest
(Accountant*Post) and the above institutional variables to test for heterogeneity in the treatment
effects. For these tests, we focus on the weighted regressions because the weights assure
comparability across countries and across time, which is important when examining countrylevel variation in the treatment effect. We find that the interaction of interest is positive in all
cases and often quite large in magnitude. However, the interaction term is often not statistically
significant. Nevertheless, the results indicate directionally that the treatment effects tend to be
larger when the harmonization of standards is greater (Table IA9b, Panels A and B) and when
regulatory harmonization is expected to affect migration the most (Table IA9b, Panels C and D).
However, considering the lack of statistical significance and the conceptual concerns about the
cross-sectional tests using country-level variables, we caution the reader to interpret the results
carefully. The evidence is nevertheless suggestive and descriptively useful.

38

As an illustration of our point that cross-sectional predictions are tricky, we note that one could also argue that
Big-4 networks provided ways to overcome the barrier that different standards created prior to regulatory
harmonization.

78

TABLE IA9a
Institutional variables used to examine cross-sectional variation in treatment effects
Country

Audit
Standards =
ISA in 2012

MCAP/GDP
Ratio

Licensing requirements

Big4 market share

High

Experience
> 3 yrs.

Final
Qualifying

Experience
before exam

Aggregate

Percent

High

Austria

No

39.53

0

0

1

1

2

14%

0

Belgium

Yes

74.56

1

0

1

0

1

22%

1

Bulgaria

Yes

17.36

0

0

1

0

1

14%

0

Cyprus

Yes

36.03

0

0

1

0

1

20%

1

Czech Republic

Yes

28.20

0

0

0

0

0

5%

0

Denmark

Yes

67.30

1

0

1

0

1

40%

1

Estonia

Yes

24.96

0

0

1

0

1

6%

0

Finland

Yes

102.48

1

0

1

0

1

26%

1

France

No

79.81

1

0

1

0

1

21%

1

Germany

No

42.74

0

1

1

1

3

19%

0

Greece

Yes

58.55

1

1

1

1

3

na

na

Hungary

Yes

29.11

0

0

0

0

0

9%

0

Iceland

Yes

165.48

1

0

1

1

2

na

na

Ireland

Yes

54.26

1

0

0

0

0

25%

1

Italy

No

43.06

0

0

1

0

1

12%

0

Latvia

Yes

14.79

0

0

1

0

1

15%

0

Lithuania

Yes

31.32

0

0

1

1

2

25%

1

Luxembourg

Yes

138.43

1

0

1

0

1

44%

1

Netherlands

Yes

88.18

1

0

1

1

2

29%

1

Norway

Yes

61.85

1

0

1

0

1

na

na

Poland

No

30.84

0

0

1

0

1

7%

0

Portugal

No

33.95

0

0

1

0

1

11%

0

Romania

Yes

20.76

0

0

1

0

1

14%

0

Slovakia

Yes

7.01

0

1

1

0

2

24%

1

Slovenia

Yes

21.73

0

1

1

1

3

2%

0

Spain

No

82.96

1

0

0

0

0

13%

0

Sweden

Yes

103.83

1

0

1

0

1

35%

1

Switzerland

Yes

230.32

1

0

1

1

2

na

na

United Kingdom

Yes

126.78

1

0

1

0

1

40%

1

Table IA9a presents country-level proxies for 1) the extent of ISA adoption; 2) the size of public equity markets; 3) strength of
licensing requirements; and the market share of Big4 auditors. ISA Adoption is assumed to be harmonized more if national
standards were fully harmonized with ISA in 2012 (We cannot publicly reveal the source of the data for contractual reasons but
we have identified the source to the Editor in compliance with JAR’s data policy). Size of public equity market is defined to be
high if the market capitalization of listed companies (which are generally subject to mandatory IFRS) as a percent of GDP
(MCAP/GDP) exceeds the median of all EU countries in 2005 (data obtained from the Worldbank). Licensing requirements are
defined as high if certified auditors must meet at least two of the following three requirements: i) have at least three years of
practical experience; ii) pass a qualifying exam, iii) have practical experience before taking the qualifying exam (data obtained
from the FEE website). Big4 market share is defined as high if the market share of Big-4 audit firms in a country exceeds the
median of all countries in 2009 (data obtained from Le Vourc’h and Morand, P., 2011).

79

TABLE IA9b
Cross-sectional variation in treatment effects
Panel A: ISA adoption
Treatment effect by
control group
Legal pros
All pros
Biz people

Panel B: Size of public equity market
Audit standards = ISA in 2012
Yes

No

Diff.

Treatment effect by
control group
Legal pros

1.646**

0.345

1.301

(2.43)

(0.73)

(1.54)

0.829***

0.606

0.223

(2.92)

(1.05)

(0.35)

0.845**

0.557

0.288

(2.15)

(1.35)

(0.51)

Panel C: Licensing requirements
Treatment effect by
control group
Legal pros
All pros
Biz people

All pros
Biz people

MCAP/GDP
High

Low

Diff.

1.903***

-0.286

2.189***

(3.57)

(-1.08)

(3.78)

1.156***

0.090

1.066***

(4.44)

(0.40)

(3.19)

1.083***

0.164

0.919**

(3.20)

(0.81)

(2.39)

Panel D: Big 4 market share

Licensing requirements

Diff.

Low

High

1.938***

-0.030

1.968***

(3.47)

(-0.09)

(3.09)

0.916***

0.549

0.367

(2.80)

(1.37)

(0.72)

0.938**

0.476*

0.462

(2.24)

(1.74)

(0.95)

Treatment effect by
control group
Legal pros
All pros
Biz people

Big 4 market share

Diff.

High

Low

2.015***

0.201

1.814**

(2.80)

(0.51)

(2.18)

0.946***

0.434

0.512

(3.27)

(0.95)

(0.95)

1.014**

0.372

0.642

(2.48)

(1.15)

(1.25)

Table IA9b presents results cross-sectional variation in the treatment effect. The research design is the same as in the regression analysis presented in Panel B of Table 3
(NATBIRTH_CHG). Results are reported using LFS-weighted regressions and controlling for domestic job mobility. Partitioning variables are defined in the notes to Table IA9a.

80

References in Internet Appendix
Le Vourc’h, J. Morand, P., 2011. Study on the effects of the implementation of the acquis on
statutory audits of annual and consolidated accounts including the consequences on the audit
market. ESCP Europe.
Münz, R., 2007. Migration, labor markets, and integration of migrants: An overview for Europe.
HWWI Policy Paper 3-6, Hamburg Institute of International Economics.
Parey, M., Waldinger, F., 2011, Studying abroad and the effect on international labour market
mobility: Evidence from the introduction of ERASMUS. Economic Journal 121, 194–222.

81

