                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ARE FIRMS IN "BORING" INDUSTRIES WORTH LESS?

                                              Jia Chen
                                             Kewei Hou
                                            René M. Stulz

                                        Working Paper 20880
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20880


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jia Chen, Kewei Hou, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Are Firms in "Boring" Industries Worth Less?
Jia Chen, Kewei Hou, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 20880
January 2015
JEL No. G12,G14,G31,G32

                                                ABSTRACT

Using theories from the behavioral finance literature to predict that investors are attracted to industries
with more salient outcomes and that therefore firms in such industries have higher valuations, we find
that firms in industries that have high industry-level dispersion of profitability have on average higher
market-to-book ratios than firms in low dispersion industries. This positive relation between market-to-
book ratios and industry profitability dispersion is economically large and statistically significant and
is robust to controlling for variables used to explain firm-level valuation ratios in the literature. Consistent
with the mispricing explanation of this finding, we show that firms in less boring industries have a
lower implied cost of equity and lower realized returns. We explore alternative explanations for our
finding, but find that these alternative explanations cannot explain our results.


Jia Chen                                               René M. Stulz
Guanghua School of Management                          The Ohio State University
Peking University                                      Fisher College of Business
5 Yiheyuan Road                                        806A Fisher Hall
Beijing, China 100871                                  Columbus, OH 43210-1144
chen.1002@gmail.com                                    and NBER
                                                       stulz@cob.osu.edu
Kewei Hou
College of Business
Ohio State University
820 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
hou.28@osu.edu
     When investors consider investing in stocks, they have to find ways to simplify the problem of

choosing among thousands of stocks. To organize their thinking, the behavior finance literature has shown

that investors put stocks in categories, such as styles (see Hirshleifer (2014) for a review). This

categorization has implications for valuations and stock returns (Barberis and Shleifer (2003)). Since

there are important valuation commonalities within industries (e.g., Hou and Robinson (2006)), we would

expect investors to find industry categorizations to be useful. In fact, industry categorizations are used

widely in the finance industry. For instance, analysts typically specialize within industries and investment

funds often restrict their investments to specific industries. When investors think about investment

through categories, they pay more attention to some categories than others. We would expect salient

industries to draw interest from investors. With the behavioral finance literature, investors increase their

holdings of stocks in categories that attract their interest, so that these categories are valued more on

average.

     In this paper, we investigate the hypothesis that more salient industries have higher valuations than

less salient industries. We call this hypothesis the industry saliency hypothesis. We use as our proxy for

the saliency of an industry the dispersion of the profitability of firms within the industry (IPD). With that

proxy, we find strong evidence that more salient industries have higher valuations.

     The motivation for our proxy for saliency is straightforward. First, large positive or negative

unexpected earnings draw attention.1 Second, industries with high IPD are industries where investors can

believe that they have a chance at a high return by picking the right stock since a higher IPD means that

there is a higher probability of some firm having unexpectedly high earnings large enough to lead to a

large stock return. With a low IPD industry, firms are more expected to perform similarly. Third,

industries with high IPD are more likely to be industries where investors have good stories to report, as

some investors will have done well.2 Similarly, the media are more likely to devote attention to such


1
  Lee (1992) finds that small traders are net buyers after both positive and negative earnings surprises. Hirshleifer, Myers, Myers,
and Teoh (2008) show that individual investors are net buyers after positive and negative extreme earnings news.
2
  Han and Hirshleifer (2013) propose that investors (“senders” in the language of Han and Hirshleifer) like to recount to others
their investment successes more than their failures and that listeners (“receivers”) do not fully discount for this behavior.

                                                                 1
industries. There is little to say about industries that have low IPD. Fourth, industries with high IPD are

more likely to be industries where investors have differences in opinion, which lead to higher volume and

hence further attention (Hong and Stein (2007)). Each one of these factors means that high IPD industries

are more salient and valued higher.

     To make our hypothesis more concrete, it is useful to compare a high IPD industry to a low IPD

industry. We sort all Fama-French 49 industries by average IPD over the sample period. The Computer

Software industry is the industry with the highest IPD. Perhaps not surprisingly, Utilities is the industry

with the lowest IPD. It seems reasonable to believe that investors are much more likely to believe that

they have the potential to earn a high return in the Computer Software industry than in Utilities. With

Computer Software, investors can focus on their victories as some stocks will most likely always do

extremely well. They can read about success stories and failures in the news. In contrast, the news will be

much less likely to have exciting stories about firms in the utilities industry.

     To test our hypothesis, we estimate the relation between a standard measure of equity valuation,

market-to-book ratio, and within-industry dispersion of firm-level profitability measured by the within-

industry standard deviation of return on equity (ROE). We find a positive relation between these two

variables: firms in industries that have higher profitability dispersion (IPD) have on average higher

market-to-book ratios (MB). This positive relation is economically large. A one standard deviation

increase in IPD is associated with an increase of 0.506 in MB, representing a 26.0% increase compared to

the cross-sectional mean of MB. This positive relation is robust to controlling for variables that Fama and

French (1998) and Pástor and Veronesi (2003) use to explain the cross section of firm valuation.

     Our theory also implies that, all else equal, firms in high IPD industries have lower returns. To

examine this prediction, we use both realized returns and ex ante discount rates. We find that firms in high

IPD industries have both lower realized returns and lower ex ante discount rates. The effect is

economically significant.

     Though our theory predicts that firms in high IPD industries are overvalued, we examine three other

possible explanations that could explain the high valuations of firms in such industries. First, investors'

                                                       2
limited attention can lead to a positive relation between industry profitability dispersion and the market-

to-book ratio. Limited attention per se does not predict overvaluation, but only slow adjustment to news

of firms that suffer from limited attention. However, if investors pay more attention to high dispersion

industries and relatively inadequate attention to low dispersion industries, they are likely to have a higher

demand for the shares of firms in industries with high profitability dispersion than firms in industries with

low profitability dispersion as long as investors with limited attention are primarily long investors.

     Second, Pástor and Veronesi (2003) show that the market-to-book ratio of a firm increases with

uncertainty about average profitability of the firm. If firms in industries with higher IPD have higher

uncertainty about future profitability, then those firms can have higher market-to-book ratios.

     Third, if firms in industries with high profitability dispersion are less risky and have lower risk-

adjusted discount rates, they should have higher market-to-book ratios all else equal. This explanation

predicts that, for given expected cash flows, firms in high IPD industries are valued more. Further, it also

implies that they have lower returns.

     We consider four groups of variables proxying for the mispricing and the three alternative

explanations. First, we use three variables to measure the extent to which a stock is mispriced: the ratio of

fundamental value to price of Frankel and Lee (1998), the composite equity issuance measure of Daniel

and Titman (2006), and a modified version of the industry-wide pricing deviation of Rhodes-Kropf,

Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005). Second, we use three variables to capture investor attention: the

number of analysts following a stock, the share of institutional ownership of a stock, and a stock's trading

volume or turnover. Third, Pástor and Veronesi (2003) argue that uncertainty about mean profitability

declines over time due to learning and this effect is stronger for dividend non-payers. Hence, we use firm

age and a dividend non-payer dummy as well as their interaction to proxy for uncertainty about average

profitability. Fourth, we measure the risks of a firm using the factor loadings on the Fama-French three

factors plus a momentum factor and the volatility of raw monthly stock returns.

     Since the industry saliency hypothesis implies that firms in high saliency industries should be

overvalued, we first use our mispricing proxies to test whether firms in high IPD industries are

                                                      3
overvalued. We find that this is the case for each mispricing measure we use. Examining the relations

between industry profitability dispersion and the other three groups of explanatory variables shows that

firms in high IPD industries tend to be younger and are less likely to pay dividends, but the relations

between industry profitability dispersion and variables proxying for investor attention and factor risk

loadings are mixed. We then include the four groups of explanatory variables in the regressions of the

market-to-book ratio on industry profitability dispersion and find that the mispricing proxies reduce the

effect of industry profitability dispersion on market-to-book ratio more than the other groups of

explanatory variables do.

     To further distinguish between these four explanations, we estimate industry-level regressions of

industry profitability dispersion on the industry averages of the four groups of explanatory variables and

then use these regressions to decompose industry profitability dispersion into components related to the

four explanations. When we use these components of industry profitability dispersion to explain market-

to-book ratios, we find that only the component related to mispricing has the right sign and significant

explanatory power, while the components related to investor attention, uncertainty about mean

profitability, and risk do not. These results suggest mispricing as the main driver of the positive relation

between industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation. Our industry saliency hypothesis provides an

explanation for the mispricing.

     We organize the rest of this paper as follows. Section 1 introduces the data. Section 2 studies the

differences in profitability dispersion across industries. Section 3 documents the positive relation between

industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation. Section 4 shows that industry profitability dispersion

is negatively related with returns and ex ante discount rates. Section 5 distinguishes between the four

explanations of the positive relation between industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation. Section

6 concludes.



Section 1. Data

    For our analysis, we use all listed securities from NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ that have sharecodes

                                                     4
10 or 11 and are at the intersection of CRSP monthly return files from July 1963 to June 2010 and the

Compustat fundamentals annual file from 1963 to 2010. Earnings is income before extraordinary items

from Compustat, and book equity is common equity from Compustat. We also obtain total assets and

dividends from Compustat. We measure profitability using return on equity (ROE), which is earnings in

year t divided by book equity from year t-1. For each industry, industry profitability dispersion is the

cross-firm standard deviation of return on equity, which we denote DROE. We also construct an

alternative measure of industry profitability dispersion, PROE, which is the within-industry 80th percentile

minus the 20th percentile of return on equity.



Section 2. Variation in profitability dispersion across industries

    In this section, we examine how profitability dispersion differs across industries. Panel A of Table 1

reports time-series averages of cross-industry summary statistics for our IPD measures. Not surprisingly,

there is considerable variation in these measures across industries. For both DROE and PROE, the 80th

percentile is almost twice the 20th percentile. In Panel B of Table 1, we sort the Fama-French 49 industries

according to the time-series average of DROE. Results are similar if we use PROE. The average

profitability dispersion for Computer Software is 0.258, which is the highest among all 49 industries.

Utilities has the lowest value of average profitability dispersion, which is 0.072. The IPD of the Computer

Software industry is 3.5 times the IPD of the Utilities industry. The average profitability dispersion for

Printing and Publishing is 0.152, which is at the median of all industries. The difference between

Computer Software and Utilities is thus 122% of this median value of industry profitability dispersion.

     In order to understand what distributional features of profitability cause this wide variation in

profitability dispersion across industries, we study the difference in the distribution of profitability

between high IPD industries and low IPD industries. To do that, we use DROE to rank the Fama-French

49 industries every year into 3 groups: top five industries, bottom five industries, and other industries. In

the same year, we also rank all individual firms into deciles based on their firm-specific profitability. For

each industry group (high IPD, low IPD, and others) each year, we then count the numbers of firms

                                                      5
falling in each profitability decile rank and normalize these numbers so that they add up to one for each

industry group. Finally, we average the normalized numbers across different years, resulting in three

separate histograms in Figure 1 for the three groups of industries.

     The profitability distribution is very different between the top five and bottom five industries ranked

by profitability dispersion. The top five IPD industries have more firms in the low and high profitability

deciles than in the middle deciles, while the bottom five IPD industries have more firms in the middle

deciles than in the extreme deciles. In other words, industries with high profitability dispersion have more

firms performing either very well or very poorly relative to the average firm. Industries with low

profitability dispersion, on the other hand, have more firms having the average profitability performance

than firms performing either very well or very poorly. In unreported tests, we also study the differences in

profitability persistence between high IPD and low IPD industries. When we regress firm-level

profitability on lagged profitability, industry profitability dispersion, and the interaction between lagged

profitability and industry profitability dispersion, the coefficient on lagged profitability is significantly

positive while the coefficient on the interaction term is significantly negative, suggesting that high IPD

industries are associated with lower levels of profitability persistence. Therefore, firms in industries with

high profitability dispersion are not only more likely to have extreme (very good or very bad) profitability

performance, this extreme performance is also more transitory than that of extreme performers in

industries with low profitability dispersion.



Section 3. The relation between industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation

    In Table 2, we use regression analysis to study whether a firm's market-to-book ratio is related to the

profitability dispersion of the industry the firm is in. We assign industry profitability dispersion to the

firms in the corresponding industry year and estimate firm-level panel regressions of the market-to-book

ratio on industry profitability dispersion and other control variables. Because we are mainly interested in

the cross-sectional relation, we use year fixed effects in these panel regressions. The standard errors are

two-way clustered by firm and year according to Petersen (2008). In Model 1, we use only DROE as the

                                                      6
explanatory variable. The coefficient on DROE is positive and statistically highly significant, indicating a

positive relation between industry profitability dispersion and market-to-book ratio. The coefficient is also

economically large. A one standard deviation increase in industry profitability dispersion is associated

with an increase of 0.506 in the market-to-book ratio,3 representing a 26.0% increase compared to the

mean of market-to-book ratio (1.944). In Model 2, we use the alternative measure of industry profitability

dispersion, PROE, as the only explanatory variable. The positive coefficient on PROE shows that the

positive relation between industry profitability dispersion and market-to-book ratio is robust to using this

alternative measure.

     To account for the possibility that the positive relation between industry profitability dispersion and

market-to-book ratio is driven by known valuation determinants, we control for variables that have been

shown by the previous literature to be related to firm valuation. Specifically, Fama and French (1998)

examine valuation regressions that perform well in a battery of tests and have been used in subsequent

studies (e.g., Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2006)). Further, Pástor and Veronesi (2003) develop a

model that explains the cross section of market-to-book ratios. We use as controls the variables from these

papers which include current and next two years’ earnings, total assets, interest expenses, dividends, and

current R&D expenditure all scaled by current book equity, skewness of daily stock returns, log total

assets, firm-level volatility of profitability estimated using the data from the previous five years (three

years minimum), and current and next two years’ stock returns.4 Appendix Table 1 provides detailed

definitions of all the variables we use in the paper. Appendix Table 2 presents summary statistics for these

variables.

     Model 3 includes only the control variables as explanatory variables, and the results are similar to

those in Fama and French (1998) and Pástor and Veronesi (2003), suggesting that the control variables are

related to firm valuation in the same way in our sample as in past studies. Specifically, market-to-book

3
  We obtain this number by multiplying the coefficient on DROE from Model 1, 7.672, by the time-series average of cross-
industry standard deviation of DROE, 0.066, from Table 1.
4
  We leave out the two primary variables that Pástor and Veronesi (2003) use to proxy for uncertainty about mean profitability
(log(Age) and the non-dividend payer dummy) from the list of control variables because we want to later explore these variables
as potential drivers of the positive relation between industry profitability dispersion and market-to-book ratio.

                                                              7
ratio is positively related to current and future profitability, future leverage ratio, future interest expense,

current and future dividend payment, current year stock return, R&D expenditure, and past profitability

volatility, and negatively related to current leverage ratio, current interest expense, future stock return, log

total assets, a dummy variable for zero R&D expenditure, and daily return skewness.

     In Models 4 and 5, we regress market-to-book ratio on measures of industry profitability dispersion

(DROE in Model 4 and PROE in Model 5) and control variables. We refer to these regressions as the

baseline regressions in subsequent analysis. The coefficients on the IPD measures remain positive and are

significant both economically and statistically. Specifically, Model 4 shows that a one standard-deviation

increase in DROE is associated with an increase of 0.431 in the market-to-book ratio, which is 22.2% of

the cross-sectional mean market-to-book ratio. Similarly, Model 5 shows that a one standard deviation

increase in PROE is associated with an increase of 0.418 in the market-to-book ratio, which is 21.5% of

the cross-sectional mean market-to-book ratio.

     These results suggest that the variables that the previous literature uses to explain firm valuation do

not subsume the positive relation between industry profitability dispersion and market-to-book ratio. Also,

the coefficients on the variables used by the previous literature are largely unaffected by the IPD measures.

The one exception is the dummy variable for zero R&D expenditure. The variable is significantly

negative when we estimate the regression without the IPD measures but it becomes insignificant after

including the IPD measures.



Section 4. The relation between industry profitability dispersion, returns, and discount rates

    As discussed in the introduction, our hypothesis implies that firms in high IPD industries are

overvalued and thus are expected to earn, all else equal, lower returns. We use two different approaches to

assess the relation between IPD and returns. First, we use realized returns. Second, we use measures of ex

ante discount rates. Low realized returns could have two different explanations. First, investors could

require lower expected returns for firms in high IPD industries. Second, investors could overvalue firms



                                                       8
in high IPD industries by overestimating future expected cash flows, so that they are negatively surprised

when they learn the true cash flows. Low ex ante discount rates imply that investors value expected cash

flows from firms in high IPD industries more than expected cash flows from firms in low IPD industries.

       We measure ex ante discount rates using the implied cost of capital (ICC) estimates of Hou, van Dijk,

and Zhang (2012). HVZ use earnings forecasts from a cross-sectional model to proxy for cash flow

expectations and estimate the implied cost of capital for a large sample of firms. They show that the

earnings forecasts generated by the cross-sectional model are superior to analysts’ forecasts in terms of

coverage, forecast bias, and earnings response coefficient. More importantly, they show that the model-

based ICC is a more reliable proxy for expected returns than the ICC based on analysts’ forecasts.5

       In Table 3, we examine the relations between realized return/ICC and our IPD measures using firm-

level Fama-McBeth regressions. Model 1 of Panel A regresses log realized returns from July of year t+1

to June of year t+2 on DROE measured at the fiscal-year end of year t and Model 1 of Panel B regresses

realized returns on PROE. In both cases, the IPD measures have negative and significant coefficients. We

then add to the regressions size, book-to-market, and past annual return to capture the size, value, and

momentum effects in average returns. With these additional variables, our IPD measures maintain their

negative and significant coefficients. Finally, we add ROE and asset growth as explanatory variables.

Again, the coefficients on the IPD measures remain negative and significant. Therefore, there is a

negative relation between the IPD measures and future realized returns as expected with our hypothesis.

This relation is economically significant. A one-standard deviation increase in DROE is associated with a

decrease in next year’s log return of 4.28%, which represents 32.3% of the log mean annual return

(13.18%).

       In Model 4 of Panels A and B, we regress the composite ICC measure of Hou, van Dijk, and Zhang

(2012) on the IPD measures. The regressions show that when used alone, both DROE and PROE are

negatively and significantly related to ICC. Based on Model 4 of Panel A, a one-standard deviation

increase in DROE is associated with a reduction in ICC of 0.59%, which represents 6.1% of the mean

5
    See Hou, van Dijk, and Zhang (2012) for details on their ICC estimates.

                                                           9
ICC (9.68%). The negative relation persists when we add the firm characteristics as controls. In fact, in

contrast to the coefficients on the IPD measures in the realized return regressions, the coefficients on the

IPD measures become more significant when we add the firm characteristics.

     In sum, the results from Table 3 show that our IPD measures are associated with lower realized

returns and lower ex ante discount rates. The evidence supports that investors value expected cash flows

of firms in high IPD industries more. We cannot exclude, however, that investors also overestimate future

cash flows for firms in such industries.




Section 5. An examination of four possible explanations

     We identify four possible explanations of the positive relation between industry profitability

dispersion and firm valuation. First, our industry saliency hypothesis predicts that firms in high IPD

industries are overvalued relative to the firms in low IPD industries. Hence, our hypothesis provides a

mispricing explanation for the relation between IPD and market-to-book ratios.

     Second, investors' limited attention can lead to this positive relation if we are willing to assume that

the investors whose attention is limited for some industries are primarily long investors, which seems

reasonable given the obstacles to short sales faced by retail investors. If investors' attention to low IPD

industries is inadequate, their demand for stocks in those industries will be lower, which leads to lower

valuations. On the other hand, if investors pay more attention to high IPD industries, their demand for

stocks in such industries will be higher. As a result, firms in high IPD industries can have higher market-

to-book ratios than firms in low IPD industries.

     Third, Pástor and Veronesi (2003) argue that the market-to-book ratio of a firm increases with

uncertainty about the average profitability of the firm, and the resolution of this uncertainty over time is

associated with a decline in the market-to-book ratio. The intuition is simple. High uncertainty about

average profitability increases the probability that the firm will have a persistently high profitability or

persistently low profitability in the future. Because of the convexity of compounding, a persistently high


                                                     10
profitability has a larger impact on the market-to-book ratio than persistently low profitability. As a result,

higher uncertainty about mean profitability leads to a higher market-to-book ratio. If firms in high IPD

industries have higher uncertainty about future profitability, then these firms will have higher market-to-

book ratios according to Pástor and Veronesi (2003).

     Fourth, firms that are less risky have lower risk-adjusted discount rates which, for a given set of

expected cash flows, leads to a higher valuation according to standard valuation theories. If firms in high

IPD industries are less risky and thus have lower discount rates, all else being equal, these firms should

have higher market-to-book ratios.

     These four explanations are not mutually exclusive. For instance, the limited attention explanation

could lead to mispricing, so that evidence supportive of the industry saliency hypothesis is not necessarily

inconsistent with evidence supportive of the limited attention explanation. However, if the relation

between IPD and valuation were explained fully by variables proxying for the other explanations than the

industry saliency hypothesis, this would be evidence against the industry saliency hypothesis.



 Section 5.1. Variables proxying for the four explanations

     To assess these four alternative explanations, we first study the relations between our IPD measures

and variables that are associated with these explanations. The first group of variables includes known

proxies for the extent to which a stock is mispriced. We use three variables for this purpose: the ratio of

fundamental value to price of Frankel and Lee (1998), the composite equity issuance measure of Daniel

and Titman (2006), and a modified version of the industry-wide pricing deviation of Rhodes-Kropf,

Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005). Our industry saliency hypothesis implies that firms in high IPD

industries are mispriced, but firms could be mispriced for other reasons.

     To construct the ratio of fundamental value to price, V/P, for a firm in a given year t, we calculate the

fundamental value, V, using Equation 3.3 in Frankel and Lee (1998),




                                                      11
                                   FROEt  re      FROEt 1  re         FROEt  2  re
                       Vt  Bt               Bt                Bt 1                 Bt  2           (1)
                                     1  re         1  re              1  re  re
                                                              2                    2




where FROEt, FROEt+1, and FROEt+2 are forecasts of return on equity for year t, t+1, and t+2, respectively.

These profitability forecasts are based on Hou, van Dijk, and Zhang (2012). Bt is book equity for year t.

To estimate the discount rate, re, we estimate the Fama-French three-factor model for each of the Fama-

French 49 industries using value-weighted industry returns for the full sample and then use the fitted

values of the model as the discount rates for all firms in that industry. The V/P measure is the fundamental

value divided by the market value of equity. According to Frankel and Lee (1998), when V/P of a firm is

low, the firm is overvalued relative to other firms.

     Second, we consider the composite equity issuance variable of Daniel and Titman (2006) as another

measure of mispricing as new issue and repurchase activities are indicative of managers exploiting

mispricing of their firm’s stock, i.e., firms tend to issue shares when their stocks are overvalued and

repurchase when their stocks are undervalued. For a firm in a given month q, we calculate the equity

issuance measure as

                                                     MEq 
                                                     ME  
                                          NI q  ln            r q  1, q  ,                          (2)
                                                       q 1 



where MEq and MEq-1 are the market values of equity of the firm for month q and q-1, and r  q  1, q  is

the log stock return from the end of month q-1 to the end of month q. It can be interpreted as the part of a

firm’s growth in market equity that is not coming from the stock return. Issuance activities, including

actual equity issuance, employee stock option plans, or any other actions that trade ownership for cash or

services, increase the composite issuance measure, while retiring activities, including repurchases and

dividends, reduce the measure. Splits and stock dividends do not affect the measure. To be consistent with

other annual data in our analysis, we construct the annual composite issuance measure by summing the

monthly issuance measures within each year.

     Third, we construct an industry-wide pricing deviations measure using an approach similar to



                                                       12
Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005). Specifically, we first express the fundamental value as

a linear function of firm-specific accounting information. To do that, we estimate a firm-level cross-

sectional regression of log market value on log book value for each Fama-French 12 industry6 every year

as follows,

                                                     mit  0 jt  1 jt bit  it ,                                     (3)

where mit and bit are log market value of equity and log book value of equity, respectively. We estimate

the regression for each industry-year separately to account for the possibility that the growth rates and

discount rates vary over time and across industries. The fitted value of the regression above is

                                               v  bit ; ˆ 0 jt , ˆ 1 jt   ˆ 0 jt  ˆ 1 jt bit ,                   (4)

where ˆ 0 jt and ˆ 1 jt are the estimated coefficients. This fitted value is a measure of the fundamental value

of a firm conditional on year t and industry j, which captures the cross-sectional variation in firm value

that is industry specific, while the residual value of the regression captures the firm-specific variation.

     We also compute a measure of the fundamental value that is industry neutral:

                                                  v  bit ; 0t , 1t   0t  1t bit ,                                (5)

               1                    1
where 0t 
               J
                  ˆ 0 jt and 1t   ˆ 1 jt are the averages of the estimated coefficients across industries
                                    J

in year t. The difference between the industry-specific valuation and the market-level valuation,

v  bit ; ˆ 0 jt , ˆ 1 jt   v  bit ; 0t , 1t  , thus captures the extent to which firm i in industry j is overvalued

relative to firms in other industries in a given year. A high value of the difference suggests that the firm is

overvalued relative to firms in other industries. We denote this industry-wide pricing deviation measure

PD_IND.

     The second group of variables includes three proxies for investors' attention to a stock: the number

of analysts following a stock (N_ANLST), the share of institutional ownership of a stock (INST_OWN),

6
  We choose Fama-French 12 industries rather than finer industry classifications because the classification of Fama-French 12
industries allows for more firms for each industry-year.

                                                                  13
and a stock's trading volume or turnover (TURNOVER). N_ANLST is the average number of analysts

providing FY1 forecast in the I/B/E/S summary file in year t. INST_OWN is the average quarterly 13F

reported fraction of shares held by institutions in year t. TURNOVER is the average of daily share

turnover in year t. When calculating TURNOVER, we adjust for the institutional features of the way that

NASDAQ and NYSE/Amex volume are computed by following Gao and Ritter (2010). Note that while

TURNOVER is a variable known to proxy for attention, it also plays a role in our industry saliency

hypothesis. With that hypothesis, we would expect more salient industries to have greater turnover.

      The third group of variables is related to the explanation based on uncertainty about average

profitability proposed by Pástor and Veronesi (2003). According to their model, uncertainty about mean

profitability declines over time due to learning. Note that in Table 2 we already control for the volatility of

past profitability, which is a variable related to the uncertainty that Pástor and Veronesi (2003) focus on.

Here, we consider additional proxies that are central to their model. All else equal, a young firm should

have higher uncertainty about profitability than a mature firm. Therefore, we include firm age in our

analysis. We measure firm age as the log of one plus the current year minus the first year that a valid

PERMCO appears on CRSP. We use log firm age because the model of Pástor and Veronesi (2003)

implies that one additional year of age should matter more for a young firm than for an old firm. 7 We

denote this variable Log(Age). Pástor and Veronesi (2003) also point out that whether a firm pays

dividends or not can interact with firm age to affect firm valuation. To account for the impact of dividends,

we construct a dividend non-payer dummy, which equals one if the firm does not pay dividends in the

current year and zero otherwise. We denote this variable ND.

      The fourth group of variables proxies for the explanation that firms in high IPD industries are less

risky and have lower risk-adjusted discount rates, which can lead to higher market-to-book ratios. This

group includes five variables. The first four are the factor loadings on the Fama-French three factors plus

a momentum factor estimated using monthly data over the past five years (24 months minimum). b, s, h,


7
  While Pástor and Veronesi (2003) strictly follow their model to use negative of the reciprocal of firm age rather than log of age
in their primary analysis, they show that log firm age generates similar results.

                                                                14
w are the loadings on the market, SMB, HML, and WML factors, respectively. The fifth variable,

SD_RET, is the total volatility of raw monthly stock returns over the past five years (24 months

minimum).



 Section 5.2. The relation between industry profitability dispersion and the four groups of
 explanatory variables

    In this subsection, we examine the relation between industry profitability dispersion and the industry

averages of the four groups of explanatory variables. Table 4 reports the correlations between them.

     First, among the mispricing proxies, V/P is negatively correlated with industry profitability

dispersion measured by either DROE or PROE, and both NI and PD_IND are positively correlated with

industry profitability dispersion. Thus, higher industry profitability dispersion is associated with lower

fundamental value to price ratios, higher composite equity issuance, and higher industry-level pricing

deviations. These results suggest that firms in high IPD industries tend to be overvalued.

     Second, among the variables proxying for investor attention, INST_OWN and TURNOVER have

positive correlations with industry profitability dispersion. These correlations are consistent with the view

that higher industry profitability dispersion is associated with more investor attention. However, the

number of analysts covering a firm, N_ANLST, is negatively correlated with industry profitability

dispersion, which is inconsistent with the results based on institutional ownership and turnover.

     Third, the correlations between the variables proxying for uncertainty about mean profitability,

Log(Age) and ND, and industry profitability dispersion show that firms in high IPD industries tend to be

younger and are more likely to be dividend non-payers than firms in low dispersion industries. These

results suggest that uncertainty about mean profitability can also potentially explain the positive relation

between industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation.

     Fourth, among the risk loadings, h and w are negatively correlated with industry profitability

dispersion, suggesting that firms in high IPD industries have lower exposures to the value and momentum

factors. This is consistent with the view that higher profitability dispersion is associated with lower risk-


                                                     15
adjusted discount rates. On the other hand, both b and s are positively correlated with industry

profitability dispersion, which suggests that firms in high IPD industries have higher exposures to the

market and size factors. In addition, total volatility, SD_RET, is also positively correlated with industry

profitability dispersion. These results are inconsistent with the negative association between industry

profitability dispersion and risk-adjusted discount rates. Therefore, similar to the attention-based variables,

the correlations show that the evidence on the relations between risk proxies and industry profitability

dispersion is also mixed.

     To help gauge the economic magnitude of the correlations in Table 4, Table 5 reports the average

values of the four groups of explanatory variables for industries with different levels of profitability

dispersion. Every year, we sort the Fama-French 49 industries into three groups based on their

profitability dispersion. The low and high IPD groups have 16 industries each and the middle dispersion

group has 17 industries. We then calculate the average values of the explanatory variables for each IPD

group as well as the differences between the low and high IPD groups and then average them over time.

Panel A of Table 5 shows the results based on DROE and Panel B shows the results based on PROE.

     Panel A shows firms in high IPD industries have on average lower fundamental value to price ratios

(0.727 vs. 1.018), higher composite equity issuance (0.009 vs. -0.013), and higher industry-wide pricing

deviations (0.191 vs. -0.121) than firms in low IPD industries, and all the differences are highly

significant. These results are consistent with firms in high IPD industries being overvalued relative to

firms in low IPD industries. Turning to the investor attention proxies, we find that firms in high IPD

industries have on average slightly higher institutional ownership (42.3% vs. 36.7%) and share turnover

(0.4% vs. 0.2%), but slightly lower analyst coverage (5.945 vs. 5.831) than firms in low IPD industries,

thus providing inconclusive evidence to the explanation based on investor attention. Firms in high IPD

industries are also 2.45 years younger on average and are 29% more likely not to pay dividends than firms

in low IPD industries, consistent with the explanation based on uncertainty about mean profitability.

Finally, in terms of risk proxies, firms in high IPD industries have lower HML betas (-0.024 vs. 0.318)

and WML betas (-0.089 vs. -0.081) but higher market betas (1.082 vs. 0.899) and SMB betas (0.905 vs.

                                                      16
0.504) as well as higher total volatility (0.032 vs. 0.023) than firms in low IPD industries. The results for

the last three risk measures do not support the explanation that firms in high IPD industries have high

valuations because of low risk-adjusted discount rates. The results from Panel B based on PROE are

similar to those in based on DROE.

     Overall, the results in Tables 4 and 5 indicate that high industry profitability dispersion is associated

with overvaluation and high uncertainty about mean profitability, while the relation between industry

profitability dispersion and investor attention and firm risks is more mixed. Our industry saliency

hypothesis predicts that firms in high saliency industries are overvalued, which is supported by the

positive relation between our IPD measures and mispricing proxies shown in Tables 4 and 5. We

investigate this relation further in Table 6, using firm-level panel regressions with year fixed effects and

standard errors clustered by firm and year. Model 1 in Panel A regresses V/P on DROE. The prediction

from our hypothesis is that the coefficient on DROE should be negative, as more salient industries should

have a higher market value relative to their fundamental valuation. Consistent with this prediction, the

coefficient on DROE is −2.087 and statistically highly significant. We then add variables known to be

related to discount rates in Models 2 and 3. We find that the negative relation between DROEt and V/P is

robust to the addition of these control variables. We then repeat the exercise for the other two mispricing

proxies and find similar results. Finally, in Panel B, we re-estimate the same regressions but use PROE to

measure industry profitability dispersion. We find similar results as well. Consequently, as predicted by

our industry salience hypothesis, our saliency measures are associated with overvaluation.



Section 5.3. Do the explanatory variables reduce the effect of industry profitability dispersion on
firm valuation?

    In Table 7, we add the four groups of explanatory variables to the baseline regressions of market-to-

book ratio on IPD measures and control variables. By studying the coefficients on IPD measures in these

regressions, we can learn whether and how these explanatory variables can explain the effect of industry

profitability dispersion on firm valuation. Panel A presents the results based on DROE and Panel B


                                                     17
presents the results on PROE.

     In Panel A, Model 1 regresses MB on DROE and the standard control variables. This is essentially

the same regression as Model 4 in Table 2, but the sample is different because we require the availability

of the additional explanatory variables. To conserve space, we do not report the coefficients on the control

variables. In this model, the coefficient on DROE is positive and statistically highly significant, which is

consistent with the result from Table 2.

     In Models 2-5, we add the four groups of explanatory variables one group at a time to Model 1. The

coefficients on DROE in all four models are smaller than that in Model 1 but remain significantly positive,

suggesting that none of the four groups of explanatory variables can completely drive out the positive

relation between industry profitability dispersion and market-to-book ratio. We see the largest drop in the

coefficient on DROE in Model 2 after controlling for the mispricing proxies (from 6.330 in Model 1 to

3.819, a 39.7% drop), compared with 17.5% (investor attention proxies), 11.2% (proxies for uncertainty

about mean profitability), and 10.3% (risk proxies) drops in Models 3, 4, and 5 respectively. These results

suggest that the three mispricing proxies (V/P, NI and PD_IND) have the largest effect on the positive

relation between industry profitability dispersion and market-to-book ratio. Finally, in Model 6, when we

add all four groups of explanatory variables to Model 1, the coefficient on DROE decreases from 6.330 in

Model 1 to 2.870 (a 54.7% drop) but remains significant.

     In Panel B of Table 7, we use PROE to measure industry profitability dispersion and obtain similar

results to those in Panel A. Specifically, the coefficient on PROE remains positive and significant after

controlling for the four groups of explanatory variables. Furthermore, including the mispricing proxies in

the regression results in the largest reduction in the coefficient on PROE (from 3.806 in Model 1 to 2.072

in Model 2), compared with investor attention proxies (3.176 in Model 3), proxies for uncertainty about

mean profitability (3.330 in Model 4), and risk proxies (3.341 in Model 5), which confirms that

mispricing proxies have the largest contribution to the positive relation between industry profitability

dispersion and firm valuation.



                                                    18
Section 5.4. Decomposing the relation between industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation

    An alternative way of examining how well the four groups of explanatory variables explain the

relation between industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation is to decompose industry profitability

dispersion into components using the explanatory variables and then study the effects of these

components on market-to-book ratio. The ability of these components to explain the market-to-book ratio

can help us understand the relative contributions of the four explanations to the positive relation between

industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation.

     We conduct this analysis in two steps. First, we estimate industry-level regressions of profitability

dispersion on industry averages of proxy variables for the four explanations and use the regression

coefficients to decompose industry profitability dispersion into four components, each related to an

explanation, and a residual component. The results of these industry-level regressions are reported in

Table 8. In the second step, we replace industry profitability dispersion with its components in the firm-

level valuation regressions. Those results are reported in Table 9.

     In Table 8, the first four models of Panel A show that when DROE is regressed on the explanatory

variables one group at a time, it is positively related to composite equity issuance, industry-wide price

deviation, analyst coverage, turnover, log firm age, dividend non-payer dummy, market beta, size beta,

momentum beta, and total return volatility, and negatively related to fundamental value to price ratio,

institutional ownership, the interaction term between firm age and dividend dummy, and value beta. The

regression R-squareds range 30-41% depending on the model. When all four groups of explanatory

variables are included together in Model 5, every variable except value and momentum betas retains its

sign. The regression R-Squared is 46%, suggesting that these explanatory variables capture significant

fraction of the variation in DROE. In Panel B, we regress PROE on the explanatory variables, and the

results are similar to those in Panel A.

     We use Model 5 in both panels to decompose the two IPD measures into four components each

related to an explanation by multiplying the coefficients in Model 5 with industry average values of the

corresponding proxies, as well as a residual component. The various components of DROE are denoted

                                                        19
DROE (Mispricing), DROE (Attention), DROE (Uncertainty), DROE (Risk), and DROE (Residual). The

components of PROE are named similarly.

     Panel A of Table 9 regresses firm-level market-to-book ratio on the different components of DROE

and the standard control variables to investigate the relative importance of different explanations in

driving the positive relation between industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation. Models 1-5

show that when the different components of DROE are included individually in the regressions, every

component except DROE (Uncertainty) is positively and significantly related to market-to-book ratio just

like DROE itself. DROE (Uncertainty), on the other hand, is negatively and significantly related to

market-to-book ratio, which is in the opposite direction of the original DROE-MB relation. In Model 6

when we include all five components of DROE in the same regression, DROE (Mispricing) and DROE

(Residual) retain their signs and statistical significance while the other three components, DROE

(Attention), DROE (Uncertainty), and DROE (Risk), become statistically insignificant. We obtain similar

results in Panel B of Table 9 when we study the different components of PROE.

     Overall, the results in Table 9 show that the mispricing component of industry profitability

dispersion can better explain its positive relation with market-to-book ratio than the components related to

investor attention, uncertainty about average profitability, and risk. This is consistent with the results in

Table 7, where we see the biggest reduction in the effect of industry profitability dispersion on market-to-

book ratio after controlling for the mispricing proxies. These results suggest that mispricing is the main

channel through which industry profitability dispersion affects firm valuation, consistent with our

industry salience hypothesis.



Section 6. Conclusion

    In this paper, we introduce and test the industry saliency hypothesis. This hypothesis predicts that

industry categorizations are useful for investors and that they are attracted to salient industries. We

measure industry saliency by the dispersion of profitability within an industry. We find that firms in more



                                                     20
salient industry are valued more, have lower returns and lower ex ante discount rates. Our analysis shows

that mispricing can better explain the positive relation between valuation and industry saliency than

explanations related to limited attention, uncertainty about mean profitability, and risk.




                                                      21
                                               References

Barberis, N. and A. Shleifer (2003). "Style Investing." Journal of Financial Economics 68(2): 161-199.

Daniel, K. and S. Titman (2006). "Market Reactions to Tangible and Intangible Information." Journal of
        Finance 61(4): 1605--1643.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1998). "Taxes, Financing Decisions, and Firm Value." Journal of Finance
       53(3): 819-843.

Frankel, R. and C. M. C. Lee (1998). "Accounting Valuation, Market Expectation, and Cross-sectional
        Stock Returns." Journal of Accounting and Economics 25(3): 283--319.

Gao, X. and J. R. Ritter (2010). "The Marketing of Seasoned Equity Offerings." Journal of Financial
        Economics 97(1): 33-52.

Han, B. and D. Hirshleifer (2013). "Self-Enhancing Transmission Bias and Active Investing." Working
        Paper.

Hirshleifer, D. (2014). "Behavioral Finance." Annual Review of Economics 7: forthcoming.

Hirshleifer, D., J. Myers, L. Myers and S. H. Teoh (2008). "Do Individual Investors Drive Post-earnings
        Announcement Drift? Direct Evidence from Personal Trades." Accounting Review 83(6): 1521-
        1550.

Hou, K. and D. T. Robinson (2006). "Industry Concentration and Average Stock Returns." Journal of
       Finance 61(4): 1927-1956.

Hou, K., M. A. van Dijk and Y. Zhang (2012). "The Implied Cost of Capital: A New Approach." Journal
       of Accounting and Economics 53(3): 504-526.

Lee, C. M. C. (1992). "Earnings News and Small Traders: An Intraday Analysis." Journal of Accounting
        and Economics 15(2-3): 265-302.

Pástor, L. and P. Veronesi (2003). "Stock Valuation and Learning about Profitability." Journal of Finance
        58(5): 1479--1789.

Petersen, M. A. (2008). "Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing Approaches."
        Review of Financial Studies 22(1): 435-480.

Pinkowitz, L., R. M. Stulz and R. Williamson (2006). "Does the Contribution of Corporate Cash Holdings
       and Dividends to Firm Value Depend on Governance? A Cross-country Analysis." Journal of
       Finance 61(6): 2725-2751.

Rhodes-Kropf, M., D. T. Robinson and S. Viswanathan (2005). "Valuation Waves and Merger Activity:
       The Empirical Evidence." Journal of Financial Economics 77(3): 561-603.



                                                    22
Figure 1: Distribution of Profitability for Three Groups of Industries Sorted by
Profitability Dispersion
Each year, the Fama-French 49 industries are ranked into three groups (top five industries,
bottom five industries, and other industries) based on their industry profitability dispersion,
DROE. In the same year, individual firms are also ranked into deciles based on their firm-
specific profitability. For each group of industries in each year, we then count the numbers of
firms falling in each profitability decile rank and normalize these numbers so that they add up to
one for each industry group. Finally, we average the normalized numbers across different years,
resulting in three separate histograms of normalized numbers of firms for the three groups of
industries. Profitability is measured by return on equity, which is earnings divided by lagged
book equity. DROE is the cross-sectional standard deviation of firm-level return on equity for
each industry.




                                                23
                           Table 1: Industry profitability dispersion
For each year and each one of the Fama-French 49 industries, DROEt is the within-industry
standard deviation of firm-level return on equity, and PROEt is the 80th percentile minus the
20th percentile of return on equity. Return on equity is earnings divided by lagged book equity.
Panel A reports the time-series averages of cross-industry summary statistics of the two measures
of industry profitability dispersion. In Panel B, the Fama-French 49 industries are ranked by their
time-series averages of DROE. Also reported is the average number of firms for each industry.
See Appendix Table 1 for detailed variable definitions.

Panel A: Summary statistics of industry profitability dispersion
             Mean     Std. Dev.      Min.        20%        Median            80%         Max.
DROEt        0.159       0.066      0.050       0.109         0.149           0.202       0.368
PROEt        0.203       0.110      0.048       0.134         0.177           0.248       0.635

Panel B: Fama-French 49 industries sorted by average industry profitability dispersion
Industry Name                                     Dispersion           Number of Firms
Computer Software                                   0.258                      116
Pharmaceutical Products                             0.257                       78
Precious Metals                                     0.254                        6
Tobacco Products                                    0.243                        6
Communication                                       0.211                       51
Coal                                                0.208                        5
Computers                                           0.203                       62
Business Services                                   0.195                      125
Entertainment                                       0.191                       25
Personal Services                                   0.189                       24
Healthcare                                          0.187                       42
Non-Metallic and Industrial Metal Mining            0.185                       13
Petroleum and Natural Gas                           0.180                       99
Electronic Equipment                                0.177                      113
Agriculture                                         0.176                        9
Recreation                                          0.176                       22
Transportation                                      0.173                       66
Electrical Equipment                                0.170                       50
Medical Equipment                                   0.169                       49
Construction                                        0.168                       33
Consumer Goods                                      0.164                       61
Apparel                                             0.157                       41
Real Estate                                         0.156                       23
Restaurants, Hotels, Motels                         0.156                       54
Printing and Publishing                             0.152                       32
Rubber and Plastic Products                         0.152                       20
Steel Works Etc                                     0.151                       52
Measuring and Control Equipment                     0.151                       43


                                                24
Industry Name                           Dispersion   Number of Firms
Wholesale                                 0.150            93
Shipbuilding, Railroad Equipment          0.149             6
Food Products                             0.147            53
Beer & Liquor                             0.147            11
Machinery                                 0.145           100
Retail                                    0.144           148
Automobiles and Trucks                    0.142            48
Defense                                   0.137             6
Chemicals                                 0.137            57
Fabricated Products                       0.136            11
Insurance                                 0.135            72
Construction Materials                    0.135            83
Trading                                   0.131           158
Textiles                                  0.129            28
Candy & Soda                              0.124            10
Almost Nothing                            0.123            12
Shipping Containers                       0.123            19
Aircraft                                  0.120            16
Business Supplies                         0.116            33
Banking                                   0.102           194
Utilities                                 0.072           142




                                   25
          Table 2: The relation between industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation
This table estimates firm-level panel regressions of market-to-book ratio (Mt/Bt) on industry
profitability dispersion and other control variables. DROEt is the cross-sectional standard
deviation of firm-level return on equity for each of Fama-French 49 industries, and PROEt is the
80th percentile minus the 20th percentile of return on equity for each industry. The control
variables are selected based on Fama and French (1998), Pástor and Veronesi (2003), and
Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2006). They include current and future (next two years’)
earnings divided by current book equity (Et+τ/Bt, τ=0 to 2), current and future total assets divided
by current book equity (At+τ/Bt, τ=0 to 2), current and future interest expenses divided by current
book equity (It+τ/Bt, τ=0 to 2), current and future dividends divided by current book equity
(Dt+τ/Bt, τ=0 to 2), current and future stock returns (RETt+τ, τ=0 to 2), log total assets (Log(At)),
current R&D expenditure divided by current book equity (RDt/Bt), a dummy variable that equals
one for zero R&D expenditure and zero otherwise (RD_ZEROt), skewness of daily stock returns
over the past year (SKEW_RETt), and firm-level time series volatility of profitability over the
previous five years (VOLPt). See Appendix Table 1 for detailed variable definitions. The panel
regressions are estimated with year fixed effects and standard errors clustered by firm and year.
Reported are the coefficients, and t-statistics are in parentheses.
Dependent Variable:                 Mt/Bt        Mt/Bt         Mt/Bt          Mt/Bt         Mt/Bt
                                     (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
DROEt                               7.672                                     6.535
                                   (12.27)                                   (17.18)
PROEt                                             4.925                                     3.804
                                                 (10.44)                                    (9.59)
Et/Bt                                                           0.170         0.171         0.173
                                                                (0.83)        (0.78)        (0.79)
Et+1/Bt                                                         0.456         0.500         0.503
                                                                (1.34)        (1.38)        (1.39)
Et+2/Bt                                                         0.232         0.255         0.258
                                                                (1.26)        (1.36)        (1.36)
At/Bt                                                          -0.103        -0.087         -0.09
                                                               (-2.32)       (-2.06)       (-2.10)
At+1/Bt                                                         0.088          0.09         0.089
                                                                (2.21)        (2.23)        (2.19)
At+2/Bt                                                         0.010         0.012         0.011
                                                                (0.57)        (0.68)        (0.60)
It/Bt                                                          -0.175        -0.202        -0.154
                                                               (-0.29)       (-0.34)       (-0.25)
It+1/Bt                                                         1.610         1.467         1.500
                                                                (1.55)        (1.45)        (1.48)
It+2/Bt                                                         0.317         0.195         0.233
                                                                (0.48)        (0.30)        (0.36)
Dt/Bt                                                            1.32         1.318         1.322
                                                                (3.74)        (3.51)        (3.55)
Dt+1/Bt                                                         6.648         6.963         6.867
                                                                (4.70)        (4.79)        (4.75)


                                                  26
Dt+2/Bt                            3.007     2.957     2.955
                                   (7.78)    (7.18)    (7.25)
RETt                               0.881     0.867     0.872
                                   (4.89)    (5.04)    (4.92)
RETt+1                              -0.33   -0.325    -0.333
                                  (-3.12)   (-3.29)   (-3.29)
RETt+2                             -0.175   -0.184    -0.184
                                  (-3.02)   (-3.71)   (-3.39)
Log(At)                            -0.067   -0.044    -0.045
                                  (-2.52)   (-1.61)   (-1.63)
RDt/Bt                             5.943     5.184      5.15
                                  (10.99)    (9.74)    (9.59)
RD_ZEROt                           -0.211   -0.039    -0.049
                                  (-2.68)   (-0.69)   (-0.83)
SKEW_RETt                          -0.113    -0.12    -0.119
                                  (-4.56)   (-4.78)   (-4.77)
VOLPt                                0.55    0.404     0.436
                                   (2.67)    (2.55)    (2.55)
Intercept      1.951     1.916     1.694     1.022     1.058
              (63.78)   (48.73)   (12.59)    (6.16)    (6.20)
Adj.R2          0.10      0.09       0.31     0.33      0.33
No. of Obs.    99576     99576     99576    99576     99576




                         27
                   Table 3: Regressions of realized return and ICC on profitability dispersion and control variables
This table estimates firm-level cross-sectional Fama-MacBeth regressions of log annual realized stock returns from July of year t+1 to
June of year t+2 (RETt+1) and implied cost of capital (ICCt+1) estimated at the end of June of year t+1 (as in Hou, van Dijk, and Zhang
(2012)) on industry profitability dispersion and control variables. DROEt is the cross-sectional standard deviation of firm-level return
on equity for each of Fama-French 49 industries, and PROEt is the 80th percentile minus the 20th percentile of return on equity for
each industry. Log(SIZEt) is log of end-of-June market capitalization, Log(Bt/Mt) is log of book value of equity at the fiscal-year end
of year t divided by the market value of equity at the end of December of year t, MOMt is log stock return from July of year t to May
of year t+1, ROEt is the earnings from the fiscal year ending in year t divided by the book equity from the fiscal year ending in year t-
1, and ∆At/At-1 is the change in total assets between year t-1 and year t divided by total assets for year t-1. See Appendix Table 1 for
detailed variable definitions. Reported are the time-series averages of annual regression coefficients and the associated time-series t-
statistics in parentheses.
Panel A: using DROE to measure industry profitability dispersion
                                 Log (1+RETt+1)   Log (1+RETt+1)   Log (1+RETt+1)         ICCt+1            ICCt+1            ICCt+1
                                       (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)               (5)               (6)
DROEt                               -0.648           -0.385             -0.302           -0.090             -0.100            -0.093
                                    (-3.52)          (-2.74)            (-2.12)          (-4.77)            (-8.84)           (-8.59)
Log(SIZEt)                                            0.013               0.01                              -0.017            -0.017
                                                      (2.62)             (2.10)                            (-11.12)          (-11.27)
Log(Bt/Mt)                                            0.064               0.05                               0.025             0.027
                                                      (5.78)             (5.24)                            (21.02)           (19.90)
MOMt                                                  0.056              0.048                              -0.015            -0.017
                                                      (3.80)             (3.08)                             (-7.53)           (-7.89)
ROEt                                                                     0.052                                                 0.033
                                                                         (4.92)                                                (4.42)
∆At/At-1                                                                -0.059                                                -0.007
                                                                        (-7.41)                                               (-5.29)
Intercept                            0.117           -0.052             -0.026            0.115             0.322              0.318
                                     (3.23)          (-0.71)            (-0.36)          (27.46)           (16.19)           (16.60)
Adj. R2                              0.020            0.073              0.078            0.017             0.331              0.345
Avg. No. of Obs.                      3465           2947.9             2681.7           2675.4            2605.9             2446.9




                                                                   28
Panel B: using PROE to measure industry profitability dispersion
                            Log (1+RETt+1)   Log (1+RETt+1)   Log (1+RETt+1)   ICCt+1    ICCt+1     ICCt+1
                                  (1)              (2)              (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)
PROEt                           -0.419          -0.217             -0.165      -0.072     -0.074     -0.068
                                (-3.41)         (-2.49)            (-1.90)     (-8.13)    (-9.67)    (-8.58)
Log(SIZEt)                                       0.013                0.01                -0.017     -0.017
                                                 (2.58)             (2.07)               (-11.08)   (-11.23)
Log(Bt/Mt)                                       0.065              0.051                  0.025      0.027
                                                 (5.75)             (5.32)               (21.31)    (20.21)
MOMt                                             0.057              0.049                 -0.015     -0.017
                                                 (3.85)             (3.12)                (-7.48)    (-7.86)
ROEt                                                                0.053                             0.033
                                                                    (5.11)                            (4.41)
∆At/At-1                                                             -0.06                           -0.007
                                                                   (-7.44)                           (-5.33)
Intercept                        0.096          -0.065             -0.037       0.112      0.32       0.316
                                (2.95)          (-0.89)            (-0.51)     (23.52)   (15.66)    (16.08)
Adj. R2                          0.018           0.072              0.077       0.016     0.330       0.345
Avg. No. of Obs.                3467.2          2948.7             2682.1      2675.6     2606       2447.1




                                                              29
                                               Table 4: Industry-level correlation coefficients
This table reports the pooled correlation coefficients of industry-level variables, including DROEt, PROEt, and industry average values
of the variables proxying for the four explanations of the positive relation between industry profitability dispersion and market-to-
book ratio. DROEt is the cross-sectional standard deviation of firm-level return on equity for each of Fama-French 49 industries, and
PROEt is the 80th percentile minus the 20th percentile of return on equity for each industry. The variables proxying for the mispricing
explanation are fundamental value-to-price ratio of Frankel and Lee (1998) (Vt/Pt), the composite equity issuance measure of Daniel
and Titman (2006) (NIt), and a modified version of the industry-level pricing deviation of Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan
(2005) (PD_INDt). The variables proxying for the investor attention explanation are the average of number of analysts providing FY1
forecast in the I/B/E/S summary file in year t (N_ANLSTt), the average quarterly 13F reported fraction of shares held by institutions
in year t (INST_OWNt), and the average daily turnover in year t (TURNOVERt). The variables proxying for the uncertainty about
mean profitability explanation proposed by Pástor and Veronesi (2003) are log firm age (Log(AGEt)) and a dividend non-payer
dummy (NDt). The variables proxying for the risk explanation are bt, st, ht, wt, and SD_RETt. The first four variables are the loadings
on the Fama-French three factors plus the momentum factor estimated over the past five years, and SD_RETt is the standard deviation
of daily returns over the past year. See Appendix Table 1 for detailed variable definitions.

                                 (1)     (2)      (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)     (9)    (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)    (14)    (15)
DROEt                    (1)    100.0
PROEt                    (2)     71.8   100.0
Industry Vt/Pt           (3)    -49.7   -52.9    100.0
Industry NIt             (4)     44.6    42.9    -49.4   100.0
Industry PD_INDt         (5)     29.4    32.2    -26.7    26.1   100.0
Industry N_ANLSTt        (6)     -0.3    -0.6    -11.3   -10.1    16.8   100.0
Industry INST_OWNt       (7)     29.0    14.5    -37.7     8.3    -1.0    21.7   100.0
Industry TURNOVERt       (8)     52.2    38.9    -52.6    44.7    18.6     8.8    68.8   100.0
Industry Log(AGEt)       (9)    -24.6   -20.3     16.1   -48.2   -19.9    15.7    18.7   -10.9   100.0
Industry NDt             (10)    54.3    50.5    -55.0    68.9    27.1   -19.7    15.3    48.8   -58.3   100.0
Industry bt              (11)    18.3    20.0    -10.5    23.8    18.8     7.0     2.8    18.1   -26.1    25.8   100.0
Industry st              (12)    19.2    18.8     -6.9    37.0    22.1   -34.3   -21.0    10.4   -39.6    41.8    30.1   100.0
Industry ht              (13)    -3.0   -13.5     -1.2   -10.1   -40.8   -11.3    34.5    14.9    30.8   -12.4   -17.1   -23.4   100.0
Industry wt              (14)   -19.1   -12.1     16.1   -10.7    14.8     8.1   -21.4   -20.5     9.2   -28.6    -8.8    -9.9    -4.9   100.0
Industry SD_RETt         (15)    41.9    40.0    -31.8    48.7     6.8   -19.8    -1.3    29.6   -53.6    68.7    34.3    37.7   -10.5   -29.9   100.0




                                                                         30
  Table 5: Averages of the variables proxying for the four explanations for industries with
                         different levels of profitability dispersion
This table reports the average values of the variables proxying for the four explanations for three
groups of industries sorted by profitability dispersion. Every year, we sort the Fama-French 49
industries into 3 groups by industry profitability dispersion measured by DROEt (Panel A) or
PROEt (Panel B). The numbers in columns labeled "Low", "Middle", and "High" are the time-
series means of the average values for low IPD (16 industries), middle IPD (17 industries), and
high IPD (16 industries) groups, respectively. The numbers in the column labeled "Low - High"
are the average differences between the low IPD group and the high IPD group. The variables
proxying for the mispricing explanation are fundamental value-to-price ratio of Frankel and Lee
(1998) (Vt/Pt), the composite equity issuance measure of Daniel and Titman (2006) (NIt), and a
modified version of the industry-level pricing deviation of Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and
Viswanathan (2005) (PD_INDt). The variables proxying for the investor attention explanation are
the average of number of analysts providing FY1 forecast in the I/B/E/S summary file in year t
(N_ANLSTt), the average quarterly 13F reported fraction of shares held by institutions in year t
(INST_OWNt), and the average daily turnover in year t (TURNOVERt). The variables proxying
for the uncertainty about mean profitability explanation proposed by Pástor and Veronesi (2003)
are log firm age (Log(AGEt)) and a dividend non-payer dummy (NDt). The variables proxying
for the risk explanation are bt, st, ht, wt, and SD_RETt. The first four variables are the loadings on
the Fama-French three factors plus the momentum factor estimated over the past five years, and
SD_RETt is the standard deviation of daily returns over the past year. See Appendix Table 1 for
detailed variable definitions. Also reported are the p-values for the null hypothesis that the
difference between the low IPD group and the high IPD group is equal to zero.

Panel A: average values of three industry groups sorted by DROE
                              Low            Middle           High        Low - High        p-value
Vt/Pt                         1.018           0.885           0.727          0.291           0.000
NIt                          -0.013          -0.002           0.009         -0.022           0.000
PD_INDt                      -0.121          -0.062           0.191         -0.312           0.000
N_ANLSTt                      5.831           5.721           5.945         -0.114           0.600
INST_OWNt                     0.367           0.434           0.423         -0.056           0.000
TURNOVERt                     0.002           0.003           0.004         -0.001           0.000
Log(AGEt)                     2.706           2.658           2.527          0.179           0.000
NDt                           0.214           0.374           0.503         -0.290           0.000
bt                            0.899           1.026           1.082         -0.183           0.000
st                            0.504           0.790           0.905         -0.401           0.000
ht                            0.318           0.191          -0.024          0.342           0.000
wt                           -0.081          -0.129          -0.089          0.009           0.633
SD_RETt                       0.023           0.028           0.032         -0.009           0.000




                                                 31
Panel B: average values of three industry groups sorted by PROE
                          Low          Middle        High         Low - High   p-value
Vt/Pt                    1.006          0.888        0.675           0.331      0.000
NIt                      -0.012        -0.002        0.011          -0.023      0.000
PD_INDt                  -0.121        -0.062        0.191          -0.312      0.000
N_ANLSTt                 5.768          5.750        5.955          -0.187      0.312
INST_OWNt                0.372          0.441        0.419          -0.046      0.000
TURNOVERt                0.002          0.003        0.004          -0.001      0.000
Log(AGEt)                2.681          2.676        2.506           0.175      0.000
NDt                      0.224          0.388        0.520          -0.296      0.000
bt                       0.903          1.024        1.105          -0.202      0.000
st                       0.524          0.803        0.925          -0.401      0.000
ht                       0.329          0.189       -0.088           0.417      0.000
wt                       -0.099        -0.110       -0.093          -0.005      0.823
SD_RETt                  0.023          0.028        0.033          -0.009      0.000




                                           32
                      Table 6: The relation between industry profitability dispersion and mispricing proxies
This table estimates firm-level panel regressions of mispricing proxies on industry profitability dispersion and control variables.
DROEt is the cross-sectional standard deviation of firm-level return on equity for each of Fama-French 49 industries, and PROEt is the
80th percentile minus the 20th percentile of return on equity for each industry. Log(SIZEt) is log of end-of-June market capitalization,
Log(Bt/Mt) is log of book value of equity at the fiscal-year end of year t divided by the market value of equity at the end of December
of year t, MOMt is log stock return from July of year t to May of year t+1, ROEt is the earnings from the fiscal year ending in year t
divided by the book equity from the fiscal year ending in year t-1, and ∆At/At-1 is the change in total assets between year t-1 and year t
divided by total assets for year t-1. See Appendix Table 1 for detailed variable definitions. The panel regressions are estimated with
year fixed effects and standard errors clustered by firm and year. Reported are the coefficients, and t-statistics are in parentheses.
Panel A: using DROE to measure industry profitability dispersion
Dependent Variable                       Vt/Pt       Vt/Pt      Vt/Pt       NIt        NIt        NIt      PD_INDt    PD_INDt    PD_INDt
                                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
DROEt                                   -2.087      -1.609     -1.207      0.154       0.131      0.116     1.644       1.467       1.453
                                        (-8.01)     (-6.16)    (-6.70)    (12.71)     (14.57)   (15.60)    (12.31)    (12.45)      (12.62)
Log(SIZEt)                                          -0.068     -0.079                  -0.005    -0.005                -0.014       -0.014
                                                    (-3.05)    (-3.47)               (-11.23)   (-11.94)               (-6.90)     (-6.55)
Log(Bt/Mt)                                           0.223      0.288                  -0.015    -0.015                -0.098       -0.099
                                                     (4.51)     (4.63)               (-12.15)   (-13.03)              (-13.96)    (-13.94)
MOMt                                                 0.215      0.175                  0.006      0.008                -0.003       -0.002
                                                     (4.62)     (3.92)                 (2.23)    (3.05)                (-0.41)     (-0.22)
ROEt                                                            0.755                            -0.014                             -0.018
                                                                (2.24)                           (-2.14)                           (-2.60)
∆At/At-1                                                        0.084                             0.012                             0.001
                                                                (4.62)                           (3.02)                             (0.55)
Intercept                                0.997      1.907       1.937     -0.026      0.025       0.025     -0.091      0.025       0.023
                                        (53.59)     (6.39)      (6.65)   (-39.52)     (5.10)     (5.44)    (-13.73)     (1.02)      (0.93)
Adj. R2                                   0.10       0.13        0.14      0.10        0.12        0.14      0.26        0.33        0.33
No. of Obs.                              95758      95701      95701     122313      121939     121853     122041      121704     121627




                                                                    33
Panel B: using PROE to measure industry profitability dispersion
Dependent Variable                   Vt/Pt     Vt/Pt     Vt/Pt       NIt        NIt        NIt      PD_INDt    PD_INDt    PD_INDt
                                      (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
PROEt                               -1.497    -1.197    -0.904      0.100       0.083      0.074     1.065       0.943      0.935
                                    (-9.78)   (-7.61)   (-5.25)    (12.84)     (13.27)   (10.17)    (14.05)    (13.92)     (13.75)
Log(SIZEt)                                     -0.07     -0.08                  -0.005    -0.005                -0.013      -0.013
                                              (-3.11)   (-3.53)               (-10.62)   (-11.69)               (-6.55)    (-6.38)
Log(Bt/Mt)                                     0.219     0.284                  -0.015    -0.015                -0.098      -0.098
                                               (4.30)    (4.43)               (-12.13)   (-13.00)              (-15.05)   (-14.86)
MOMt                                           0.218     0.177                  0.005      0.007                -0.011      -0.009
                                               (4.70)    (3.96)                 (1.78)    (2.60)                (-1.19)    (-1.03)
ROEt                                                     0.747                            -0.013                            -0.013
                                                         (2.23)                           (-2.12)                          (-2.40)
∆At/At-1                                                 0.081                             0.012                            0.005
                                                         (4.59)                           (3.14)                            (2.16)
Intercept                            1.012    1.938       1.96      -0.027     0.023       0.023      -0.1      0.001       0.001
                                    (59.62)   (6.49)     (6.76)    (-37.84)    (4.45)     (4.97)    (-15.69)    (0.06)      (0.03)
Adj. R2                               0.11     0.13       0.14       0.09       0.12        0.14      0.25       0.31        0.31
No. of Obs.                          95765    95708     95708      122328     121954     121868     122050     121713     121636




                                                             34
Table 7: The relation between industry profitability dispersion and firm valuation after
controlling for variables proxying for the four explanations
This table estimates firm-level panel regressions of market-to-book ratio on industry profitability
dispersion and standard control variables as well as variables proxying for the four explanations
of the positive relation between industry profitability dispersion and market-to-book ratio.
DROEt is the cross-sectional standard deviation of firm-level return on equity for each of Fama-
French 49 industries, and PROEt is the 80th percentile minus the 20th percentile of return on
equity for each industry. The variables proxying for the mispricing explanation are fundamental
value-to-price ratio of Frankel and Lee (1998) (Vt/Pt), the composite equity issuance measure of
Daniel and Titman (2006) (NIt), and a modified version of the industry-level pricing deviation of
Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005) (PD_INDt). The variables proxying for the
investor attention explanation are the average of number of analysts providing FY1 forecast in
the I/B/E/S summary file in year t (N_ANLSTt), the average quarterly 13F reported fraction of
shares held by institutions in year t (INST_OWNt), and the average daily turnover in year t
(TURNOVERt). The variables proxying for the uncertainty about mean profitability explanation
proposed by Pástor and Veronesi (2003) are log firm age (Log(AGEt)) and a dividend non-payer
dummy (NDt). The variables proxying for the risk explanation are bt, st, ht, wt, and SD_RETt.
The first four variables are the loadings on the Fama-French three factors plus the momentum
factor estimated over the past five years, and SD_RETt is the standard deviation of daily returns
over the past year. In all models, we use the same control variables as in Table 2 but do not report
the coefficients on these control variables. See Appendix Table 1 for detailed variable definitions.
The panel regressions are estimated with year fixed effects and standard errors clustered by
industry and year. Reported are the coefficients and t-statistics in parentheses.




                                                 35
Panel A: using DROE to measure industry profitability dispersion
 Dependent Variable:    Mt/Bt       Mt/Bt         Mt/Bt     Mt/Bt     Mt/Bt      Mt/Bt
                         (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)
 DROEt                  6.330       3.819         5.221     5.622     5.681      2.870
                       (16.22)    (13.92)        (15.80)   (15.82)   (13.41)   (10.45)
 Vt/Pt                             -0.100                                       -0.065
                                  (-3.46)                                      (-3.22)
 NIt                                2.983                                        1.814
                                   (8.65)                                       (7.94)
 PD_INDt                            1.644                                        1.334
                                  (12.86)                                      (10.56)
 N_ANLSTt                                        0.084                           0.073
                                                 (7.00)                         (6.76)
 INST_OWNt                                       0.915                           0.701
                                                 (7.57)                         (5.67)
 TURNOVERt                                       42.808                        34.156
                                                 (4.15)                         (4.75)
 Log(AGEt)                                                 -0.331               -0.282
                                                           (-7.06)             (-6.83)
 NDt                                                        0.791                0.315
                                                            (4.55)              (1.89)
 Log(AGEt)×NDt                                             -0.104               -0.005
                                                           (-1.85)             (-0.09)
 bt                                                                   0.289      0.104
                                                                      (4.67)    (2.11)
 st                                                                   0.041     -0.011
                                                                      (1.43)   (-0.49)
 ht                                                                  -0.312      -0.16
                                                                     (-8.33)   (-5.54)
 wt                                                                   0.258      0.228
                                                                      (4.14)    (4.07)
 SD_RETt                                                              0.665     -8.169
                                                                      (0.18)   (-2.33)
 Controls               Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Adj. R2                0.29        0.32          0.34      0.31       0.31       0.38
 No. of Obs.           56339       56339         56339     56339     56339      56339




                                            36
Panel B: using PROE to measure industry profitability dispersion
Dependent Variable:   Mt/Bt       Mt/Bt         Mt/Bt     Mt/Bt     Mt/Bt     Mt/Bt
                       (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)
PROEt                 3.806        2.072        3.176     3.330     3.341      1.529
                      (9.82)      (7.42)        (9.16)    (9.26)   (10.56)    (6.20)
Vt/Pt                             -0.100                                      -0.064
                                 (-3.49)                                     (-3.22)
NIt                                3.045                                       1.835
                                  (8.75)                                      (7.97)
PD_INDt                            1.775                                       1.431
                                 (13.32)                                     (12.16)
N_ANLSTt                                         0.085                         0.073
                                                (6.91)                        (6.75)
INST_OWNt                                        0.986                         0.739
                                                (7.58)                        (5.85)
TURNOVERt                                       43.820                       34.467
                                                (4.02)                        (4.62)
Log(AGEt)                                                -0.330               -0.282
                                                         (-7.02)             (-6.82)
NDt                                                       0.833                0.328
                                                          (4.54)              (1.92)
Log(AGEt)×NDt                                            -0.110               -0.005
                                                         (-1.91)             (-0.09)
bt                                                                  0.291      0.102
                                                                    (4.84)    (2.10)
st                                                                  0.042     -0.012
                                                                    (1.41)   (-0.55)
ht                                                                 -0.314     -0.159
                                                                   (-8.22)   (-5.46)
wt                                                                  0.261      0.228
                                                                    (4.09)    (4.02)
SD_RETt                                                             1.620     -7.676
                                                                    (0.40)   (-2.07)
Controls               Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
Adj. R2                0.28        0.31          0.34      0.30      0.31       0.37
No. of Obs.           56339       56339         56339     56339    56339      56339




                                           37
Table 8: The relation between industry profitability dispersion and the variables proxying
for the four explanations
This table estimates industry-level panel regressions of industry profitability dispersion on
industry average values of the variables proxying for the four explanations of the positive
relation between industry profitability dispersion and market-to-book ratio. DROEt is the cross-
sectional standard deviation of firm-level return on equity for each of Fama-French 49 industries,
and PROEt is the 80th percentile minus the 20th percentile of return on equity for each industry.
Variables whose names start with “Industry” are average values of the corresponding firm-level
variables. The variables proxying for the mispricing explanation are fundamental value-to-price
ratio of Frankel and Lee (1998) (Vt/Pt), the composite equity issuance measure of Daniel and
Titman (2006) (NIt), and a modified version of the industry-level pricing deviation of Rhodes-
Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005) (PD_INDt). The variables proxying for the investor
attention explanation are the average of number of analysts providing FY1 forecast in the I/B/E/S
summary file in year t (N_ANLSTt), the average quarterly 13F reported fraction of shares held
by institutions in year t (INST_OWNt), and the average daily turnover in year t (TURNOVERt).
The variables proxying for the uncertainty about mean profitability explanation proposed by
Pástor and Veronesi (2003) are log firm age (Log(AGEt)) and a dividend non-payer dummy
(NDt). The variables proxying for the risk explanation are bt, st, ht, wt, and SD_RETt. The first
four variables are the loadings on the Fama-French three factors plus the momentum factor
estimated over the past five years, and SD_RETt is the standard deviation of daily returns over
the past year. See Appendix Table 1 for detailed variable definitions. The panel regressions are
estimated with year fixed effects and standard errors clustered by industry and year. Reported are
the coefficients and t-statistics in parentheses.




                                                38
Panel A: using DROE to measure industry profitability dispersion
Dependent Variable                DROEt          DROEt     DROEt     DROEt     DROEt
                                     (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)
Industry Vt/Pt                    -0.021                                       -0.014
                                  (-1.72)                                      (-1.31)
Industry NIt                       1.363                                        0.769
                                   (4.11)                                       (2.63)
Industry PD_INDt                   0.103                                        0.086
                                   (3.32)                                       (2.91)
Industry N_ANLSTt                                 0.000                         0.001
                                                 (0.10)                         (0.41)
Industry INST_OWNt                               -0.207                        -0.106
                                                 (-1.82)                       (-1.46)
Industry TURNOVERt                               14.966                         6.435
                                                 (2.65)                         (2.61)
Industry Log(AGEt)                                          0.046               0.043
                                                            (1.66)              (1.55)
Industry NDt                                                0.414               0.127
                                                            (2.39)              (0.81)
Industry Log(AGEt)×Industry NDt                            -0.097              -0.054
                                                           (-1.45)             (-0.96)
Industry bt                                                           0.022     0.005
                                                                      (1.13)    (0.30)
Industry st                                                           0.005     0.005
                                                                      (0.30)    (0.36)
Industry ht                                                          -0.017     0.000
                                                                     (-1.07)    (0.00)
Industry wt                                                           0.039    -0.002
                                                                      (2.14)   (-0.15)
Industry SD_RETt                                                      5.347     3.207
                                                                      (4.80)    (3.21)
Intercept                          0.152         0.155     -0.035    -0.011    -0.043
                                  (12.98)        (8.87)    (-0.46)   (-0.45)   (-0.53)
Adj. R2                             0.41          0.30       0.32      0.37      0.46
No. of Obs.                        1182           1182      1182       1182      1182




                                            39
Panel B: using PROE to measure industry profitability dispersion
Dependent Variable                PROEt          PROEt     PROEt     PROEt     PROEt
                                     (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)
Industry Vt/Pt                     0.005                                        0.002
                                   (0.90)                                       (0.69)
Industry NIt                      -0.436                                       -0.321
                                  (-2.04)                                      (-2.31)
Industry PD_INDt                  24.239                                       12.112
                                   (2.86)                                       (3.32)
Industry N_ANLSTt                                -0.068                        -0.061
                                                 (-3.74)                       (-3.56)
Industry INST_OWNt                                1.909                         1.380
                                                  (2.30)                        (2.67)
Industry TURNOVERt                                0.119                         0.109
                                                  (1.89)                        (2.00)
Industry Log(AGEt)                                          0.109               0.096
                                                            (1.89)              (1.93)
Industry NDt                                                0.605               0.089
                                                            (1.90)              (0.35)
Industry Log(AGEt)×Industry NDt                            -0.134              -0.053
                                                           (-1.04)             (-0.55)
Industry bt                                                           0.058     0.043
                                                                      (1.79)    (1.49)
Industry st                                                          -0.019    -0.005
                                                                     (-0.66)   (-0.20)
Industry ht                                                          -0.012     0.003
                                                                     (-0.35)    (0.13)
Industry wt                                                           0.068    -0.000
                                                                      (2.05)   (-0.02)
Industry SD_RETt                                                      8.114     4.651
                                                                      (4.03)    (3.34)
Intercept                         0.225           0.248    -0.189    -0.039    -0.112
                                  (6.36)         (14.16)   (-1.17)   (-0.79)   (-0.80)
Adj. R2                            0.23            0.31      0.18      0.23      0.41
No. of Obs.                        1182           1182      1182       1182      1182




                                            40
Table 9: Decomposing the relation between industry profitability dispersion and firm
valuation
This table estimates firm-level panel regressions of market-to-book ratio on components of
industry profitability dispersion and other control variables. These components are computed by
multiplying the estimated coefficients from Model 5 of Table 9 Panels A and B with the industry
average values of the proxy variables for the four explanations of the positive relation between
industry profitability dispersion and market-to-book ratio. DROEt (Mispricing) is based on
Industry Vt/Pt, Industry NIt, and Industry PD_INDt. DROEt (Attention) is based on Industry
N_ANLSTt, Industry INST_OWNt, and Industry TURNOVERt.. DROEt (Uncertainty) is based
on Industry Log(AGEt) and Industry NDt as well as the interaction between these two variables.
DROEt (Risk) is based on Industry bt, Industry st, Industry ht, Industry wt, and Industry SD_RETt.
We use the same control variables as in Table 2 but do not report the coefficients on these
variables. See Appendix Table 1 for detailed variable definitions. The panel regressions are
estimated with year fixed effects and standard errors clustered by firm and year. Reported are the
coefficients and t-statistics in parentheses.
Panel A: using components of DROE to explain market-to-book ratio
Dependent Variable:         Mt/Bt       Mt/Bt          Mt/Bt     Mt/Bt       Mt/Bt         Mt/Bt
                             (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)         (5)           (6)
DROEt (Mispricing)         18.551                                                        17.854
                           (15.11)                                                       (13.57)
DROEt (Attention)                       19.721                                            -1.313
                                        (2.94)                                           (-0.46)
DROEt (Uncertainty)                                   -21.222                             5.034
                                                       (-7.95)                            (1.28)
DROEt (Risk)                                                     15.033                   0.866
                                                                 (6.61)                   (0.31)
DROEt (Residual)                                                             5.519        4.188
                                                                             (8.36)       (9.92)
Controls                     Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
Adj. R2                      0.32        0.30          0.30       0.30        0.30         0.33
No. of Obs.                 71054       71054         71054      71054       71054        71054




                                                 41
Panel B: using components of PROE to explain market-to-book ratio

Dependent Variable:      Mt/Bt      Mt/Bt         Mt/Bt    Mt/Bt    Mt/Bt      Mt/Bt
                          (1)        (2)           (3)      (4)      (5)        (6)
PROEt (Mispricing)       9.819                                                9.857
                        (13.03)                                              (14.17)
PROEt (Attention)                  5.668                                      0.046
                                   (1.99)                                     (0.03)
PROEt (Uncertainty)                              -11.019                      -1.160
                                                 (-8.96)                     (-0.87)
PROEt (Risk)                                               8.935              -2.338
                                                           (6.32)            (-1.31)
PROEt (Residual)                                                    2.819     1.849
                                                                    (6.88)    (5.60)
Controls                 Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes
Adj. R 2                 0.32       0.30          0.30      0.30     0.30      0.32
No. of Obs.             71054      71054         71054     71054    71054     71054




                                            42
                                          Appendix

                          Appendix Table 1: Variable definitions


Variable                      Definition
DROEt                        Cross-sectional standard deviation of firm-level ROEt for each Fama-French
                             49 industries.
PROEt                        Cross-sectional 80th percentile minus 20th percentile of ROEt for each Fama-
                             French 49 industries.
Mt/Bt                        Market value of equity at fiscal year end in year t (the product of closing price
                             of the firm's stock (Compustat mnemonic PRCC_F) and the number of
                             common shares outstanding (Compustat mnemonic CSHO)) divided by book
                             value of equity (Compustat mnemonic CEQ) for fiscal year ending in year t.
Et/Bt, Et+1/Bt, Et+2/Bt      Current and next two years’ earnings (Compustat mnemonic IB) divided by
                             current book equity (Compustat mnemonic CEQ).
At/Bt, At+1/Bt, At+2/Bt      Current and next two years’ total assets (Compustat mnemonic AT) divided by
                             current book equity (Compustat mnemonic CEQ).
It/Bt, It+1/Bt, It+2/Bt      Current and next two years’ interest expenses (Compustat mnermonic XINT)
                             divided by current book equity (Compustat mnemonic CEQ).
Dt/Bt, Dt+1/Bt, Dt+2/Bt      Current and next two years’ dividends (Compustat mnemonic DVC) divided
                             by current book equity (Compustat mnemonic CEQ).
RETt, RETt+1, RETt+2         Current and next two years’ stock returns.
ASSETt                       Total assets for fiscal year ending in year t (Compustat mnemonic AT).
RDt/Bt                       R&D expenditure (Compustat mnemonic XRD) divided by book equity
                             (Compustat mnemonic CEQ) for fiscal year ending in year t.
RD_ZEROt                     Dummy variable that equals one for zero R&D expenditure and zero
                             otherwise.
SKEW_RETt                    Skewness of daily stock returns of year t (50 daily observations minimum).
VOLPt                        Firm-level time series volatility of return on equity in a five-year window
                             ending in year t (three years minimum).
ICCt+1                       The composite implied cost of capital estimate of Hou, van Dijk, and Zhang
                             (2012) at the end of June of year t+1.
SIZEt                        End-of-June Market capitalization.
Bt/Mt                        Book value of equity (Compustat mnemonic CEQ) at the fiscal-year end of
                             year t divided by the market value of equity at the end of December of year t.
MOMt                         Log return from July of year t to May of year t+1.
ROEt                         Return on equity. This variable is the earnings from the fiscal year ending in
                             year t divided by the book equity (Compustat mnemonic CEQ) from the fiscal
                             year ending in year t-1. Earnings is income before extraordinary items from
                             Compustat (Compustat mnemonic IB).
∆At/At-1                     The change in total assets between year t-1 and year t divided by total assets
                             for year t-1.
Vt/Pt                        The fundamental value-to-price ratio of Frankel and Lee (1998).
NIt                          The composite equity issuance measure of Daniel and Titman (2006).
PD_INDt                      A modified version of the industry-wide pricing deviation measure of Rhodes-
                             Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005).
N_ANLSTt                     The average of number of analysts providing FY1 forecast in the IBES
                             summary file in year t. We use data starting from 1983. Missing values are set
                             to zero.
INST_OWNt                    The average quarterly 13F reported fraction of shares held by institutions in
                             year t. We use data starting from 1983. Missing values are set to zero.
TURNOVERt                    The average daily turnover in year t.
AGEt                         Firm age is calculated as one plus the current year minus the first year that a


                                                43
Variable         Definition
                 valid PERMCO appears on CRSP tapes.
NDt              A dividend non-payer dummy which equals to one if the firm does not pay
                 dividends in year t and zero otherwise.
bt, st, ht, wt   Factors loadings on the Fama-French three factors and the momentum factor
                 estimated over the past 60 months (24 months minimum).
SD_RETt          Standard deviation of daily stock returns of year t (50 daily observations
                 minimum).




                                  44
                             Appendix Table 2: Summary statistics
This table reports the time-series averages of cross-sectional summary statistics of the variables
used in the paper. See Appendix Table 1 for detailed variable definitions.
               Mean       Std. Dev.      Min.          20%      Median       80%          Max.
Mt/Bt           1.944       2.016       0.125         0.908      1.449      2.501        43.899
Et/Bt           0.067       0.294       -7.876        0.027      0.109      0.164        2.330
At/Bt           3.827       5.203       1.035         1.580      2.277      4.310       114.525
It/Bt           0.067       0.172       0.000         0.007      0.034      0.088        5.096
Dt/Bt           0.037       0.088       0.000         0.007      0.024      0.056        2.963
RETt            0.160       0.491       -0.779        -0.160     0.085      0.399        6.769
Log(At)         6.041       1.686       3.033         4.513      5.806      7.532        12.326
RDt/Bt          0.038       0.105       0.000         0.000      0.000      0.055        2.304
RD_ZEROt        0.656       0.464       0.000          0.111     1.000      1.000        1.000
SKEW_RETt       0.409       0.971       -6.855        -0.077     0.338      0.847        10.240
VOLPt           0.088       0.178       0.001         0.021      0.051       0.119       5.259
ICCt            0.094       0.067       0.010         0.054      0.081      0.121        0.965
Log(SIZEt)     12.348       1.729       7.779         10.797    12.246      13.843       18.384
Log(Bt/Mt)     -0.342       0.698       -3.422        -0.867    -0.310      0.183        2.789
MOMt            0.052       0.341       -1.879        -0.178     0.062      0.292        1.693
ROEt            0.103       0.192       -2.345        0.030      0.121      0.191        2.568
∆At/At-1        0.127       0.348       -0.692        -0.009     0.078      0.200        8.669
Vt/Pt           0.861       1.290      -11.906        0.316      0.713      1.281        24.211
NIt            -0.006       0.055       -0.150        -0.043    -0.013      0.016        0.372
PD_INDt        -0.016       0.243       -0.652        -0.221    -0.050      0.168        0.928
N_ANLSTt        6.426       7.428       0.000         0.704      3.519      11.573       40.733
INST_OWNt       0.430       0.240       0.000         0.184      0.434      0.667        0.977
TURNOVERt       0.003       0.003       0.000         0.001      0.002      0.004        0.042
AGEt           21.277      15.102       5.000         9.089     16.311      33.129       64.000
NDt             0.313       0.419       0.000         0.000      0.244      0.600        1.000
bt              0.992       0.540       -1.418        0.565      0.950      1.399        4.332
st              0.668       0.843       -2.686        -0.009     0.567      1.289        6.223
ht              0.184       0.854       -4.631        -0.404     0.232      0.794        4.983
wt             -0.104       0.560       -3.879        -0.488    -0.084      0.291        2.930
SD_RETt         0.026       0.013       0.006         0.016      0.023      0.034        0.146




                                                 45
