                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             DOES FINANCE BENEFIT SOCIETY?

                                           Luigi Zingales

                                        Working Paper 20894
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20894


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




Prepared for the 2015 AFA Presidential Address. While a consultant to the PCAOB, the opinions expressed
in this paper are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Board or the PCAOB as a whole.
I wish to thank Sarah Niemann for research assistantship and Nava Ashraf, Luigi Guiso, Oliver Hart,
Adair Morse, Donatella Picarelli, Raghu Rajan, Guy Rolnick, Paola Sapienza, Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer,
Amir Sufi, and Paul Tucker for very valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Does Finance Benefit Society?
Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 20894
January 2015
JEL No. G00,O43

                                           ABSTRACT

Academics’ view of the benefits of finance vastly exceeds societal perception. This dissonance is at
least partly explained by an under-appreciation by academia of how, without proper rules, finance
can easily degenerate into a rent-seeking activity. I outline what finance academics can do, from a
research point of view and from an educational point of view, to promote good finance and minimize
the bad.


Luigi Zingales
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
luigi.zingales@ChicagoBooth.edu
For an academic economist the answer to the question raised in the title seems obvious. After all, there are

plenty of theories that explain the crucial role played by finance: from managing risk (Froote et al., 1993)

to providing valuable price signals (Hayek, 1945), from curbing agency problems (Jensen and Meckling,

1976) to alleviating informational asymmetries (Myers and Majluf, 1984). Furthermore, there is plenty of

evidence that finance fosters growth (e.g., Levine 2005), promotes entrepreneurship (Guiso et al, 2004;

Mollica and Zingales, 2008), favors education (Flug et al., 2008; and Levine and Rubinstein, 2014),

alleviates poverty and reduces inequality (Beck et al., 2007).

        Yet, this feeling is not shared by society at large. 57% of readers of The Economist (not a

particularly unsympathetic crowd) disagree with the statement that “financial innovation boosts economic

growth.” When asked “Overall, how much, if at all, do you think the US financial system benefits or hurts

the US economy?”, 48% of a representative sample of adult Americans respond that finance hurts the US

economy, only 34% say that it benefits it. 1

        This sentiment is not just the result of the crisis: throughout history finance has been perceived as

a rent-seeking activity. Prohibitions against finance date as far back as the Old Testament. 2 The aftermath

of the 2007-08 financial crisis has only worsened this view. From Libor fixing to exchange rate

manipulation, from gold price rigging to outright financial fraud in subprime mortgages, not a day passes

without a news of a fresh financial scandal. After the financial crisis, Americans’ trust towards bankers

has dropped tremendously (Sapienza and Zingales, 2012) and has not yet fully recovered.

        It is very tempting for us academics to dismiss all these feelings as the expression of ignorant

populism (Sapienza and Zingales, 2013). After all, we are the priests of an esoteric religion, only we

understand the academic scriptures and can appreciate the truths therein revealed. For this reason, we

almost wallow in public disdain and refuse to engage, rather than wonder whether there is any reason for

these feelings.


1
  Chicago Booth-Kellogg School Financial Trust Index survey December 2014. The survey, conducted by Social
Science Research Solutions, collects information on a representative sample of roughly 1,000 American households.
2
  "If you lend money to any of my people with you who is poor, you shall not be to him as a creditor, and you shall
not exact interest from him." Exodus 22:24 (22:25 in English trans).

                                                                                                                  2
        This is a huge mistake. As finance academics, we should care deeply about the way the financial

industry is perceived by society. Not so much because this affects our own reputation, but because there

might be some truth in all these criticisms, truths we cannot see because we are too embedded in our own

world. And even if we thought there was no truth, we should care about the effects that this reputation has

in shaping regulation and government intervention in the financial industry. Last but not least, we should

care because the positive role finance can play in society is very much dependent upon the public

perception of our industry.

        When the anti-finance sentiment becomes rage, it is difficult to maintain a prompt and unbiased

enforcement of contracts, the necessary condition for competitive arm’s length financing. Without public

support, financiers need a political protection to operate, but only those financiers who enjoy rents can

afford to pay for the heavy lobbying. Thus, in the face of public resentment only the noncompetitive and

clubbish finance can survive. The more prevalent this bad type of finance is, the stronger the anti-finance

sentiment will become. Hence, a deterioration of the public perception of finance risks triggering a

vicious circle, all too common around the world (Zingales, 2012). The United States experienced it after

the 1929 stock market crash and it faces this risk again today.

        What can we do as a profession? First of all, acknowledge that our view of the benefits of finance

is inflated. While there is no doubt that a developed economy needs a sophisticated financial sector, at the

current state of knowledge there is no theoretical reason or empirical evidence to support the notion that

all the growth of the financial sector in the last forty years has been beneficial to society. In fact, we have

both theoretical reasons and empirical evidence to claim that a component has been pure rent seeking. By

defending all forms of finance, by being unwilling to separate the wheat from the chaff, we have lost

credibility in defending the real contribution of finance.

        Our second task is to use our research and our teaching to curb the rent-seeking dimension of

finance. We should use our research to challenge the existing practices in finance and blow the whistle

on what does not work. We should be the watchdogs of the financial industry, not its lapdogs (Zingales,

2014). While there are several encouraging examples in this direction, we can definitely do more.

                                                                                                              3
        We should get more involved in policy (while not in politics). Policy work enjoys a lower status

in our circles, because too often it becomes the ex post rationalization of proposals advanced by various

interest groups. By contrast, the benefit of a theory-based analysis is that it imposes some discipline,

making capture by industry more difficult.

        Finally, we can do more from an educational point of view. Borrowing from “real” sciences we

have taken a very agnostic approach to teaching. But physicists do not teach to atoms and atoms do not

have free will. If they did, physicists would be concerned about how the atoms being instructed could

change their behavior and affect the universe. Experimental evidence (Wang et al, 2011; Cohn et al.,

2014) seems to suggest that we inadvertently do teach people how to behave and not in a good way.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 tries to answer the question of why we should

care about this dissonance. Section 2 argues that our own perception of the benefits of finance is inflated.

Section 3 presents evidence of why the financial sector can be excessively big and why market forces

cannot bring it in check. Sections 4 to 6 outline what we can do from a research point of view and from a

teaching point of view.



1.      Why Should We Care?

        Facing (often exaggerated) attacks by the media, it is tempting for us financial economists to

close ranks and defend the entire industry. If the healthcare industry – which grew in relative size more

than the financial one – is not under attack, why should we?

        This attitude is very myopic. While the financial sector can and does add a lot of value, some of

the criticism is real. An industry does not pay $139 billion in fines in two years (see Table 1) if there is

nothing wrong. Several finance practices are wasteful if not fraudulent. If we try to defend them all, we

might win some battles, but we will lose the war.



1.1 Monetary vs. social rewards



                                                                                                               4
In the social prestige arena, finance starts at a disadvantage vis-à-vis other fields. In an evolutionary view

of social norms (Hayek, 1967), one of the possible roles of social prestige is to fill the gap between the

(perceived) social and private returns of various activities. For example, fighting the spread of ebola is an

activity with a very high social return, but a very low private return. Consistently, people who engage in

such activity are kept in high regard by society. By contrast, tax-dodging is an activity with a very high

private return, but negative social returns. Not surprisingly, tax dodgers and their enablers are not

regarded very highly.

        Many financial activities tend to have a private return that is much higher than the (perceived)

social return. The same is true for lawyers, especially litigation lawyers, but it is not true for doctors. In

finance, however, this difference is often extreme. In 1992 George Soros’ short forced the pound out of

the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (Ferguson and Schlefer, 2009). While (arguably) his social

contribution was big (the United Kingdom got out from the ERM that was penalizing its economy), it was

not very visible and easy to measure. By contrast, his private profit ($1 bn) was. Thus, it is only natural

that finance be low in the scale of social prestige. It is incumbent upon us, finance academics, to enhance

the perception of the social return of many finance activities. To this day, the empirical measurements of

the benefits of having an efficient market are fairly elusive.

        But even if we do our best, the deck is stacked against us. Regardless of their social return, large

and rapid accumulations of wealth (like Soros’ one) are likely to generate envy and public resentment.

This is even more true when the reason for that accumulation is not easily understood. Most people did

not resent Steve Jobs’ huge wealth accumulation, because they could directly appreciate the benefits of

his innovations. The same is not true for financiers.

        Thus, even in the absence of any fraud there is a natural public dislike towards finance. In the

presence of fraud, this dislike easily becomes rage. This is the reason why we should all be sensitive to

the cost created by fraud. Even when relatively small from a quantitative point of view, fraud in the

financial sector can have devastating effects on the reputation of the industry, with extreme negative

consequences on its functioning.

                                                                                                                 5
1.2 Reputation and good finance

If political power is disproportionately in the hands of large donors – as it is increasingly the case in the

United States – why is the negative public perception of finance a problem? Rich financiers can easily

buy their political protection. In fact, this is precisely the problem.

        At the cost of oversimplifying, there are two main ways in which financing can be done by the

private sector (i.e., without the coercive power of the State). There is the competitive arm’s length mode,

which relies heavily on the prompt and unbiased enforcement of contracts; and there is a relationship-

based mode, where the financier secures her return on investment by retaining some kind of monopoly

over the firm she finances (Rajan and Zingales, 1998a). As with every monopoly, this requires some

barriers to entry. These barriers may be due to regulation, or to a lack of transparency – or "opacity" – of

the system, which substantially raises the costs of entry to potential competitors. Alternatively, the

barriers may be provided by a “special relationship” with the Government. In such a system, conflicts of

interest are not the exception, they are the rule.

        While it is certainly possible to construct counterexamples, the competitive mode of financing is

cheaper and less biased. Yet, it is a much more difficult mode to sustain. It requires not only that the rule

of law is respected now, but also that it will be respected in the future. If a lender does not expect her

contract to be enforced by the law, she will never extend arm’s length credit. She will seek some degree

of economic or political control to protect her investment.

        True competition can occur only on a leveled playing field and this leveled field needs to be

designed and supported. In particular, it needs an administrative system that follows the impartiality

principle and the rule of law. Unfortunately, while everybody benefits from such a system, nobody

benefits so disproportionately to spend resources to lobby for it. Paradoxically, the lobby in favor of true

competitive markets is the weakest of them all (Rajan and Zingales, 2003). This is the reason why public

support for finance is so important. Without public support, the best form of finance – the competitive,

democratic, and inclusive finance – cannot operate. If political protection becomes necessary to operate,

                                                                                                                6
only the type of finance that enjoys sufficient rents to lobby heavily can survive. This is the bad type of

finance: the noncompetitive, plutocratic, and clubbish one.



1.3 The Vicious Circle

The rule of law is a crucial ingredient in the development of competitive financial markets (La Porta et

al., 2008). Yet, what underpins the rule of law is a set of beliefs that the rule of law promotes economic

prosperity. If these beliefs start to waver, the expectation that property rights will be respected in the

future wavers as well.

        In 2009, despite questions about its legality, the U.S. Congress approved by a 328-to-93 vote a

retroactive 90 percent levy on bank bonuses of bailout banks. 3 Thus, even in the United States public

resentment against finance can undermine the expectation that the rule of law will be respected in the

future. Without this expectation the competitive, democratic, and inclusive finance will quickly become

unsustainable.

        This situation is very common around the world. Di Tella and MacCulloch (2009) find that,

controlling for country fixed effects, the more an individual perceive his country as corrupt, the more he

demands government intervention. They also find that increases in corruption in a country precede

increases in voting support for populist, left-leaning parties.

        In these situations, to keep the money spigot going, the financial industry will seek protection by

increasing its political power. Unfortunately, this increased political power will have the effect of creating

even more popular resentment against the industry. This resentment can be neutered by heavier lobbying,

but this starts an escalation. The risk is that this escalation will end with an even more radical backlash

against the entire industry.




3
 Hulse, Carl And David M. Herszenhorn, 2009, House Approves 90% Tax on Bonuses After Bailouts, New York
Times, March 19, 2009.

                                                                                                              7
        This vicious circle is not unique to the finance industry. It is present in every industry. But it is

particularly strong in the financial industry, because of the importance that the rule of law plays in this

industry and because of the negative feelings this industry engenders even in regular times.



1.4 No easy way out

        How to break this vicious circle? The traditional response – more government regulation –

makes the problem worse. If the financial industry is good at buying out political power, it is even better

at capturing regulators. At every financial crisis we create a new regulator. The Federal Reserve was

created in 1913 to address the liquidity problems experienced during the panic of 1907. The Federal

Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) was born in 1933 to prevent the kind of bank runs that had forced

more than 5,000 banks to close in the early 1930s. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) came

into being in 1934 to prevent the stock-market manipulations that had prevailed during the 1920s. And the

Office of Thrift Supervision was created in 1989, following the savings-and-loan crisis of the late

eighties. The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) was created in response of the

Enron and WorldComm accounting scandals. The 2007-08 financial crisis brought us the Consumer

Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).

        All these agencies start with the best intentions. Hiring on the wake of a crisis, they are able to

attract highly motivated people, who want to make the difference. Over time, however, the sense of

purpose fades, while the constant pressure of the industry succeeds in winning over or pushing out even

the best people. From a tool to improve the functioning of markets, over time these agencies become a

club to consolidate the power of incumbents.

        This life-cycle theory of government agencies should not be used as an excuse for total laissez

faire. Without proper rules we do not have a well-functioning market: we have a jungle. Yet, it should be

kept in mind when thinking about how to intervene. In designing rules we economists need to think about

how these rules will be adapted and enforced under heavy lobbying pressure. For this reason, rules that

modify incentives ex ante rather than repress behavior ex post are to be preferred: enforcement can be

                                                                                                                8
more easily blocked by lobbying. Similarly, simpler rules approved by Congress are to be preferred to

complicated regulation implemented by captured agencies. Finally, rules that can be enforced by class

action suits are better, because it is easier to buy out an agency or a prosecutor than to buy out an entire

class (Zingales, 2012).

           Last but not least, regulation is not the only solution. As academics we can do a lot to ameliorate

the situation. Yet, we cannot do it if we do not believe there is a problem. Thus, I will start arguing that

we do have a problem and then I will outline what we can do about it.


    2. An Inflated View of the Benefits of Finance


Even the most severe critics of the financial sector agree that a good financial system is essential for a

well-functioning economy and that “over the long sweep of history, financial innovation has been

important in promoting growth” (Stiglitz, 2010). The real matters of contention are whether financial

innovation over the last 40 years has been beneficial and whether the size of the U.S. financial system has

outgrown its benefits. A common belief in our profession is that all that we observe is efficient. But do

we have any theory or any evidence to justify this conclusion?

2.1 Lack of theory

The First Welfare Theorem (Arrow and Debreu, 1954) demonstrates that in a competitive economy

individual choices lead to an allocation that is Pareto efficient. The First Welfare Theorem, however,

holds only if every relevant good is traded in a market at publicly known prices (i.e., if there is a complete

set of markets). When this condition is violated (as it generally is), the Pareto optimality of the

equilibrium is not guaranteed. More interestingly for the financial sector, Hart (1975) shows that starting

from an incomplete market economy, adding a market can make all agents worse off. Elul (1995) shows

that far from being an exception, Hart’s result is very robust and pervasive. Thus, there is no theoretical

basis for the presumption that financial innovation, by expanding financial opportunities, increases

welfare.




                                                                                                                 9
2.2 Lack of evidence

         There is a large body of evidence (summarized in Levine, 1997, 2005 and Beck, 2011)

documenting that on average a bigger banking sector (often measured as the ratio of private credit to

GDP) is correlated with higher growth, both cross-sectionally and over time.

         Besides the traditional issues with this cross-country analysis (Zingales, 2003), this evidence has

two problems in answering the question of whether the U.S. financial system is excessively big. First, that

the relationship exists on average does not imply it is still true on the margin. Second, in this large body

there is precious little evidence that shows the positive role of other forms of financial development,

particularly important in the United States: equity market, junk bond market, option and future markets,

interest rate swaps, etc.4

         More recent evidence has challenged that more credit is always good. Arcand et al. (2011) find

that there is a non-monotone relationship between credit to GDP and growth, with a tipping point when

credit to the private sector reaches around 80-100% of GDP. At this level, the marginal effect of financial

depth on output growth becomes negative. To a similar conclusion arrive Cecchetti and Carroubi (2012).

In fact, Schularick and Taylor (2012) go further and establish that lagged credit growth is a highly

significant predictor of financial crises and that financial stability risks increase with the size of the

financial sector. Similarly, Mian and Sufi (2014) identify in the rise of the ratio of debt to GDP (the flip

side of credit to GDP) the main culprit of the 2007-08 financial crisis. If anything, the empirical evidence

suggests that the credit expansion in the United States was excessive.

         The problem is even more severe for other parts of the financial system. There is remarkably little

evidence that the existence or the size of an equity market matters for growth. Da Rin et al. (2006) find

that in Europe the opening of a ‘New’ market for smaller companies had a positive and significant effect

on the proportion of private equity funds invested in early stage ventures and high-tech industries. It is

unclear, though, how much of this effect is specific to the internet bubble. Levine and Zervos (1998)

4
 As a measure of financial development Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) use bank deregulation and Rajan and
Zingales (1998b) use quality of accounting standards. Yet, even this evidence is unable to answer the question raised
at the beginning of this section.

                                                                                                                  10
estimate the correlation between various stock market measures and economic growth. Only market

turnover (value of domestic shares on domestic exchanges over domestic capitalization) is significantly

correlated with economic growth. A priori this would not have been the most obvious measure of

development. Thus, it is not clear how much this result is the product of data snooping. Furthermore, I am

not aware of any evidence that the creation and growth of the junk bond market, the option and futures

market, or the development of over-the-counter derivatives are positively correlated with economic

growth.

          In interpreting a body of empirical literature one has to use Sherlock Holmes’ famous principle of

the dog that didn’t bark. Before the 2007-08 financial crisis the incentives to write a paper documenting

the benefit of any of these markets was very high. The data were readily available. Thus, if no paper has

been published it is not for lack of trying, but for luck of any success in finding a statistically significant

result. Therefore, the lack of published evidence can be safely interpreted as evidence of lack of any

correlation. 5

          To this point it is interesting to note that all the above-mentioned evidence on the negative effects

of financial development was collected since the crisis even if based on pre-crisis data. Thus, the same

evidence could have been gathered before the crisis, but it was not. Why? It is possible that our profession

is subject to fads and the type of evidence we are looking for is affected by those fads as well. If so, the

body of empirical evidence should be interpreted in light of these fads.

2.3 Not guilty by association

          Between 1960 and 2012 while the financial industry grew from 4% of GDP to 8% of GDP, the

healthcare sector grew from 5% to 18%. If this explosion happened in other service sectors, doesn’t this

justify the growth in the financial sector?

          The healthcare sector is a particularly good comparison for the financial one. Both sectors

provide a service everybody needs, but very few people understand and thus both sectors depend heavily


5
 Of course, lack of statistical significance is often simply because of noise in the data. Thus, we cannot necessarily
conclude that the correlation is zero, but simply that all the existing measures will produce a zero correlation.

                                                                                                                     11
on trust. Both sectors are plagued by conflicts of interest and experience enormous abuse and fraud. In

both sectors, the buyers often do not bear the entire cost of their decisions. Finally, both sectors are much

bigger in the United States than in most other countries.

        Is this analogy a source of comfort or a source of worry? In both sectors, the government has

intervened massively and distorted the natural market forces. Both sectors lobby heavily to direct

government intervention to their own advantage. In 2014 they were at the top of the ranking for money

spent in lobbying with $369M (finance) and $367M (healthcare).6 Thus, the parallel dynamics is more

evidence of a common problem, rather than of the inexistence of a problem.

2.4 Money Doctors

In an attempt to explain the growing size of the money management business documented in Greenwood

and Scharfstein (2013), Gennaioli et al. (2014) argue that – like healthcare – finance is a service, which

people cannot perform on their own. While expensive, not using these professional services could be

worse because most people do not know much about these fields. According to this view, finance has

grown because the demand for this service has grown. This view is supported by Von Gaudecker

(forthcoming), who shows that financial illiterate workers benefit from financial advice: they gain roughly

50 bps of extra return per given level of risk.

        As for healthcare, though, the question is not whether people benefit from doctors, but what is the

cost-to-benefit ratio. In the United States healthcare expenditure over GDP is 18%, almost twice that of

the United Kingdom (9%), Sweden (10%), Canada (11%), and Germany (11%).7 The disproportionate

size of the U.S healthcare sector does not map into measurable benefits: the United States is only 32nd for

overall life expectancy below Portugal and Greece, in spite of spending more than four times as much per

capita. 8 In Sweden the share of finance over GDP is half of that in the United States. Are U.S. retirement

savings managed so much better than Swedish ones? The evidence in Cronqvist and Thaler (2004) seems

to suggest that is not the case.

6
  https://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/top.php?indexType=c&showYear=2014.
7
  http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.TOTL.ZS.
8
  World Health Organization, http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.688.

                                                                                                             12
         As for healthcare, the question is also whether the system can be designed in a better way. The

architecture of a country’s retirement system (public or private, defined benefit or defined contribution,

default options) has a big impact not only on its ability to fund pensions at a reasonable cost, but also on

the size, the profitability, and the efficiency of the financial system. The movement towards defined

contributions has significantly increased the share of GDP represented by asset management services

(Greenwood and Scharfstein, 2013), making the financial industry richer. 9 Was this good or bad for

society overall?


    3. An Hypertrophic Financial Sector


The last forty years have witnessed a major revolution in finance. While forty years ago the efficient

market theory (EMT) was dominant and Jensen (1978) could assert with confidence that “there is no other

proposition in economics which has more solid empirical evidence supporting it”, today it is hard to find

any financial economist under forty with such a sanguine position.

         The consequences of this revolution, however, have not been fully digested when it comes to

welfare analysis and regulation. When does finance help ordinary people and when does it take

advantage of them? Without the crutches of the EMT, the analysis is more nuanced (Zingales, 2010). We

cannot argue deductively that all finance is good. Yet, we do not want to fall in the opposite extreme that

all finance is bad or useless. To separate the wheat from the chaff, we need to identify the rent-seeking

components of finance, i.e. those activities that while profitable from an individual point of view are not

so from a societal point of view. In what follows I will focus on some corporate-finance examples,

ignoring others such as excessive information discovery (Hirshleifer (1971)) and trading (French (2008)).

I do so not necessarily because these are the most important cases, but because they are less discussed in

the literature.

3.1 Duping unsophisticated investors


9
 In 2010 U.S. households owned $10.1 trillion in retirement assets. At a conservative 100bps of management fee
per years, this represents a $100bn for the financial industry.

                                                                                                                 13
        In the financial sector “duping” takes place in two forms. There is the “straight” duping, where

investors are sold a product they do not understand and would have never wanted had they understood it,

and the “indirect” duping, where investors are attracted to product bundles that are very convenient for

sophisticated investors (who buy the cheap part and disregard the expensive one), but turns out to be

extremely costly for unsophisticated ones, who buy the whole bundle.

        The structured products sold to depositors throughout Europe belong to the first categories.

Celerier and Vallee (2013), for example, analyze 55,000 retail structured products issued in 17 European

countries from 2002 to 2010. They find that more complex products have higher markups and are sold to

less sophisticated investors. Consistent with Carlin (2009), they find that complexity increases with an

increase in competition, measured as the introduction of ETF products. Thus, complexity seems to be

used to increase search costs.

        Another example of “straight” duping are lemon securities sold to unsophisticated buyers. In fact,

the fear that commercial banks will dump on their depositors bonds of near-insolvent borrowers they do

not want to refinance was one of the reasons behind the 1933 legislation to separate investment and

commercial banks (also known as Glass Steagall Act). Kroszner and Rajan (1994) examine whether there

was any empirical basis for this fear in the years preceding the Glass Steagall Act and they find no

evidence that commercial banks systematically fooled the public. Yet, the same cannot be said for other

countries. Italian banks dumped Parmalat and Cirio bonds on their depositors shortly before these

companies went bankrupt (Maciocchi, 2012).

        Finally, an example of “straight” duping is represented by mortgages sufficiently complicated not

to be understood by borrowers. The level of complication does not need to be extreme. By using an

experiment of mandatory counseling in Illinois, Ben-David et al. (forthcoming) show that an

overwhelming majority of borrowers who were receiving adjustable rate loans did not understand that

their mortgage payment was not fixed over the life of the loan.

        A more sophisticated form of duping is the one studied by Gabaix and Laibson (2006). The basic

financial product is not a lemon, but it is packaged with some optional overpriced add-ons (e.g., a free

                                                                                                           14
credit card with extremely high late fees). Sophisticated consumers observe the price of the expensive

add-on even if it is shrouded and they limit their purchase to the base good, while unsophisticated

consumers do not pay attention to the price of the shrouded add-on and they buy it in addition to the base

good. In equilibrium the base good will be priced below the marginal cost because it will be subsidized by

the excessive profits on the shrouded add-on. Yet, the distortion will not be eliminated.

        These distortions are present in every sector, not just in finance. Yet, the financial sector provides

much greater opportunities for abuses, thanks to the flexibility provided by financial engineering. These

opportunities are so large that even governments take advantage of them. Subsidized credit is a very

popular form of government intervention because it is less transparent to the taxpayers. So are various

forms of financial engineering, such as the implicit bailout options to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and

many non-recourse loans granted by the Fed during the crisis. The use of financial engineering to disguise

reality is so pervasive that even governments use it. A senior official in the Bush administration

congratulated the Treasury and the Fed for their cleverness in designing a financial arrangement that hid

from Congress the cost of the subsidies to the financial industry (Swagel, 2009).

        Except for clear cases of fraud and for misrepresentation by the government, one may wonder

whether all these situations do not fall under the caveat emptor principle. Under this old principle, the

buyer cannot recover damages from the seller for defects on a property. This principle had two functions:

First, to create the incentives for the buyer to collect information about his purchases; second, to minimize

the possible litigation due to buyer’s remorse. When it comes to the securities’ market, we may wonder to

what extent it is efficient to require all investors to collect the same information. Especially when they are

de facto forced to become investors by some 401K plan.

3.2 Aiding and Abetting Agency Problems

        Frequent-flier miles for business customers are generally credited to the individual flying, not the

company paying for the ticket, a clever way to create brand loyalty and reduce price sensitivity.

Similarly, several drug companies provide customers with a rebate roughly equal to their out-of-pocket

expenses: another clever way to make customers insensitive to the price of the product. It is also a way to

                                                                                                            15
prey on the moral hazard present in healthcare. Insured customers tend to disregard prices and to over-

consume drugs. Principals (in this case the insurance companies that foot the bill) try to reduce this moral

hazard by introducing some co-payment. By introducing the rebate, pharmaceutical companies neuter the

insurance companies’ attempt to mitigate the moral hazard problem.

        As these examples suggest, exploiting customers’ agency problems is a very diffused and time-

honored technique. Of course, principals can react by requiring their employees to rebate their miles or

their insured people to pay back their drug rebates. These countermeasures, however, take time and they

are plagued with problems. Their efficacy depends very much on the speed of marketing innovation, the

flexibility of the technology to exploit these agency problems, and how present and active the principal is.

        Unfortunately, finance stands out in all three dimensions: innovation happens very fast; financial

engineering provides an extremely flexible tool to exploit agency problems; and the principles (be they

shareholders in publicly traded companies or taxpayers) are dispersed and almost incapacitated to move.

For this reason, financial products designed to prey on existing agency problems are very diffused.

        Most executive compensation packages, for example, are linked to stock prices through options

and to some financial variables, from earnings to cash flow. A clever use of derivatives can increase the

value of the options and the value of the stated earnings or cash flow per given true performance of the

company. For example, by increasing risk, derivatives can increase the value of the executives’ stock

options and by swapping a fixed rate with a floating rate, they can easily increase current earnings. A

board could try to sterilize the effects of these derivatives in the CEO’s compensation formula; however,

having served on a compensation committee, I can attest to how difficult this is, even when board

members have all the intention to do so, let alone when they are a little hesitant.

        The problem is obviously even more severe when the principal is the taxpayers. Perignon and

Vallee (2014) document this problem very clearly by looking at the actual borrowings of nearly 3,000

French local governments. They show that politicians use structured loans with artificially low initial

rates and substantial future coupon risk . They use them more frequently and to a larger extent when their

incentives to hide the cost of debt are strong, when their area is politically contested, and when their peers

                                                                                                            16
implement similar transactions. Thus, financial engineering makes the agency problem between voters

and elected politicians worse.

        The same can be said for much of regulation. When Greece was trying to meet the Maastricht

parameters to be admitted in the euro, it engaged in a series of currency and interest rate swaps. These

contracts were not based on the prevailing spot market rates of exchange at the time of the swap

transaction but on different ones. As a result “the Greek government debt was de facto reduced by EUR

2.4 billion by the conversion process” (EUROSTAT, 2010). “Normally, Greece should have made an

equivalent payment in cash in order to compensate its swap counterpart, with an unfavorable effect on the

government deficit. Instead the Greek authorities agreed that this above-mentioned lump sum would be

repaid through an off-market interest rate swap that was structured such that the repayment by Greece

would be spread by way of annual net interest payments until 2019, following a grace period of two years

for such payments. The impact on the deficit therefore appeared over many years and the impact on the

Greek accounts was low on a yearly basis” (EUROSTAT, 2010). Thus, the flexibility provided by

financial derivatives allowed Greece to run afoul of the Maastricht parameters. Apparently, Greece was

not the only one to do so (e.g. see Piga, 2001), but it is the one we know the best because the European

Union conducted an investigation after Greece was bailed out.

        The problem is not limited to sovereigns, but involves all regulated entities. According to recent

revelations, in early 2012 Goldman Sachs entered into a deal with Banco Santander, which a U.S.

regulator defined as “basically window dressing that’s designed to help Banco Santander artificially

enhance its capital” (Bernstein, 2014). The operation was not illegal, but it was designed with the main

purpose of bypassing crucial capital ratio requirements. This case is only one of many. How many?

Unfortunately, it is not easy to find out.

3.3 Is fraud a bug or a feature?

        Distortions and abuses are present in every industry. Rudman et al. (2009) estimate the cost of

fraud and abuse in the healthcare sector to be between $100 and $170 billion per year. Yet, the size and



                                                                                                           17
pervasiveness of fraud in the financial sectors seem to exceed the one in the healthcare sector, in spite of

being half its size.

           For the period 1996-2004, Dyck et al. (2014) estimate that the cost of (mostly financial) fraud

among U.S. companies with more than $750m in revenues is $380bn a year. Table 1 reports the fines

paid by financial institutions to U.S. enforcement agencies between January 2012 and December 2014.

The total amount is $139 bn, $113bn of which related to mortgage fraud. This severely underestimates the

magnitude of the problem. First, some of the main mortgage lenders (like New Century Financial) went

bankrupt and therefore were never charged. Second, even if the fraudulent institution did not go bankrupt,

it can effectively be sued only if it has enough capital. The table includes just one fine regarding Madoff,

for only 2.9bn, when the overall amount of the Madoff fraud totaled $64.8 bn. 10 Finally, Dyck et al.

(2014) estimate that only one fourth of the fraud are detected. Thus, the actual figure can easily be four

times the calculated amount.

           Fraud has also been documented on a large scale during the real estate bubble. Piskorski et al.

(forthcoming) find that close to 10% of the $2 trillion non-agency RMBS issued between 1999 and 2007

misreport occupancy status of borrower and/or second liens. These results are also supported by the

declaration of a whistleblower inside JPMorgan Chase who reports that 40 percent of the mortgages of

some RMBS were based on overstated incomes (Querner, 2014).

           Not to mention the Ponzi scheme organized by Madoff. Instead of offering phenomenal returns to

attract investors, Madoff offered very stable, but fraudulent, returns.

           What is unique is not just the magnitude of fraud, but the fact that most people committing it

seem to have got away with it, leaving shareholders to bear the cost. While Madoff is in jail, I am not

aware of any financial executive in jail for the $113bn of mortgage related fraud, nor for the Libor

scandal.

           Finally, the pervasiveness of the fraud is remarkable. From Libor fixing to exchange rate

manipulation, there is hardly any activity untouched by fraud. But even more remarkable is the

10
     Bray, Chad, 2009, “Madoff Pleads Guilty to Massive Fraud”. The Wall Street Journal, March 12.

                                                                                                             18
nonchalance of the people committing it. For example one of the many email exchanges between

employees of the Royal Bank of Scotland recites:

          Senior Yen Trader: the whole HF (hedge fund) world will be kissing you instead of calling me if
                                             libor move lower
                      Yen Trader 1: ok, i will move the curve down 1bp maybe more if I can
                             Senior Yen Trader: maybe after tomorrow fixing hehehe
                              Yen Trader 1: fine will go with same as yesterday then
                                              Senior Yen Trader: cool
                                 Yen Trader 1: maybe a touch higher tomorrow.11


There is no attempt to hide what they are doing, no sense of guilt. It is ordinary business.

         I fear that in the financial sector fraud has become a feature and not a bug. In the medical field,

doctors might over-use expensive procedures, but they certainly do not boast that they are doing it with

their colleagues. The Hippocratic Oath makes it socially unacceptable for a doctor to maximize income at

the expense of patients.

         The same is not true in finance. We teach our students how to maximize the tax advantage of debt

and how to exploit any arbitrage opportunity. Customers are often not seen as people to respect, but as

counterparties to take to the cleaners. It should not come as a surprise, thus, that – according to a

whistleblower – investment bankers were referring to their clients as Muppets.12 If the only goal is

enrichment, there is a risk that abuses and fraud become not a distortion, but a continuation of the same

strategy by other means. 13



3.4 The Distortionary Role Played by the Government

         All too often, the inefficiencies of the financial sector are blamed only on market imperfections

and government intervention is invoked as the solution (e.g., Stiglitz, 1991). This approach ignores that


11
   http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2013/02/06/libor-scandal-outrageous-traders-exchanges_n_2630945.html.
12
   “I have seen five different managing directors refer to their own clients as ‘muppets,’ sometimes over internal e-
mail” writes Greg Smith in “Why I Am Leaving Goldman Sachs,” New York Times, March 14, 2012.
13
   There are two movements that attempt to create in students the mindset that doctors have: the MBA Oath
movement (http://mbaoath.org/), which exhorts MBAs to be “Value Creators”, and “client-centeredness”, which
focuses on maximizing the value for the client. Both approaches suffer from some vagueness in their prescriptions
and generate some other tensions (for example, similar to the tension between doctors and management).

                                                                                                                    19
the observed inefficiency of the financial sectors is often not the result of market imperfections, but of

government interventions themselves.

          The most famous example is the put option provided by the Government to the financial sector.

As Kelly et al. (2012) show, during the 2007-08 financial crisis stock prices reflected a collective

guarantee for the financial sector. At the peak of the crisis, the market value of this implicit put option

exceeded $100bn, reducing banks’ cost of equity. As I will discuss in more detail later, when there is free

entry the effect of a subsidy is to increase disproportionately the size of the sector.

          Another example is provided by the two government-sponsored mortgage giants (Fannie Mae and

Freddie Mac), which had ability to borrow with an implicit government guarantee (guarantee that became

explicit in the summer of 2008). In 2000, the subsidy for Fannie alone was estimated at $6.1 billion and in

2003 at $13.6 billion. 14 When the need to intervene materialized, the effective cost was more than $180

billion. 15

          The mistake often made is to attribute this government intervention to some populist pressure to

promote low-income housing, against the interest of the financial industry. In fact, the financial industry

was quite happy to receive a government subsidy in the form of underpriced insurance against default,

and promoting low-income housing was just a noble excuse. Lobbying does not work very effectively

without the cover of some noble ideas, and what is nobler than providing a house to every American?

          Unfortunately, in this case (unlike in the Government put option), academia did not play its

positive role. By using its privileges to guard internal data closely, Fannie was able to prevent most

independent researchers from assessing its performance. As a result, most of the research available on

Fannie was research that Fannie authorized or paid for. In 2002, Fannie Mae commissioned a reassuring

paper stating that “This analysis shows that, based on historical data, the probability of a shock as severe




14
  Congressional Budget Office, “Updated Estimates of the Subsidies to the Housing GSEs,” April 2004.
15
  Congressional Budget Office, “The Budgetary Cost of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and Options for the Future
Federal Role in the Secondary Mortgage Market”, Testimony of Deborah Lucas before the US House of
Representatives Committee on the Budget, June 2, 2011.

                                                                                                              20
as embodied in the risk-based capital standard is substantially less than one in 500,000—and may be

smaller than one in three million.” 16

        Fannie’s influence in academia, however, was not limited to the occasional paid-for paper. In a

textbook example of how economists can be “captured” just as regulators can, Fannie Mae financially

backed the two leading academic journals in housing research, Housing Policy Debate and the Journal of

Housing Research. Not surprisingly, the articles in these journals were not terribly critical of Fannie Mae.

Morgenson and Rosner (2011) report that a bank lobbyist trying to hire a housing expert to take on Fannie

Mae admitted: “I tried to find academics that would do research on these issues and Fannie had bought off

all the academics in housing. I had people say to me ‘Are you going to give me stipends for the next 20

years like Fannie will?’”



3.5 Economic Consequences

        The economic consequences of all these distortions differ widely. When regulation is useful,

regulatory arbitrage has important welfare costs, as is likely to be the case in the two examples provided

above. When regulation is inefficient and serving just the interest of the large incumbents, regulatory

arbitrage might actually decrease existing distortions, with welfare benefits. Unfortunately, we do not

know how to identify the two scenarios ex ante. Lacking a theory of how frequently regulation is

inefficient and how inefficient it is, it is impossible to make an average statement about the overall cost of

regulatory arbitrage. To the extent, however, that at least some of the regulatory arbitrage is inefficient (as

in the two examples provided above), resources are wasted in the process.

        Preying on agency costs is likely to always lead to inefficiencies. Even if principles can prevent it

through ex ante contractual restrictions, these restrictions are likely to be either costly (because they

prevent some legitimate actions) or incomplete (because they cannot fully prevent the additional

opportunism). Thus, all these components of finance are redundant.


16
 Joseph E. Stiglitz, Jonathan M. Orszag and Peter R. Orszag, “Implications of the New Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac Risk-based Capital Standard,” Fannie Mae Papers, 2002, vol. 1 (2), page 2.

                                                                                                               21
         Much of the “duping” and fraud is pure redistribution from the duped to the dupers. As

economists we tend to be fairly silent about the welfare effect of wealth redistribution, because we do not

want to engage in interpersonal utility comparisons. Yet, there are several important aspects that should

be considered.

         First, this is no costless redistribution. In fact, given the high salaries of the financial sector

(Philippon and Reshef, 2009), the deadweight loss can be pretty substantial.

         Second, redistributing resources from the (relatively) poor to the (relatively) rich is not an activity

that enhances the reputation of the financial industry.

         Another important dimension is where innovation efforts take place. If the most profitable line of

business is to dupe investors with complex financial products, competitive pressure will induce financial

firms to innovate along that dimension, with a double loss to society: talents are wasted in search for

better duping opportunities and the mistrust towards the financial sector increases.

         Last but not least, all these relatively easy profit opportunities in a sector with no barrier to entry

lead to excessive entry in the sector. The point is best illustrated with an example. Before the internet

made shopping for properties easy, American realtors possessed a huge source of market power: the

Multiple Listing Service (MLS), a central repository of all properties available for purchase. All realtors

who used the MLS abided by a type of contract that made it extremely difficult for buyers and sellers to

compete on price, guaranteeing realtors a commission of 6% of the property’s purchase price.17 Since it

is relatively simple and inexpensive to become a licensed realtor, this market – like the finance market –

is characterized by free entry. The combination of some monopoly power and free entry leads to a bloated

and less productive realtor industry.

         Hsieh and Moretti (2003) demonstrate this point empirically, using variation in land – instead of house

– prices across U.S. cities. If land prices go up, a house does not become any more difficult to sell. Yet, if the

realtor commission stays fixed, selling a house becomes more lucrative thanks to the land’s escalating value.

   17
      When the seller negotiates a lower commission, he must not only bargain with his own real estate agent, but
also with the prospective buyer’s agent, who holds a big bargaining chip: the power to steer his client away from the
property.

                                                                                                                  22
The effect is an increase in the fraction of the labor force working as real estate agents, lower productivity

(sales per agent or sales per hour worked) among real estate agents, and real wages that remain flat.

         What happened in the real estate sector is happening to the financial sector. When it is easy to dupe

investors or to prey on their agency problems, many more people will try to enter the industry. The main

difference is that entry into real estate brokering is fairly fast: one has to take a relatively easy state license

exam and he is in. The same is not true for the financial sector. Much of the reputation is associated to the firm,

not the individual. Thus, new entrants have to climb the ladder inside existing organizations. Thus, the

equalization of compensations takes longer.



4. What can we do in empirical research?

4.1 Whistleblower

“Publicity,” wrote Justice Louis Brandeis (1914), “is justly commended as a remedy for social and

industrial diseases.” Thus, our primary contribution as researchers is to expose these distortions, to act as

whistleblowers. When the necessary data to conduct the research are broadly accessible, this seems to

work. The competition among academics to write interesting papers to advance their career contributes to

uncover scandals. From collusive quotes on NASDAQ (Christie and Schultz, 1994) to postdated stock

options (Lie, 2005), from overinflated house transaction prices (Ben-David, 2011) to disappearing

analysts’ recommendations (Ljungqvist et al., 2009), academic research has identified many improprieties

in the financial industry.

         In pure Adam Smith fashion, competition in the academic field ensures that the pursuit of self-

interest delivers the common good. Ritter (2008) summarizes the many cases in which “forensic” finance

uncovered some wrongdoing. Yet, this mechanism does not always work well. We academics have been

late in spotting mortgage fraud. Even today there are only two academic papers documenting it (Piskorski

et al., 2013; Griffin and Maturana, forthcoming). I fear this mechanism works well only when the data to

conduct the research are broadly accessible.




                                                                                                                      23
         Unfortunately, this is increasingly not the case. In spite of their quasi-government status, Fannie

and Freddie kept their data closely guarded, preventing any academic inquiry into their activities. In other

cases, companies and regulators use access to their data to indirectly influence research. Access to

proprietary data provides a unique advantage in a highly competitive academic market. To obtain those

data, academic economists generally have to maintain a reputation for treating their sources favorably.

Therefore there are incentives to cater to the industry or the political authority that controls the data

(Zingales, 2014).

         The problem is potentially even more severe with regulators, who have captive research

departments. Regulators, being hierarchical organizations, have hierarchy vet all research done inside

their organization, especially the one done with proprietary data. This vetting is often done both ex ante

(on the basis of the results they expect to find) and ex post (on the basis of the results that have been

found). Even when regulators are not captured by the industry, they tend to be very risk-averse: they do

not want a scandal under their watch. This is the reason why they tend to be very averse to granting

access to data to independent researchers: they fear they would uncover something inconvenient. They do

not appreciate that independent researchers are their allies, not their enemies.

         When I was a young assistant professor I worked with confidential data at the Bank of Italy. I

inquired if I could use it to test whether industrialists sitting on a bank’s board were getting a sweetheart

deal from the bank. It is a question the Bank of Italy, as supervisor and, at the time, regulator of the entire

Italian banking sector, should have found interesting. In spite of the potential regulatory implications, I

was stonewalled. In my naïveté, I could not understand why bank officials seemed uninterested in finding

out the truth. Now that I am older and more cynical, I think that the bank had no desire to confront reality.

Its officials doubtless suspected the truth but wished to keep it hidden, to avoid a scandal under their

watch.

         Unfortunately, these episodes are not restricted to other countries; they do take place in the

United States as well. They create a potentially serious sample selection in the type of questions that can

be analyzed and hence in the published evidence.

                                                                                                              24
4.2 Ex Post Cost Benefit Analysis

         “Publicity” does not work only against fraud, it can also work to favor evidence-based regulation.

To understand this mechanism, let us consider a concrete example of a controversial financial innovation:

payday loans. Payday loans are a form of regulatory arbitrage around anti-usury laws. Payday lenders,

instead of charging high rates, charge ‘fees’ ($15 to $20 per $100 principal balance) for unsecured loans

with a very short time horizon (two to four weeks), with rates above 400% per year.

         Introduced in the early 1990s, payday loans exploded in the United States in the following two

decades. Today 12 million Americans per year use payday loans, spending on average $520 in interest for

loans of average size of just $375. 18 There are more payday-loan shops than McDonald’s and Starbucks

stores combined (Zinman, 2010).

         Not surprisingly, this practice is very controversial and it is has been banned in several states.

Yet, it could be defended as a unique financing opportunity for low income people, who have nothing

otherwise. Without it, low income people will find it impossible to cope with unexpected shocks or will

have to rely on loan sharks or internet payday loans, with worse consequences. Both arguments have

some validity, thus only empirical work can tell us which is the practical relevance of the two sides of the

story.

         Academic papers find some support for both sides of the argument. Melzer (2011) documents that

access to payday loans increases real indicators of economic distress, such as difficulties in paying bills,

delaying medical care, and skipping on purchasing prescription medicines, by 25 percent. Similarly,

Carrell and Zinman (2010) find that payday loan access adversely affects the job performance and

readiness of U.S. aviators: it increased by 5.3% the likelihood that an airman was sanctioned for critically

poor readiness and by 3.9% the likelihood that he was ineligible to re-enlist.




18
  The Pew Charitable Trusts, 2012, “Payday Lending in America: Who Borrows, Where They Borrow, and Why”
http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2012/PewPaydayLendingReportpdf.pdf.

                                                                                                              25
         On the other side, in Morse (2011) access to payday loans lowers the likelihood of foreclosure

after natural disasters by over 20 percent and in Zinman (2010) restrictions on payday loans introduced in

Oregon appear to have worsened the overall financial conditions of Oregon households vis-à-vis

Washington ones.

         These different results only appear to be in contradiction. In reality, they reflect the heterogeneity

in the use of payday loans. To appreciate it, we need to understand that when most borrowers (69%) use

payday loans, they are doing so to cover ordinary living expenses, not to meet unexpected emergencies.19

Given the very high cost of this type of borrowing, in most (but not all) situations the optimal response to

a shock would be to cut ordinary expenses, which is precisely what they say they would have done

without access to payday loans. 20 The question is whether reductions in ordinary expenses could be

accomplished at the pace needed to cover shortfalls. The contractual design of payday loans, however,

does not lead naturally to such adjustment. Since the loan is due in full at maturity, most borrowers find

impossible to repay the loan in a single income cycle, triggering a spiral of additional borrowing.

         In 2010, the state of Colorado tried to eliminate this feature of payday lending by mandating that

they be offered in the form of installment loans. A legitimate question is why this contractual form should

be mandated. The simple reason – very much in line with Gabaix and Laibson (2005) – is that

unsophisticated borrowers cannot appreciate the convenience of installment loans. When they do not,

lenders prefer conventional payday loans because they make customers borrow repeatedly, maximizing

the fees they can charge.

         The experience in Colorado is very positive. Three years after the reform, borrowers spent 44

percent less in interest than they had in 2009 under the conventional payday loan model, saving $41.9

million. 21

19
   The Pew Charitable Trusts, 2012, “Payday Lending in America: Who Borrows, Where They Borrow, and Why”
http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2012/PewPaydayLendingReportpdf.pdf.
20
   The Pew Charitable Trusts, 2012, “Payday Lending in America: Who Borrows, Where They Borrow, and Why”
http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2012/PewPaydayLendingReportpdf.pdf.
21
   The Pew Charitable Trusts, 2013, “Payday Lending in America: Policy Solutions
file:///C:/UserData/work/Afa_address/pay_day_loans/PewPaydayPolicySolutionsOct2013pdf.pdf


                                                                                                             26
        Given such a drastic reduction in fees paid to lenders, it is entirely relevant to consider what

happened to the payday lending supply. In fact, supply of loans increased. The explanation relies upon the

elimination of two inefficiencies. First, less bankruptcies. Second, the reduction of excessive entry in the

sector. Half of Colorado’s stores closed in the three years following the reform, but each remaining store

served 80 percent more customers , with no evidence of a reduced access to funds.

        This result is consistent with Avery and Samolyk (2010), who find that states with no rate limits

tend to have more payday loan stores per capita. In other words, when payday lenders can charge very

high rates, too many lenders enter the sector, reducing the profitability of each one of them. Similar to the

real estate brokers, in the presence of free entry, the possibility of charging abnormal profit margins lead

to too many firms in the industry, each operating below the optimal scale (Flannery and Samolyk, 2007),

and thus making only normal profits.

        Interestingly, the efficient outcome cannot be achieved without mandatory regulation. Customers

who are charged the very high rates do not fully appreciate that the cost is higher than if they were in a

loan product which does not induce the spiral of unnecessary loan float and thus higher default. In the

presence of this distortion, lenders find the opportunity to charge very high fees to be irresistible, a form

of catering products to profit from cognitive limitations of the customers (Campbell, 2006). Hence, the

payday loan industry has excessive entry and firms operating below the efficient scale. Competition alone

will not fix the problem, in fact it might make it worse, because payday lenders will compete in finding

more sophisticated ways to charge very high fees to naïve customers, exacerbating both the over-

borrowing and the excessive entry. Competition works only if we restrict the dimension in which

competition takes place: if unsecured lending to lower income people can take place only in the form of

installment loans, competition will lower the cost of these loans.

        The problem is how this solution is going to emerge politically. Industry lobbyists will not be in

favor of setting caps on rates, even if this might end up increasing the profitability of the surviving firms,

because it will damage many of the incumbents in their interest group. Unsophisticated customers are

unable to appreciate the cost of conventional payday loans in the marketplace, let along to organize

                                                                                                             27
politically to fight them. The only political constituency for change would be the people impoverished by

the spiral of borrowing. But these people will lobby to prohibit payday lenders, rather than to modify the

way they are run. Who is going to lobby for these restrictions that level the playing field and make the

economy more productive, but do not shut down the industry?

        While some seminal work in this area had been done by academics, the assessment of the

Colorado initiative has been done by the Pew Foundation. I wonder to what extent there are not enough

incentives, from an academic point of view, to produce this research. If profitable trading strategies are

considered publishable research, why shouldn’t well-done policy program evaluations?


    5. What can we do in theoretical research?


All researchers are affected by fads, by their ideological beliefs, and are biased by interests they are often

not aware of (Kuhn, 1962). We economists are no different. Yet, the rigor of our formal analysis provides

us with an important tool to try and resist all these undue influences.

        The framework we have developed is not always realistic and often needs to be adapted and

changed. What we should avoid, though, is the ad hoc adaptations of the framework to avoid falsification,

as described by Kuhn (1962) and as occurs so frequently in our field. To try and minimize our inevitable

biases, we should start from first-principles and let the model tell us the results, not the other way around.

In particular, we need to pay attention to the following three issues.

5.1 Be rigorous, not policy-relevant

        When we engage in policy work we try to be relevant. Theoretical work needs to be first and

foremost rigorous, not policy-relevant. If our main goal is to be policy-relevant, we can do empirical

work. The reason why rigor is so important is that our set of tools is so powerful that we run the risk that

our models become simply an elegant formalization of the consensus. Good theoretical work, by contrast,

makes us see the world differently.

        Unfortunately, all too often we run the risk of succumbing to the temptation of policy-relevant

theory for fear of becoming irrelevant. Suppose – for example – that there are two methods to curb the

                                                                                                             28
too-big-to-fail problem. One solves the problem completely, but it is very costly for banks. The other one

provides only a partial solution, but it is much less costly to banks. Which approach would an economist,

who wants to be relevant, advocate? Obviously, the second one. By advocating the first one, he would be

considered unrealistic. He will not be invited to major conferences (often sponsored by banks or by

regulators who are captured by banks) and his papers would probably be rejected from the major

economic journals where editors will prefer to publish “more realistic” schemes.

5.2 Policy vs. Politics

Many policy-oriented economists think that “to take public positions on important policy issues without

knowledge of the political process is a big mistake,” where “knowledge of the political process” should

be read as “the political constraints imposed by lobbying.” 22

           These constraints should be considered by politicians. “Politics – Otto Von Bismarck said –is the

art of the possible, the attainable — the art of the next best.” These constraints should also be studied by

political economists. But they should not be at the forefront of our economic analysis. The reason is not

that they are not relevant, the reason is that they inevitably embed the lobbying pressure of the powerful

incumbents. By incorporating them in our analysis we run the risk of becoming (inadvertently) the mouth

piece of those interests.

           Eliminating the tax advantage of debt, for example, does not strike me as a very politically

feasible proposal. But it is certainly the right proposal to eliminate many financing distortions. Ignoring it

and marketing alternative proposals only contributes to making it more difficult that the tax distortion will

be eventually eliminated.

           For this reason it is very important to separate policy from politics and advocacy. We need more

of the first in our academic literature, less of the second.

5.3 Keep it simple, stupid




22
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2009, page 76.

                                                                                                            29
When we economists try to derive policy implications, we tend to prefer elaborate solutions: they show

our cleverness and they demonstrate the importance of our technical expertise. In so doing, however, we

ignore some important considerations.

         First, when the possibility of arbitrage and manipulation is considered, the best (most robust)

solutions tend to be the simplest ones. This is, for example, the case in Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987),

where they show that linear incentives schemes are optimal when the possibility of inter-temporal

arbitrages is considered. In the same spirit, Innes (1990) shows that when an agent can hide output at no

cost, a simple debt contract is the optimal contract to overcome a moral hazard problem with limited

liability.

         Second, simple rules also facilitate accountability (Glaeser and Shleifer, 2001). Complicated rules

are difficult to enforce even under the best circumstances, and impossible when their enforcement is the

domain of captured agencies. In the context of regulation, however, there is one added benefit of

simplicity. Not only does simple regulation reduce lobbying costs and distortions; it also makes it easier

for the public to monitor, reducing the amount of capture.

         Finally, when we factor in the enforcement and lobbying costs, simpler choices, which might

have looked inefficient at first, often turn out to be optimal in a broader sense. Thus, we should make an

effort to propose simple solutions, which are easier to explain to people and easier to enforce and monitor.

         For example, a simple way to deal with the problem of unsophisticated investors being duped is

to put the liability on the sellers. Just like brokers have to prove that they sold options only to

sophisticated buyers, the same should be true for other instruments like double short ETF.

         This shift in the liability rule (Caveat Venditor) risks shutting off ordinary people from access to

financial services. For this reason, there should be an exemption for some very basic instruments – like

fixed rate mortgages and a broad stock market index ETF. 23


23
  One risk of such a system is excessive litigation. Obviously, this litigation would only take place when the
unsophisticated counterparty loses money. Thus, for unsophisticated people investing in risky products would be a
one way bet. I do not see this problem as significant. First, after a few litigations, the major players will choose to
get out of selling complicated products to unsophisticated people, avoiding the problem altogether. Second, the

                                                                                                                      30
        Similarly, the simple (in fact ideal solution) to reduce several agency problems that can be

exploited by financial instruments is to reduce the magnitude of these agency problems. In particular, the

problem between shareholders and managers is quite severe and there are many margins for

improvement.

        Even ignoring those margins, though, there are simple mechanisms to limit the proliferation of

financial instruments aimed at preying on agency problems. The first (and simplest) one is to make

mandatory, in addition to the standard financial accounts, also derivative-free financial accounts. This will

eliminate any opacity and ambiguity. It will not prevent good transactions, but it will stop the bad ones. It

is reasonable to expect that the politicians in French local governments studied by Perignon and Vallee

(2014) would not have bought structured loans if such disclosure were in place.

        There is also a simple way to prevent regulatory-arbitrage transactions while not curbing financial

innovation that could be valuable: to make investment banks liable for aiding and abetting regulation-

avoidance. In tax law we already have a principle that any transaction designed for the sole purpose of

reducing taxes is illegal. It amounts to extending this principle to regulation.

        What about bad regulation? Isn’t this rule giving an excessive amount of power to regulators,

power that can be abused? First of all, short of wanting zero regulation, it is not obvious what is the

purpose of having easing regulatory arbitrage. Second, the problem could be easily solved by creating an

“efficiency exception” in the aiding and abetting rule. If the investment bank can prove that the rule it was

aiding to bypass was an inefficient and senseless rule, then the charge will be dropped.

6. What can we do in teaching?

        The RBS emails reported above, like many others clues, seem to suggest that the moral standards

in the financial industry are very low. One possible reason is self-selection. After all, as Rajan (2010)

argues, money is the only metric in the financial world. Thus, people motivated by other goals prefer to

enter different businesses. There is some evidence (Frey and Meier, 2003) that business economics


uncertainty could be limited by some guidelines issued by the American Finance Association on what is deemed as
an appropriate instrument for various categories of buyers (not unlike what the AMA does for medicines).

                                                                                                              31
students are more selfish than the average student and that higher level of selfishness is due to self-

selection, not indoctrination. 24

         Yet, indoctrination seems to be playing a role. Cohen et al. (2014) show that employees of a large

international bank behave more dishonestly when their professional identity as bank employees is

rendered salient. This effect is unique to bank employees because employees from other industries do not

become more dishonest when their professional identity or bank-related items are rendered salient. This

experiment suggests that the prevailing business culture in the banking industry undermines honesty

norm. This result is consistent with Wang et al. (2011), who show in an experiment that the teaching of

economics makes students more selfish and less concerned about the common good. Are we training

people to be (more) dishonest?

         Our standard defense is that we are scientists, not moral philosophers. Just like physicists do not

teach how atoms should behave, but how they do behave, so should we. Yet, physicists do not teach to

atoms and atoms do not have free will. If they did, physicists would be concerned about how the atoms

being instructed could change their behavior and affect the universe. Shouldn’t we be concerned about the

effect of our “scientific” teaching?

         A former student of Gary Becker’s once admitted to me that many of his classmates were

remarkably amoral. He attributed this to the fact that – in spite of the teacher’s intentions – they took

Becker’s (1968) descriptive model of crime as prescriptive. We label as “irrational” not committing a

crime when the expected benefit exceeds the expected punishment. Most people call this behavior moral.

Is being agnostic subtly teaching students the most amoral behavior, without us taking any responsibility?

         I fear so. We should not relegate our prescriptive analysis to separate, poorly attended courses,

validating the implicit assumption that social norms are a matter of interest only for the less bright

students. There are several social norms that are crucial to the flourishing of a market economy. We



24
  Not all papers find economists to be selfish and amoral. For example, Laband and Beil (1999) find that a majority
of economists pay the highest level of dues to the American Economic Association (based on self-reported income).
Furthermore, the rate of cheating (based on imputed income) is similar to that of sociologists and political scientists.

                                                                                                                     32
should teach them in our regular classes, at the very least emphasizing how violating these norms has

negative effect on reputation.

         We should also be much more transparent on the negative aspects of the financial industry, from

rent-seeking behavior to captured regulation, from inefficient boards to outright fraud. Unfortunately,

business cases do not help us in this dimension. Most of them are field-based, i.e. they rely on private

information provided by the company. The explicit quid-pro-quo is that the author will request the

company’s approval before release. The implicit one is a positive spin in exchange for access to

interesting information. As we describe in Dyck and Zingales (2003), some companies actively manage

their information release to shape the cases. While there is more to be learned from failures, cases tend to

celebrate successes and be fairly acritical toward business. For example, to find problems with venture

capitalists, one has to read marketing cases, not finance ones (Najjar et al, 2002). While some of these

biases might be inevitable, the more aware we become, the more we can correct them.

7. Conclusion

As a profession we financial economists have been too proud of the technical achievements and the

economic successes of our discipline and too complacent of its shortcomings. There is a large gap

between our self-perception and the outside perception of our role in society, a gap that can undermine the

political viability of a well-functioning financial system. A competitive and inclusive financial system can

exist only if the rule of law is respected and expected to be respected in the future. Yet, this expectation is

unsustainable if there is a major public resentment against the financial system at large.

         It is incumbent upon us academics to fill this gap. On the one hand, we need to better explain and

document the contribution of finance to society. On the other hand, we need to appreciate that some of the

criticisms that are raised against us are founded. Most importantly, we need to guard against the risks of

becoming simple mouthpieces of the financial industry.

         In this article I outline some steps we can take as a profession. Yet, the most important one is

awareness of the problem. Without it, no solution can work. I hope with this piece to plant a seed. Only

time will tell if it will flourish.

                                                                                                            33
                                               References

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas D. Evanoff,
      2014, Predatory lending and the subprime crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 113, 29–52.

Arcand, Jean-Louis, Enrico Berkes, and Ugo Panizza, 2012, Too much finance? Working Paper
       WP/12/161, International Monetary Fund.

Arrow, Kenneth J., and Gerard Debreu, 1954, Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive economy,
       Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 265–290.

Avery, Robert B, and Katherine A. Samolyk, 2011, Payday loans versus pawnshops: The effects of loan
       fee limits on household use, Federal Reserve System Research Conference, Arlington, Virginia.

Beck, Thorsten, A Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2007, Finance, inequality and the poor, Journal of
       Economic Growth 12 (1), 27-49.

Beck, Thorsten, December 2011, The role of finance in economic development: Benefits, risks, and
       politics, European Banking Center, Discussion Paper no. 2011-038.

Becker, Gary, 1968, Crime and punishment: An economic approach, Journal of Political Economy 169.

Ben-David, Itzhak , 2011, “Financial Constraints and Inflated Home Prices During the Real-Estate
      Boom,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, vol. 3 (3): 55–78.

Bernstein, Jake, 17 November 2014, The Carmen Segarra tapes, ProPublica.

Bourke, Nick, Alex Horowitz, Walter Lake, and Tara Roche, October 2013, Payday lending in America:
       Policy solutions, (Washington, DC: Pew Charitable Trusts)
       http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2013/pewpaydaypolicysolutio
       nsoct2013pdf.pdf.

Bourke, Nick, Alex Horowitz, and Tara Roche, 2012, Payday lending in America: Who borrows, where
       they borrow, and why, (Washington, DC: Pew Charitable Trusts) http://www. pewtrusts.
       org/uploadedFiles/wwwpewtrustsorg/Reports/Safe_Small_Dollar_ Loans/LOANS_Payday%
       20Lending% 20Report% 20Final_web. pdf.

Bray, Chad, 2009, “Madoff Pleads Guilty to Massive Fraud". The Wall Street Journal, March 12.

Brandeis, Louis D., 2009, Other people’s money: And how bankers use it (New York: F.A. Stokes, 1914).

Campbell JY, 2006, Household Finance. Journal of Finance. 2006;LXI(4):1553-1604

Carrell, Scott, and Jonathan Zinman, 2014, In harm's way? Payday loan access and military personnel
         performance, Review of Financial Studies 27, 2805–2840.

Cecchetti Stephen G. and Enisse Kharroubi, 2012, Reassessing the impact of finance on growth, BIS
       working paper no. 381.


                                                                                                      34
Célérier, Claire, and Boris Vallée, 2013, What drives financial complexity? A look into the retail market
        for structured products, A Look into the Retail Market for Structured Products (July 1, 2013).
        Paris December 2012 Finance Meeting EUROFIDAI-AFFI Paper.

Christie, William G. and Paul H. Schultz, 1994, “Why Do NASDAQ Market Makers Avoid Odd-Eighth
        Quotes?,” Journal of Finance, vol. 49 (5): 1813–1840.

Cohn, Alain, Ernst Fehr, and Michel André Maréchal, 2014, Business culture and dishonesty in the
       banking industry, Nature 516, 86–89.

Cronqvist, Henrik, and Richard H. Thaler, 2004, Design choices in privatized social-security systems:
       Learning from the Swedish experience, American Economic Review 94.2, 425–428.

Da Rin, Marco, Giovanna Nicodano, and Alessandro Sembenelli, September 2006, Public policy and the
        creation of active venture capital markets, Journal of Public Economics 80(8-9), 1699—1723.

Di Tella, Rafael, and Robert MacCulloch. "Why Doesn't Capitalism Flow to Poor Countries?" Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity (spring 2009): 285–321.

Dyck , Alexander and Luigi Zingales, 2003 , “The Bubble and the Media” in Cornelius, Peter and Kogut,
        Bruce (eds.) Corporate Governance and Capital Flows in a Global Economy, New York, Oxford
        University Press

Dyck, Alexander, Adair Morse, and Luigi Zingales, 2014, How pervasive is corporate fraud? Work Paper
       No. 2222608, Rotman School of Management.

Elul, Ronel, 1995, Welfare effects of financial innovation in incomplete markets economies with several
        consumption goods, Journal of Economic Theory 65, 43–78.

EUROSTAT, 2010, Report on the edp methodological visits to Greece in 2010 (European Comission).

Ferguson, Niall, and Jonathan Schlefer, September 9, 2009, Who broke the Bank of England? Harvard
       Business School BGIE Unit Case No. 709-026.

Flannery, Mark J., and Katherine A. Samolyk, 1 June 2007, Scale economies at payday loan stores,
       Proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago’s 43rd Annual Conference on Bank
       Structure and Competition (May 2007), Chicago, IL, 233–259.

Flug, Karnit, Antonio Spilimbergo, and Erik Wachtenheim, April 1998, Investment in education: do
       economic volatility and credit constraints matter? Journal of Development Economics 55 (2),
       465–481.

Foa, Gabriel, Leonardo Gambacorta, Luigi Guiso, and Paolo Emilio Mistrulli, 2013, The supply side of
       housing finance, EIEF working Paper.

French, Kenneth, August 2008, The cost of active investing, Journal of Finance 63, 1537-1573.

Frey and Meier, 2003. “Are political economists selfish and indoctrinated? Evidence from a natural
       experiment”, Economic Inquiry 41:448-462.

                                                                                                        35
Froot, Kenneth A., David S. Scharfstein, Jeremy C. Stein, 1993, Risk management: Coordinating
        corporate investment and financing policies, The Journal of Finance 48 (5), 1629–1658.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2014, Finance and the Preservation of Wealth,
       The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3), 1221-1254.

Glaeser, Edward and Andrei Shleifer, 2011, A reason for quantity regulation, American Economic
        Review, 431–435.

Goldman, Dana, and Elizabeth McGlynn, 2005, U.S. health care: Facts about cost, access, and quality,
      RAND Health.

Griffin, John and Gonzalo Maturana, forthcoming “Who Facilitated Misreporting in Securitized Loans?”.
         Journal of Finance.

Grossman, Andrew, Emily Glazer, and Christina Rexrode, 18 December 2014, How a memo cost big
      banks $37 billion, Wall Street Journal.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2004, Does local financial development matter?
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 929-969.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, December 2008, Trusting the stock market, Journal of
        Finance 63 (6), 2557-2600.

Hart, Oliver, 1975, On the optimality of equilibrium when the market structure is incomplete, Journal of
        Economic Theory 11, 418-443.

Hirshleifer, Jack, 1971, The private and social value of information and the reward to inventive activity,
        The American Economic Review 61, 561–574.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom, 1987, Aggregation and linearity in the provision of intertemporal
       incentives, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 303–328.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Enrico Moretti, 2003, Can free entry be inefficient? Fixed commissions and social
        waste in the real estate industry, Journal of Political Economy 111 (5), 1076- 1122.

Hulse Carl, and David M. Herszenhorn, 2009, House approves 90% tax on bonuses after bailouts, New
       York Times, March 19.

Innes, Robert D., 1990, Limited liability and incentive contracting with ex-ante action choices, Journal of
        Economic Theory 52, 45–67.

Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan, August 1996, The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank
        branch deregulation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 639–670.

Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency
        costs and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3 (4), 305–360.




                                                                                                         36
Jensen, Michael C., 1989, “Some Anomalous Evidence Regarding Market Efficiency,” Journal of
        Financial Economics, Vol. 6, Nos. 2/3, 95- 101.

Kelly, Bryan T., Hanno N. Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2012, Too-systemic-to-fail: What option
        markets imply about sector-wide government guarantees, Fama-Miller Working Paper, Chicago
        Booth Research Paper No. 11-12.

Kroszner, Randall S., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1994, Is the Glass-Steagall act justified? A study of the
       US experience with universal banking before 1933, The American Economic Review 84, 810–
       832.

Kuhn, Thomas 1962, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Laband, David, and Richard Beil. 1999. Are economists more selfish than other ‘social’ scientists? Public
       Choice, 100 (1-2): 85-101

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, June 2008, The economic
        consequences of legal origins, Journal of Economic Literature 46 (2), 285-332.

Levine, Ross, 1997, Financial development and economic growth: Views and agenda, Journal of
        Economic Literature 35, 688-726.

Levine Ross, 2005, Finance and growth: Theory and evidence, in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf,
       eds., Handbook of Economic Growth 1A, 865-934, (North-Holland Elsevier, Amsterdam).

Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos, 1998, Stock markets, banks, and economic growth, American Economic
        Review 88, 537-558.

Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein, 2014, Liberty for more: Finance and educational opportunities, Cato
        Papers on Public Policy, Vol. 3.

Lie, Erik (May 2005). "On the Timing of CEO Stock Option Awards" (PDF). Management Science 51
        (5): 802–812

Ljungqvist, Alexander, Christopher Malloy, and Felicia Marston, 2009, “Rewriting History”, Journal of
       Finance, vol. 64 (4): 1935–1960.

Maciocchi, Patrizia, 19 Ottobre 2012, Cassazione: L'investimento sui bond Ciro e Parmalat era a rischio.
       Si al risarcimento, Il Sole 24 Ore.

Melzer, Brian T., 2011, The real costs of credit access: Evidence from the payday lending market, The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 517–555.

Mian Atif and Amir Sufi, 2014, House of Debt, University of Chicago Press

Mollica, M. and Luigi Zingales, 2008, The impact of venture capital on innovation and the creation of
        new businesses, working paper, University of Chicago.

Morgenson, Gretchen, and Joshua Rosner, 2011, Reckless Endangerment, New York: Times Books.

                                                                                                         37
Morse, Adair, 2011, Payday lenders: Heroes or villains? Journal of Financial Economics 102, 28–44.

Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions when
       firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13 (2), 187–
       221.

Najjar Andrei, Anne T. Coughlan, and Julie Hennessy, 2002, “Invisalign: Orthodontics
        Unwired,”Kellogg School of Management.

Pew Charitable Trusts, 2014, How state rate limits affect payday loan prices,
      http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/fact-sheets/2014/04/10/how-state-rate-limits-
      affect-payday-loan-prices

Philippon, Thomas, 2012, Has the US finance industry become less efficient? On the theory and
        measurement of financial intermediation, Working Paper No. 18077, National Bureau of
        Economic Research.

Philippon, Thomas, and Ariell Reshef, 2012, Wages and human capital in the U.S. finance industry:
        1909–2006, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1551–1609.

Piga, Gustavo, 2001. Derivatives and public debt management (International Securities Market
        Association (ISMA)).

Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and James Witkin, 2013, Asset quality misrepresentation by financial
        intermediaries: Evidence from rmbs market, Working Paper No. 18843, National Bureau of
        Economic Research.

Pérignon, Christophe, and Boris Vallée, 2013, Political incentives and financial innovation: The strategic
       use of toxic loans by local governments, HEC Paris Research Paper No. FIN-2013-1017.

Rajan, Raghuram G., 2011, Fault lines: How hidden fractures still threaten the world economy (Princeton
        University Press).

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1998a, Which capitalism? Lessons from the east Asian crisis,
        Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 11 (3), 40-48.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1998b, Financial dependence and growth, The American
        Economic Review 88, 559-586.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 2003, Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists, Random House,
        New York .

Ritter, Jay R., 2008, Forensic finance, Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(3), 127-147.

Rudman, William J., John S. Eberhardt, William Pierce, and Susan Hart-Hester, 2009, Healthcare fraud
      and abuse, Perspectives in Health Information Management/AHIMA, American Health
      Information Management Association 6.




                                                                                                        38
Sapienza, Paola, and Luigi Zingales, 2012, A trust crisis, International Review of Finance 12 (2), June:
       123–131.

Sapienza, Paola and Luigi Zingales, 2013, Economic experts vs. average Americans,       American
       Economic Review 103(3), May: 636-642.

Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor, 2012, Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage cycles,
        and financial crises, 1870–2008, American Economic Review 102(2), 1029–1061.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., 2010, Financial innovation: Against the motion that financial innovation boosts
          economic growth, The Economist February 23 – March 3.
          http://www.economist.com/debate/days/view/471.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. , 1991, The invisible hand and modern welfare economics, NBER Working Paper No.
          W3641.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. , Jonathan M. Orszag, and Peter R. Orszag, 2002, Implications of the new Fannie Mae
          and Freddie Mac risk-based capital standard, Fannie Mae Papers 1 (2), 2.

Swagel, Phillip, 2009, The financial crisis: An inside view, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1–
       63.

Taibbi, Matt, 6 November 2014, The $9 billion witness: Meet JP Morgan Chase's worst nightmare,
        Rolling Stone.

Von Gaudecker, Hans‐Martin, 2014, How does household portfolio diversification vary with financial
      literacy and financial advice?, The Journal of Finance.

Von Hayek, Friedrich A, 1945, The use of knowledge in society, American Economic Review, Vol. 35,
      No. 4 (Sep., 1945), pp. 519-530

Von Hayek, Friedrich A., 1967, Notes on the Evolution of Systems of Rules of Conduct, In Friedrich A.
      von Hayek, Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics, Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press: 66‐81.

Xavier, Gabaix, and David Laibson, 2005, Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and information
        suppression in competitive markets, Working Paper No. 11755, National Bureau of Economic
        Research.

Wang Long, Deepak Malhotra, and J. Keith Murnighan, December 2011, Economics education and
      greed, Academy of Management: Learning Education 10 (4), 643-660.

Zibel, Alan, and Brent Kendall, 7 August 2013, Probe turns up heat on banks, Wall Street Journal.

Zingales, Luigi, July/August 2003, Commentary on more finance more growth, The Federal Reserve of
        St. Louis Review.

Zingales, Luigi, Fall 2010, Learning to live with not-so-efficient markets, Daedalus 139 (4).


                                                                                                           39
Zingales, Luigi, 2012, A capitalism for the people (Basic Books).

Zingales, Luigi, 2014, Preventing economists’ capture, Preventing Regulatory Capture, eds. Daniel
        Carpenter and David Moss, (Cambridge University Press)

Zinman, Jonathan, 2010, Restricting consumer credit access: Household survey evidence on effects
       around the Oregon rate cap, Journal of Banking & Finance 34, 546–556.




                                                                                                    40
Table 1: Fines paid by financial institutions to US enforcement agencies 2012-14

Agency            Amount       Who                           Why
DOJ, HUD, 49            $25. B Wells Fargo, JPMorgan Chase, Collective agreement to address mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure abuses
states                         Citigroup, Bank of America,
                               Ally Financial
DOJ, NYS              $619. M ING Bank N.V.                  conspiring to violate the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) and the Trading with the Enemy
                                                             Act (TWEA) and for violating New York state laws by illegally moving billions of dollars through the U.S. financial
                                                             system on behalf of sanctioned Cuban and Iranian entities
CFTC                  $200. M Barclays                       Libor rate rigging case
DOJ                   $160. M Barclays                       resolve violations arising from Barclays’s submissions for the London InterBank Offered Rate (LIBOR) and the Euro
                                                             Interbank Offered Rate (EURIBOR)
SEC                    $35. M OppenheimerFunds Inc.          making misleading statements about two of its mutual funds struggling in the midst of the credit crisis in late
                                                             2008
CFTC                     $5. M Morgan Stanley                unlawfully executed, processed, and reported numerous off-exchange futures trades to the Chicago Mercantile
DOJ                   $175. M Wells Fargo                    engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination against qualified African-American and Hispanic borrowers in
                                                             its mortgage lending from 2004 through 2009. The settlement provides $184.3 million in compensation for
                                                             wholesale borrowers who were steered into subprime mortgages or who paid higher fees and rates than white
                                                             borrowers because of their race or national origin
SEC                     $6.5 B Wells Fargo                   Financial crisis - selling investments tied to mortgage backed securities without fulling understanding their
                                                             complexity or disclosing the risk to investors; oncealed from investors risks, terms, and improper pricing
                                                             in CDOs and other complex structured products
SEC                    $14. M Well Advantage                 insider trading
SEC                  $296.9 M JPMorgan Chase                 Made misleading disclosures to investors about mortgage-related risks and exposure
SEC                   $120. M Credit Suisse                  Made misleading disclosures to investors about mortgage-related risks and exposure
DOJ, OCC, Federal      $1.92 B HSBC Holdings Plc. And HSBC HSBC’s violations of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) and
Reserve                        Bank                          the Trading with the Enemy Act (TWEA). According to court documents, HSBC Bank USA violated the BSA by
                                                             failing to maintain an effective anti-money laundering program and to conduct appropriate due diligence on its
                                                             foreign correspondent account holders.
CFTC, UK                $1.5 B UBS                           Libor rate rigging case
regulators, Swiss
FINMA
DOJ, NYS              $227. M Standard Chartered             conspiring to violate the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA): violated U.S. laws governing
                                                             transactions involving Sudan, Iran, and other countries subject to U.S. sanctions
Federal National       $11.6 B Bank of America               settle claims that it sold Fannie Mae hundreds of billions of dollars worth of dud home loans
Mortgage
Association
(Fannie Mae)
Federal Reserve         $9.3 B Bank of America, Wells Fargo, foreclosure abuses from robo-signing scandal
and OCC                        JP Morgan Chase, Citigroup,
                               Morgan Stanley, Goldman
                               Sachs, Aurora Bank, PNC
                               Financial, Sovereign Bank,
                               Metlife Bank, US Bancorp,
                               SunTrust, HSBC
CFTC and UK           $612. M Royal Bank of Scotland         Libor rate rigging case
regulators
SEC                   $600. M CR Intrinsic Investors         participated in an insider trading scheme involving a clinical trial for an Alzheimer’s drug being jointly developed
                                                             by two pharmaceutical companies
FRBNY                  $62. M Bank of America                mortgage securities Maiden Lane II had purchased from AIG
NCUA                  $165. M Bank of America                for losses related to purchases of residential mortgage-backed securities by failed corporate credit unions
SEC                    $6.5 M Fifth Third                    improper accounting of commercial real estate loans in the midst of the financial crisis

SEC                       $3.5 M CapitalOne                     understating millions of dollars in auto loan losses
MBIA                       $1.7 B Bank of America               that Countrywide misrepresented its mortgage values and underwriting standards
FHFA                     $885. M UBS                            settlement covers claims of alleged violations of federal and state securities laws in connection with private-
                                                                label residential mortgage-backed securities purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
FERC                     $410. M JPMorgan Chase                 JP Morgan Ventures Energy Corp traders gamed rules to set cost of electricity in 2010 in California and Midwest

DOJ, NYS                 $23.8 M Liechtensteinische             opening and maintaining undeclared bank accounts for U.S. taxpayers from 2001 through 2011: assisted a
                                 Landesbank AG                  significant number of U.S. taxpayers in evading their U.S. tax obligations, filing false federal tax returns with the
                                                                IRS and otherwise hiding accounts held at LLB-Vaduz from the IRS
SEC                       $50. M UBS                            iolating securities laws while structuring and marketing a collateralized debt obligation (CDO) by failing to
                                                                disclose that it retained millions of dollars in upfront cash it received in the course of acquiring collateral for the
                                                                CDO
OOC, SEC, Fed, UK        $920. M JPMorgan Chase                 settle all claims about management and oversight in London Whale trades
Financial Conduct
Authority

OCC                      $389. M JPMorgan Chase                 deceiving customers into buying costly unneeded services when they signed up for credit cards


                                                                                                                                                                        41
Agency               Amount      Who                          Why
DOJ                      $2.85 M Chevy Chase Bank             Chevy Chase Bank F.S.B. engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination against qualified African-American and
                                                              Hispanic borrowers in its home mortgage lending from 2006 through 2009
CFTC, DOJ                 $800. M Rabobank                    Libor rate rigging case
CFTC                      $100. M JPMorgan Chase              settle charges related London Whale trades
DOJ, NCUA, FDIC,            $13. B JPMorgan Chase             to setlle series of lawsuits over sale of toxic mortgage-backed securities
FHFA, NY, CA, DE,
SEC                       $150. M RBS Securities              Made misleading disclosures to investors about mortgage-related risks and exposure
FHFA                        $1.9 B Deutsche Bank               settlement addresses claims alleging violations of federal and state securities laws in connection with private-
                                                              label mortgage-backed securities (PLS) purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac between 2005 and 2007

DOJ, CFBP                  $35. M National City Bank          engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination that increased loan prices for African-American and Hispanic
                                                              borrowers who obtained residential mortgages between 2002 and 2008 from National City Bank’s retail offices
                                                              and nationwide network of mortgage brokers
DOJ                          $7. B Citigroup                  knowingly selling shoddy mortgages ahead of crisis
DOJ                         $2.6 B JPMorgan Chase             Lax oversight of Bernie Madoff
Treasury Dept OFAC        $152. M Clearstream Banking, S.A.    to settle its potential civil liability for apparent violations surrounding Clearstream’s use of its omnibus account
                                                              with a U.S. financial institution as a conduit to hold securities on behalf of the Central Bank of Iran (CBI)
FHFA                      $1.25 B Morgan Stanley              addresses claims alleging violations of federal and state securities laws and common law fraud in connection
                                                              with private-label mortgage-backed securities (PLS) purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac between 2005
                                                              and 2007
DOJ                       $614. M JPMorgan Chase              for violating the False Claims Act by knowingly originating and underwriting non-compliant mortgage loans
                                                              submitted for insurance coverage and guarantees by the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD)
                                                              Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
SEC                       $196. M Credit Suisse               for violating the federal securities laws by providing cross-border brokerage and investment advisory services to
                                                              U.S. clients without first registering with the SEC
FHFA                      $122. M Societe Generale            resolves claims in the lawsuit FHFA v. Société Générale, et al alleging violations of federal and state securities
                                                              laws in connection with private-label mortgage-backed securities (PLS) purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie
                                                              Mac during 2006
FHFA                        $9.5 B Bank of America            settle litigation over mortgage securities sold to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
FHFA                      $885. M Credit Suisse               resolves all claims in the lawsuit FHFA v. Credit Suisse, et al. as well as all claims against the Credit Suisse
                                                              defendant in FHFA v. Ally Financial Inc., et al. alleging violations of federal and state securities laws in connection
                                                              with private-label mortgage-backed securities (PLS) purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac during 2005-2007
FHFA                      $280. M Barclays                    to settle claims of violations of federal and state securities laws in connection with private-lable mortgage-
                                                              backed securities purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac duirng 2005-2007
FHFA                      $110. M First Horizon               settlement resolves claims in the lawsuit FHFA v. First Horizon National Corporation, et al. (S.D.N.Y.), alleging
                                                              violations of federal and District of Columbia securities laws in connection with private-label mortgage-backed
                                                              securities purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac during 2005-2007
DOJ                         $2.6 B Credit Suisse              pled guilty to helping Americans lie to avoid paying taxes
NYS, DOJ                    $8.9 B BNP Paribas                transferring dollars on behalf of countries blacklisted by United States
DOJ, HUD, CFPB            $968. M SunTrust Mortgage           mortgage origination, servicing, and foreclosure abuses
DOJ                       $200. M U.S. Bank                   violated the False Claims Act by knowingly originating and underwriting mortgage loans insured by the Federal
                                                              Housing Administration (FHA) that did not meet applicable requirements
DOJ, CFBP                 $169. M GE Capital Retail Bank       engaged in a nationwide pattern or practice of discrimination by excluding Hispanic borrowers from two of its
                                                              credit card debt-repayment programs
FHFA                      $99.5 M RBS Securities              resolves claims against RBS in FHFA v. Ally Financial Inc. in the Southern District of New York, alleging violations
                                                              of federal and state securities laws in connection with private-label mortgage-backed securities purchased by
                                                              Freddie Mac during 2005-2007
DOJ, NYS,                   $4. B Citigroup                   to resolve federal and state civil claims related to Citigroup’s conduct in the packaging, securitization, marketing,
Colorado, FHFA                                                sale and issuance of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) prior to Jan. 1, 2009
AIG                       $650. M Bank of America             to settle allegations of fraud in the bank's packaging and selling of mortgages to investors during housing bubble

DOJ                       $320. M SunTrust Mortgage           concludes a criminal investigation of SunTrust’s administration of the Home Affordable Modification Program
                                                              (HAMP). SunTrust misled numerous mortgage servicing customers who sought mortgage relief through HAMP:
                                                              made material misrepresentations and omissions to borrowers in HAMP solicitations, and failed to process HAMP
                                                              applications in a timely fashion
SEC                       $275. M Morgan Stanley              misleading public disclosures about the level of delinquent subprime mortgages in two mortgage-backed
                                                              securities the firm sold to investors in 2007 during the early days of the financial crisis
CFTC                      $105. M Lloyds Banking Group        Libor rate rigging case
DOJ                        $86. M Lloyds Banking Group        manipulation of submissions for the London InterBank Offered Rate (LIBOR), a leading global benchmark interest
                                                              rate
Federal gov               $1.27 B Bank of America             Countrywide committed mail and wire fraud by selling thousands of toxic mortgages to Fannie Mae and Freddie
                                                              Mac with lies that they were quality investments
DOJ, SEC, 6 states       $16.65 B Bank of America             $5 billion penalty under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) and provide bill
DOJ                      $100. M BB&T                         subsidiary of the BB&T Corporation was not entitled to $660 million in tax benefits that BB&T claimed based on its
                                                              participation in an abusive tax shelter known as Structured Trust Advantaged Repackaged Securities (STARS).

Total                   $138.59 B




                                                                                                                                                                                 42
