                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               COMPETITION AND R&D FINANCING DECISIONS:
       THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE BIOPHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY

                                         Richard T. Thakor
                                          Andrew W. Lo

                                        Working Paper 20903
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20903


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




We thank Raj Iyer, Debbie Lucas, Andrey Malenko, and Stew Myers for helpful comments and discussions.
We also thank Nicholas Anaya, Christian Vilanilam, and Yuwei Zhang for research assistance. Any
remaining errors are our own. Research support from the MIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering
is gratefully acknowledged. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors
only and do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of any other organizations, any of their
affiliates or employees, any of the individuals acknowledged above, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20903.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Richard T. Thakor and Andrew W. Lo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Competition and R&D Financing Decisions: Theory and Evidence from the Biopharmaceutical
Industry
Richard T. Thakor and Andrew W. Lo
NBER Working Paper No. 20903
January 2015, Revised September 2015
JEL No. D82,D83,G31,G32,L11,L15,L25,L65

                                              ABSTRACT

How does competition affect innovation and how it is financed in R&D-intensive firms? We study
the interaction between competition, R&D investments, and the financing choices of such firms using
data on biopharmaceutical firms. To motivate the empirical hypotheses, we develop a model for such
firms in which their capital structure and amounts invested in R&D as well as existing assets are all
determined in response to the degree of competition in the industry. The key predictions are that, as
competition increases, such firms will: (1) increase R&D investment relative to investment in assets-in-place
that support existing products; (2) carry more cash and maintain less net debt; and (3) experience declining
betas but greater total stock return volatility due to higher idiosyncratic risk. While the focus is on
the biopharmaceutical industry, the results are broadly applicable to other R&Dintensive industries
as well. We provide empirical support for these predictions. In order to deal with the endogeneity issue
introduced by the fact that a firm's R&D investments and the product-market competition it faces influence
each other, we provide further evidence through a differences-in-differences analysis.


Richard T. Thakor
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-615
Cambridge, MA 02142
rthakor@mit.edu

Andrew W. Lo
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-618
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
alo-admin@mit.edu
1     Introduction

The idea that innovation is a key to economic growth has a long tradition, dating back at least
to Adam Smith, who explicitly recognized the role of technological progress in the production
function of the firm. Competition also grows with the economy, and since monopolists are
unlikely to perceive the same benefits from innovation that competitive firms perceive (see,
for example, Aghion, Bloom, Blundell, and Griffith (2005)), a natural question that arises
is: how does competition affect innovation? In addition, investments in R&D that make
innovation possible often require large amounts of capital that must be externally financed,
so financing frictions and the risk profile of the firm can affect innovation as well (e.g.
Hall and Lerner (2010), and Cornaggia et. al. (2013)). Since firms can be expected to
seek financing through the lowest-cost means, a second important question that arises is:
how does product-market competition affect the financing choices and risk profiles of firms
through its effect on their innovation incentives? That is, it is important to study how
financing and competition interact, and the important role that this interaction plays for
R&D-intensive firms, which are crucial drivers of innovation.
    The primary goal of this paper is to provide an empirical answer to these questions. While
each of the two questions stated above has been studied separately, we are not aware of any
paper that has studied the relationship between competition, innovation, financing, and risk
in an integrated framework. We first develop a simple (reduced-form) theoretical model to
provide motivation for a number of testable hypotheses. We then provide empirical evidence
on the relationship between competition, R&D investment, financing, and the evolution of
the firm’s risk profile by studying the biopharmaceutical (biopharma) industry.
    Apart from the fact that this industry is intimately tied to health care—a sector that is
now one-fifth of the U.S. economy—R&D is the lifeblood of biopharma firms, and spending on
R&D often dwarfs spending on property, plant, and equipment. Moreover, decisions related
to capital budgeting and financing for R&D that these firms make depart sharply from those
made for other capital projects, due to the high-risk, staged nature of R&D investment and

                                              1
the absence of observable post-investment cash flows for many years. This makes it difficult to
simply extrapolate the insights on financing choices for other kinds of firms to R&D-intensive
firms like those in biopharma (see Myers and Howe (1997), who lay out these issues for the
pharmaceutical industry). Moreover, this industry has become increasingly competitive over
time for a variety of reasons, including regulation, lower costs of entry due to improvements
in technology, and the expiration of patents combined with high development costs of new
therapeutics (e.g. Caves, Whinston, and Hurwitz (1991), Grabowski and Vernon (1992),
and others). These factors have squeezed margins from existing products associated with
assets-in-place, with marked implications for R&D investments in new products as well as
the capital structure choices of these firms.1 These developments, coupled with the R&D-
intensive nature of these firms, make the biopharma industry well suited for the study of the
two questions posed above.
       We examine how an R&D-intensive firm makes decisions about investment (how much
to invest in R&D and how much to invest in assets in place), capital structure, and cash
to carry, and how these decisions are affected by the mediating influence of its competitive
environment. We start by developing a simple theoretical model whose main goal is to
motivate and deliver testable predictions. The model is in reduced form in order to get
to the predictions as directly as possible. The first prediction of the model is that greater
product-market competition induces the firm to cut back on investments in assets-in-place
and increase investments in R&D. The intuition is similar to the “escape-the-competition”
effect (e.g. Aghion , Bloom, Blundell, and Griffith (2005))—increased competition erodes
margins on existing products, thus making them less attractive relative to new R&D products
   1
    For example, the expiration of a patent and the subsequent entry of a generic drug in the marketplace.
Another factor is the rapid improvement in technology in the past decades, which has allowed many com-
petitors to enter the marketplace and offer products that directly compete with many long-established firms.
The implications of these developments are potentially pervasive. For example, see Bloom, Schankerman,
and Van Reenan (2013), who examine the effects of R&D spillovers, which may be either positive (due to
improvements in knowledge and technology) or negative (due to business competition). Also, see Kogan and
Papanikolaou (2010, 2014), who model the effects technology shocks on assets-in-place and growth oppor-
tunities, and derive macroeconomic and asset pricing implications. And Haddad, Ho, and Loualiche (2014)
explore the impact of disagreement about the details of R&D on competition, which can lead to innovation
booms.


                                                     2
that are under patent protection.
   The second prediction of the model is that firms will carry more cash and net debt
will decline in response to greater product market competition. The reason is that greater
competition leads to more investments in R&D, which, in turn, makes debt financing less
attractive because the R&D becomes substantially less profitable to the firm if debtholders
can force the firm to repay early, thereby causing premature liquidation of the (illiquid) R&D.
The reason for carrying extra cash is to avoid having to raise future financing in states of the
world in which such financing may be unavailable but is viewed as being valuable by firm
insiders. The relatively large cash balances of R&D-intensive companies are consistent with
this implication.
   The final prediction of the model follows from the first prediction. Since existing products
have systematic risk, whereas (at least early-stage) R&D has mainly idiosyncratic risk (see
Pastor and Veronesi (2005)), the reallocation of investments from assets-in-place to R&D that
is induced by increased competition causes systematic risk in the firm to decline. Moreover,
competition causes idiosyncratic risk in R&D to increase over time, so the shift in stock
returns from systematic to idiosyncratic risk is accompanied by an increase in total stock
return volatility.
   With regard to investment, while the majority of the analysis focuses on the choice
between investing in assets-in-place versus new early-stage in-house R&D, in reality, an
R&D-intensive firm may also be able to choose a later-stage R&D investment outside of the
firm, through acquisition or collaboration. For example, it is common for a pharmaceutical
company to acquire a smaller biotech company in order to gain access to its portfolio of R&D
projects that are in the later stages of development. In order to incorporate this aspect into
the analysis, we include a simple extension of the main model in which the biopharma firm
has a choice of R&D projects: either do R&D in-house (“internal” R&D) or acquire a biotech
company with an R&D project that has already succeeded (“external” R&D). While there is
a large theoretical and empirical literature on the R&D boundaries of the firm related to the


                                               3
choice between internal and external R&D, our goal is to simply connect this R&D choice
to the analysis in this paper, and to demonstrate how the analysis may change when such a
choice is open to firms.2
      Using data on publicly traded biopharma companies from 1950 to 2012, we provide strong
empirical support for these predictions. We first provide time-series evidence, taking as a
given the increase in competition over time which has been documented in previous research.
We document that R&D and cash holdings of the firms in the sample are substantial, and
have increased over time in response to increasing competition. In particular, for the average
biopharma firm, R&D as a percentage of total assets increased from roughly 3% in 1950 to
46% in 2012, whereas cash as a percentage of total assets increased from 22% in 1950 to 55%
in 2012. In addition, assets-in-place and net debt as a percentage of total assets declined
for the average biopharma firm as competition increased. Moreover, we show that the betas
of a value-weighted portfolio of biopharma firms have declined over time—for example, the
market beta of the industry has declined from over 1.0 in 1950 to approximately 0.7 in 2012.
Finally, idiosyncratic and total stock return volatility for biopharma firms have increased
while competition has increased.
      While this time-series evidence is consistent with the predictions of our model, it is also
subject to potential endogeneity concerns. In particular, biopharma firms face competition
that has both endogenous and exogenous elements. The endogenous competition is affected
by how much the firm spends on R&D (the more it spends, the lower the competition ceteris
paribus). The exogenous nature of competition comes from things like changes market
structure, regulation, and the nature of patent protection—developments that are plausibly
exogenous at least at the individual firm level. To deal with these endogeneity concerns and
provide causal evidence of the impact of competition on the variables we study, we exploit
the quasi-natural experiment represented by a legislative change that induced an exogenous
increase in competition in the biopharma industry: the Hatch-Waxman Act of 1984. This
  2
    See Bhattacharya and Guriev (2004), Bhattacharya, Glazer, and Sappington (1990), Pisano (1990), Gans
and Stern (1997), and Cassiman and Veugelers (2006), among others.


                                                   4
legislation made it significantly easier for generic drugs to compete with patented drugs
and has been widely regarded as an act that increased competition in the industry (e.g.
Grabowski and Vernon (1986, 1992)). Using a differences-in-differences approach, we again
find strong supporting evidence for the main predictions of the model.
       Our paper is related to the theoretical industrial organization literature that explores
the effect of competition on innovation. For example, a number of papers have shown
that innovation may allow the firm to differentiate its products more effectively, thereby
generating an “escape-the-competition” effect (Aghion, Harris, Howitt, and Vickers (2001),
and Aghion et. al. (2005)) that implies that competitive firms will tend to innovate more
than a monopolist via the so-called “replacement effect” (Tirole (1988)). Aghion et. al.
(2005) build a model where firms facing large competitive pressures may innovate in order
to regain lost profit margins, but this effect may be reversed in industries where competition
is less intense and laggard firms face large costs to catch up to industry leaders. Aghion,
Dewatripont and Rey (1999) reach a similar conclusion based on the logic that competition
can stimulate R&D by reducing expected bankruptcy costs. Recently, Aghion, Bechtold,
Cassar and Herz (2014) have provided evidence based on lab experiments. They find that
higher competition among product-market competitors leads to higher R&D by neck-and-
neck firms and lower R&D by laggards.3 While our paper also predicts that an increase in
competition will increase innovation (through increased R&D investment), our model differs
from Aghion et. al. (2005) and other studies in that we also focus on how competition
affects the firm’s choice of funding for innovation and its risk profile. Since a firm’s ability
to secure capital is crucial for undertaking R&D, we thus treat competition as an important
determinant of innovation by considering its effect on the firm’s interactions with the capital
market and its risk characteristics.
   3
    Other authors have also made the point that patentable innovation is one way for firms to protect against
profit erosion induced by competition. For example, Langinier and Moschini (2002) note that the duration
of a patent can affect the length of time the holder can exert monopoly power. See also Grant and Jordan
(2015).




                                                     5
    Our model is also related to the literature exploring the financing of R&D.4 Hall and
Lerner (2010) show that large firms prefer internal funds for financing R&D, whereas small
firms experience high external financing costs that are only partially mitigated by venture
capital. Brown, Fazzari, and Petersen (2009) empirically document a positive relation-
ship between financing supply and R&D. Bergemann and Hege (2005) develop a theoretical
model in which they examine how the choice of relationship versus arms-length financing by
borrowers affects their R&D funding. While these papers focus on issues related to R&D
financing, they do not consider the effect of product market competition on how R&D is
financed. More recently, a handful of papers have explored how competition affects firms’
innovation incentives and cash holdings. Lyandres and Palazzo (2014) show theoretically
and empirically that the firms that successfully innovate use cash as a commitment device
for implementation of successful innovations. Morellec, Nikolov, and Zucchi (2014) develop
a dynamic model and provide empirical support that competition increases corporate cash
holdings and equity issues. Our analysis differs from these studies in a number of ways.
First, unlike these studies, we examine how the firm’s optimal capital structure changes in
response to competition. The cash decision is just one component of this capital structure
decision. Second, we also examine how the firm’s risk profile changes as competition induces
a change in the mix of investment across R&D and assets-in-place, and in its capital struc-
ture. Furthermore, we provide clear empirical evidence that overcomes endogeneity concerns
using data from the biopharmaceutical industry.
    Our results are also related to an empirical literature that examines the R&D costs,
returns, and risks in the pharmaceutical industry. For example, Grabowski and Vernon
(1990) and DiMasi, Grabowski, and Vernon (1995) examine a selection of drugs introduced
in the U.S. and show a substantial increase in competition and a skewed distribution of
sales returns from the drugs. DiMasi, Hansen, and Grabowski (2003) examine the cost
   4
     Our work is also related to the vast capital structure literature, e.g. Jensen and Meckling (1976), Myers
and Majluf (1984), Stulz (1990), Zwiebel (1996), Abel (2014); see Graham and Leary (2011) and Myers
(2001) for comprehensive reviews.



                                                      6
of new drug development. Ellison, Cockburn, Griliches, and Hausman (1997) model the
demand for pharmaceutical products and compute price elasticities. Myers and Howe (1997)
build a Monte Carlo life-cycle model of drug R&D development for the pharmaceutical
industry, and examine the model’s estimates of risk, return, NPV, and cost of capital. Gans,
Hsu, and Stern (2002) and Gans and Stern (2003) look more generally at R&D-intensive
firms, and examine how their R&D strategies are affected by competition and cooperation.
Our paper is complementary to some of the evidence provided in these studies, but also
provides additional empirical evidence focused on financial characteristics. Moreover, we
focus explicitly on the interaction between competition, R&D spending, and capital structure
decisions of biopharma companies which, to our knowledge, has not been considered in
previous studies.
    In Section 2 we describe our theoretical framework, and the main predictions it gen-
erates. We discuss the underlying economic intuition for the results, relegating the formal
development and analysis of the model to the Appendix. We present the time-series evidence
on average trends in Section 3, and the differences-in-differences analysis using the Hatch-
Waxman Act as a source of exogenous variation is described in Section 4. We conclude in
Section 5 and provide supplemental results in the Appendix.



2     Formulating Testable Hypotheses

In this section, we provide a sketch of a simple theoretical model, as well as the intuition for
the results and predictions that it generates, to motivate the testable hypotheses we consider
in our empirical analysis. We provide the full formal model in the Appendix, including proofs
of the results.




                                               7
2.1    The Model

We consider a large biopharmaceutical firm in a three-date model in which final payoffs occur
at t = 2. The firm decides at date t = 0 how much to invest in R&D, how much to invest in
assets-in-place, and its capital structure.
   If the firm invests in R&D, the R&D consists of two stages. The initial R&D investment
at t = 0 is for first-stage research. At t = 1, it will be known whether the first-stage
research failed, was modestly successful, or was very successful. At this stage, R&D produces
no cash flows, but allows the possibility of further investment. If the first-stage research
was successful, the firm must decide whether to invest in second-stage R&D. Such a setup
captures the staged R&D investment in biopharma firms in which a drug is considered a
“success” if it passes Phases 1–3 of clinical trials, where each phase requires an additional
investment. At t = 2, if the firm invested in both first-stage and second-stage research,
the R&D produces a stochastic cash flow. The R&D produces both benefits that can be
contracted upon with outside financiers—such as commercializable products—as well as
benefits (such as knowledge generation) for insiders that cannot be contracted upon. If
the firm invests in assets-in-place, they produce a positive cash flow at t = 2 that varies
depending on competition (described below) and the state of the economy.
   As in Pastor and Veronesi (2009), we assume that the risk associated with R&D is
idiosyncratic and the risk associated with assets-in-place is systematic. By definition, R&D
involves new projects that are one-off stand-alone investments by individual firms, and hence
uncorrelated with the economy. Existing products involve similar investments by many other
firms, and hence contain systematic risk. For example, in the biopharma industry, new drugs
have patent protection and are thus less affected by investments by other firms due to the
monopoly that patents confer on the specific drug (e.g. Langinier and Moschini (2002)).
In contrast, existing products include generic drugs that no longer enjoy patent protection
and are sensitive to the investments of other firms. This is also consistent with previous
studies that have established that greater monopoly power is associated with a lower degree


                                              8
of systematic risk (e.g. Subrahmanyam and Thomadkis (1980), Lee, Liaw, and Rahman
(1990), and others).
       At t = 0, the firm makes its capital structure decision, which involves determining the
mix of debt and equity with which to finance the firm and how much excess cash to carry
to date t = 1. At t = 1, the firm can again choose to raise capital. We assume that external
financing for the second-stage R&D cannot be raised at t = 1 if the first-stage research
failed or was only modestly successful.5 However, insiders would like to fund the second-
stage R&D even if the first-stage research has been only modestly successful, because of the
non-contractible benefits to insiders.
       The firm’s cash flows are taxable, debt repayments are tax-deductible, and the firm op-
erates in an adverse-selection environment in that there are observationally-identical lemons
that also raise financing at t = 0. These lemon firms, while appearing identical to viable
good firms, do not have the ability to produce cash flows from their R&D. At t = 1, the
firm’s bondholders receive a noisy signal that enables them to update their priors on whether
the firm is good or a lemon. If a firm is suspected of being a lemon based on the signal,
bondholders will demand to be repaid at t = 1—this leads to liquidation, since the firm
has no cash flows at the interim date.6 Thus, debt has a monitoring role in reducing mis-
appropriation of resources, in line with theories of debt discipline extensively discussed in
the literature (e.g. Hart and Moore (1995, 1998), Jensen (1986), and Calomiris and Kahn
(1991)). Since the signal is noisy, the probability of a good firm being liquidated is positive.
       Competition is modeled as a probability that a competing firm will arrive. If it does ar-
rive, the firm engages in competition with the incumbent firm, driving down the cash flows on
   5
     This assumption is consistent with the empirical evidence of Grabowski and Vernon (1990), who doc-
ument a skewed distribution of returns for drugs in the marketplace, with “blockbuster” drugs achieving
much higher returns than other drugs. Given the large investment costs of drug development (e.g. DiMasi
and Grabowski (2007)), a very successful commercial result is often needed in order for the project to be
perceived as positive NPV.
   6
     The debt need not be viewed as short-term debt, but could be long-term debt where bondholders detect
a covenant violation at the interim date and demand repayment then, or where there is an interest payment
that bondholders have the option of forgiving until a later date.




                                                   9
its assets-in-place.7 R&D, when successful, is patent-protected and thus unaffected by com-
petitive entry. For example, one of the reasons why firms in the biopharma industry engage
in R&D is to replace old drugs (many of which may be off-patent and thus face competitive
pressures) with new drugs (which are patent-protected and insulated from competition).8
       A time-line of the events of the model is given in Figure 1.


2.2       Intuition

The model allows us to characterize the firm’s optimal investments in R&D and assets-in-
place, and examine how these respond to competition. We show that higher competition
causes investments in assets-in-place to decline and investments in R&D to increase, so
R&D grows relative to assets-in-place. The intuition lies in the patent-protected rents that
successful R&D offers the firm. An increase in competition erodes the payoffs of assets-in-
place (since existing products are not under patent protection), which makes the payoffs
from investment in R&D relatively more attractive. The firm then has an incentive to shift
investment away from assets-in-place and towards R&D.9
       The firm’s capital structure decision trades off tax benefits against the possible loss of
R&D rents if the (good) firm is erroneously liquidated at t = 1. The presence of lemons
makes such early repayment/liquidation subgame perfect for the bondholders, even though
   7
      The effect of competition here is the same as in Bertrand competition, where the two firms will reduce
their prices down to their marginal costs. In our model, competition can be interpreted as structural changes
in the industry or other changes in competition that are exogenous to the individual firm. Important drivers
of competition to industries such as biopharma are exogenous technology or regulatory shocks that lower
entry costs. For example, the Human Genome Project represented a technology shock that was plausibly
exogenous to any individual firm’s decision, and it led to the entry of numerous small biotech firms into
the industry (see Thakor et. al. (2015)). Another example is the Hatch-Waxman Act, which was a source
of exogenous variation in competition for the biopharma industry, and something we use for identification
purposes later in our analysis. However, since R&D by incumbents can also affect the degree of competition,
some portion of the degree of competition is endogenous (e.g. Gans and Stern (2000)). Our empirical tests
are designed to tackle this potential endogeneity.
    8
      This is consistent with the earlier cited literature, e.g. Tirole (1988), Langinier and Moschini (2002), and
Grant and Jordan (2015). The specific way we have described competition is not critical to our prediction.
All that is needed is that the firm’s profit margins on patentable drugs emerging from R&D are higher than
those from existing products that do not enjoy patent protection.
    9
      In the terminology of Aghion et. al. (2005), we are modeling “neck-and-neck” firms competiting in the
product market.


                                                       10
t=0                        t=1                      t=2
• Firm determines its      • The state of the       All payoffs on existing
capital structure as       economy (which will      assets and R&D are
well as scale, i.e., how   determine date-2         realized. Shareholders
much to invest in          payoffs of assets that   and bondholders are
assets-in-place (or        covary with the          paid off.
existing products)         economy) is revealed.
and how much to            • Bondholders receive
invest in R&D.             noisy information
Investment capital is      about the quality of
raised externally from     the firm and can
investors in an            demand repayment
environment of             on debt.
adverse selection.         • Information is
• With some                revealed about the
probability, a             success of the
competitor arrives,        first-stage R&D. The
which reduces the          firm may need to
profitability of           raise additional
existing products          financing to fund its
• Firm makes its           second-stage R&D.
investment in existing
products and its
first-stage investment
in R&D

                  Figure 1: Time-line of Decisions




                                    11
it is costly for them. We show that as competition increases, debt financing declines in
the firm’s capital structure. The intuition is twofold. First, since the firm reduces its
investment in assets-in-place, it reduces its collateral base, which makes it unable to support
as much debt. Second, given the firm’s larger investment in R&D in response to increased
competition, the possible loss of R&D rents due to erroneous liquidation at t = 1 is greater.
    We also show that the potential lack of access to external second-stage R&D funding at
t = 1 when the firm’s insiders want to invest causes the firm to carry excess cash from t = 0
to t = 1. This is because there is a future state of the world (when the first-stage R&D is
modestly successful) in which outside investors will be unwilling to fund second-stage R&D
even though the firm’s insiders consider it valuable to do so due to non-contractible R&D
rents.10 Since the amount of second-stage funding is positively related to the investment in
first-stage R&D, the higher relative investment in R&D in response to higher competition
also means that the firm carries more excess cash as competition increases. This result is
similar to a precautionary demand for liquidity in anticipation of future states in which there
may be a shortfall (see, for example, Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2014)).
    The excess cash that the firm holds, combined with the earlier result about lower debt
financing, means that the firm’s net debt will fall as it faces higher competition. Finally,
since the firm shifts its investments from assets-in-place (which carries systematic risk) to
R&D (which carries idiosyncratic risk) in response to higher competition, an increase in
competition also implies that the firm’s beta will decline as competition increases. By the
same token, the firm’s idiosyncratic risk will also increase. Since R&D investments tend to
be riskier than other types of investment (e.g. DiMasi, Hansen, Grabowski, and Lasagna
(1991)), this also implies that the firm’s total stock return volatility will tend to increase.
    As an extension of the model, we also examine the firm’s choice between doing in-house
R&D and buying a firm (such as a smaller biotech firm) that has successfully completed first-
  10
     An alternative interpretation of this result is that the firm’s insiders have information about the quality
of the R&D that they cannot credibly communicate to investors, and therefore investors are unwilling to
provide additional funding.



                                                      12
stage research. We find that firms with relatively lower R&D success rates will tend to acquire
other firms that rely on “internal” R&D. It follows that an increase in competition will induce
firms to engage in more “external” R&D via acquisitions. Moreover, since “external” R&D
(i.e. acquiring a firm) involves less risk than internal R&D, one would expect acquiring firms’
stock returns to have lower idiosyncratic risk than the stock returns of firms that engage in
internal R&D. We leave tests of these predictions of the extended model to future research.


2.3    Empirical Implications

To summarize, our model has implications for how the characteristics of R&D-intensive
biopharma firms change in response to changes in competition. A number of studies have
documented increased competition in the biopharma industry, brought about by a combina-
tion of improvements in technology and entry of generic drugs. For example, the Drug Price
Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984 (informally known as the Hatch-
Waxman Act) and the Generic Initiative for Value and Efficiency of 2007 were designed to
increase the entry of generic drugs into the market place in order to spur competition (see
Caves, Whinston, and Hurwitz (1991), Grabowski and Vernon (1990, 1992), and others for
more details). Consistent with this evidence, we also document in the empirical results an
increase in competition over time, as viewed through various measures. The model predicts
that, as competition increases:

  1. Firms will increase R&D investment and reduce investment in assets-in-place that
      support existing products.

  2. Firms will carry more cash and net debt will decline.

  3. Firm betas will decline, but idiosyncratic risk will rise. Under some conditions, total
      stock return volatility will rise.




                                              13
3     Time-Series Evidence

To test the empirical implications of our model of R&D-intensive corporate financial policies,
we first consider time-series evidence on increasing competition in the biopharma industry
and then turn to the predictions of the model for R&D investments, assets-in-place, capital
structure, cash balances, and risk. The empirical evidence is generally consistent with the
theory’s predictions.
    While the time-series evidence is suggestive of the effects documented by our model, it is
subject to endogeneity concerns, as its interpretation implicitly requires competition in the
biopharma industry to be exogenous. However, this assumption is unlikely to hold for the
biopharma industry. For example, R&D outlays by incumbent firms can act as a competitive
entry barrier—in other words, R&D is affected by competition, but competition is also
affected by R&D. To overcome this endogeneity problem, we exploit the exogenous variation
introduced by the passage of the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act
of 1984, and conduct a differences-in-differences analysis to provide a cleaner empirical test
of the model.


3.1    Empirical Methodology

We begin by documenting evidence of how competition in the biopharma industry has in-
creased over time, consistent with the results of other studies. We first measure competition
through the Concentration Ratio, which is defined as the market share of the largest firms
in the industry. It is defined as follows for each year t:

                                                    M
                                                    X
                                      CRt (M ) =          si,t ,                           (1)
                                                    i=1


where si is the market share of firm i, defined as the proportion of the industry’s sales
that are attributable to firm i. A lower value of CRt (M ) in a given year indicates less
concentration, and thus greater competition, in the industry. As is common, we calculate

                                               14
(1) for M = 4 (4-firm Concentration Ratio).11 However, for the biopharma industry, many
small biotech firms compete with larger firms through their R&D efforts, even though they
may not have products that are commercialized (and therefore have little to no sales). In
addition, since the FDA approval process for drugs is lengthy, new competing firms may not
have an effect on industry sales until several years after they enter. Therefore, sales-based
measures of competition such as the Concentration Ratio may not fully capture changes in
competition for the biopharma industry. As a result, we also measure competition in a more
simple manner as a robustness check, using the number of competitors in the industry over
time.
    We next document the financial characteristics of interest that are related to predictions
1 and 2 in Section 3.4. They are defined as follows. R&D investment is measured by
(R&D/T A)i,t , which is R&D expenditures scaled by total assets for firm i in year t. Assets-
in-place are measured by (P P E/T A)i,t , which is property, plant, and equipment scaled by
total assets. Cash is represented by (Cash/T A)i,t , which is measured by cash and short-
term investments scaled by total assets. Debt is represented by (Debt/T A)i,t , which is the
sum of total long-term debt and short-term debt (debt in current liabilities). Net debt is
represented by (N et Debt/T A)i,t , where N et Debti,t = Debti,t − Cashi,t . The mean values of
these variables across all firms are calculated for each year in the sample.
    In order to examine prediction 3 of the theoretical model, we construct time-series es-
timates of stock return volatility and betas for the biopharma industry. To examine stock
return volatility, we compute both the total stock return volatility and the idiosyncratic stock
return volatility of firms in the biopharma industry. The calculation of idiosyncratic stock
return volatility requires a measure of the idiosyncratic component of total stock returns,
which we calculate in the following way. First, the betas for the Fama and French (1993)
  11
     Our results are also similar when using other sales-based measures of concentration, such as the 8-firm
Concentration Ratio (where M = 8 in (1)), Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, or the Hannah and Kay (1971)
Index. We include these measures in the Appendix.




                                                    15
three-factor model are calculated using a rolling two-year window of daily returns:


        Ri,t − rf = α + βi,t,mkt (Rm,t − rf ) + βi,t,SM B RSM B,t + βi,t,HM L RHM L,t + i,t .   (2)


Second, once the betas have been calculated for each day, the idiosyncratic portion of the
return (i,t ) is estimated using the beta estimates and (2).
   We take two simple approaches to calculating the total and idiosyncratic volatility of the
biopharma industry. The first approach, which is consistent with Officer (1973) and others,
is to calculate volatility by taking the standard deviation of a rolling window of the past 360
days of daily returns. We calculate these rolling volatilities at the individual stock level and
then average the volatilities at each date across all stocks, and we also consider the rolling
return volatilities of a value-weighted portfolio of biopharma firms. This is done for both
total stock returns and for idiosyncratic returns. We let σi,t represent total stock return
                                                                    idio
volatility for firm i, σP,t represent portfolio return volatility, σi,t  represent idiosyncratic
                                   idio
return volatility for firm i, and σP,t  represent idiosyncratic portfolio return volatility.
   As noted by Schwert (1989) and French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987), a potential
concern of the above procedure is autocorrelation in the return series, which may bias the
volatility estimates. Therefore, our second approach to calculating volatility is to use non-
overlapping samples of daily data to construct monthly volatility estimates. Specifically, we
follow Bali, Cakici, Yan, and Zhang (2005) and calculate a measure of average stock variance.
We first calculate the monthly variance of a stock i within a month T as the sum of the
squared daily returns of that stock within the month. These monthly variance estimates are
then averaged across all stocks, to create an average stock variance for month T :

                                                NT
                                                   "D       #
                                                      T
                                              1 X   X
                                   (σ̂T )2 =            R2 ,                                     (3)
                                             NT i=1 t=1 i,t

where DT is the number of days in month T , Ri,t is the return of stock i on day t, and NT



                                                 16
is the total number of stocks that exist in month T .12 The average stock standard deviation
                                                                    q
(volatility) is given by the square root of the variance, i.e. σ̂T = (σ̂T )2 . Similarly, average
idiosyncratic return variance for month T is given by:

                                                        NT
                                                           "D       #
                                                              T
                                              2      1 X   X
                                      σ̂Tidio      =             2
                                                                 ,                                      (4)
                                                     NT i=1 t=1 i,t

                                                                            q          2
and the average idiosyncratic volatility is given by          σ̂Tidio   =       σ̂Tidio . For robustness, we
also calculate monthly volatilities as in Schwert (1989). We include these estimates in the
Appendix.
       Finally, to examine the time-series trend of betas for the biopharma industry, we form
a value-weighted portfolio of biopharma firms, and calculate the Fama-French factor betas
(given by (2) above) of the portfolio using a rolling 2-year window of daily portfolio returns.


3.2       Data and Summary Statistics

The focus of the empirical results is on the biopharma industry, which we take to be com-
prised of 4-digit Standard Industry Classification (SIC) codes 2830-2836.13 The sample
period is from 1950 to 2012. For our financial characteristic data, we include all biopharma
firms that are listed in the Compustat database. The data encompass a total of 15,366
firm-year observations. For stock return data, we take all biopharma firms from the CRSP
database for which daily data is available, which encompass 2,356,868 daily return observa-
tions.14 Daily return data for the Fama-French factors and the risk-free rate of return were
  12
     This calculation of stock variance differs slightly from Bali et. al. (2005) in that they include a term
that includes the cross-product of adjacent returns within the month, as in French, Schwert and Stambaugh
(1987). The calculation of the monthly variance in (3) follows from Schwert (1989), who notes that including
cross-products of returns may lead to negative volatility estimates. One could also make an adjustment for
the mean return in the calculation of the monthly variance, but Schwert (1989) notes that the differences in
the estimates are very small.
  13
     These are made up of Drugs (2830), Biological Products (2831), Medicinal Chemical and Botanical
Products (2833), Pharmaceutical Preparations (2834), In Vitro and In Vivo Diagnostic Substances (2835),
and Biological Products except diagnostics (2836). These are the same SIC codes that comprise the Fama
and French (1993) “Drugs” industry.
  14
     Daily data from 1948 and onwards is used to estimate betas and volatilities for the years 1950 and 1951.


                                                       17
obtained from Ken French’s web site.15 All variables except for those formed from stock
returns are winsorized at the 1% level in order to reduce the impact of extreme outliers.
      Summary statistics for all of the variables are given in Table 1. The entries in Table
1 show that R&D spending is substantial for the industry, averaging roughly 32% of total
assets over the sample period. In addition, cash holdings are also substantial, averaging 45%
of total assets. While the mean level of debt is somewhat high at 26% of total assets, the
much lower median and 25th percentile values (as well as high standard deviation) indicate
that the distribution is skewed—there are firms with substantial amounts of debt on their
balance sheet that drive the mean up. However, accounting for cash holdings and computing
net debt, the mean firm in the industry as well as the median firm hold substantially negative
net debt as a result of their cash holdings.
      Table 1 also contains summary statistics for the volatility and beta estimates. The mean
volatility of daily returns, calculated from rolling 360-day windows, is 3.1% for total volatility
and 2.9% for idiosyncratic volatility. Consistent with portfolio diversification benefits, the
numbers are lower when considering rolling volatilities of daily portfolio returns, 1% and 0.5%
for total and idiosyncratic volatility, respectively. The monthly average volatility estimates
are higher, at roughly 17% for total volatility and 14.1% for idiosyncratic volatility. Finally,
for the beta estimates, the mean market beta for the industry is roughly 0.90, indicating that
the biopharma industry co-moves less than one-for-one with the market. The mean of the
SMB beta is slightly less than 0; however the standard deviation and 75th percentile indicate
that it is also positive for a number of years. The mean of the HML beta is negative, and
while the standard deviation indicates substantial variability, the negative percentile values
also indicate that it is negative for most years.
 15
      http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data library.html




                                                   18
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table provides summary statistics for all variables. CRt (4) is the 4-firm concentration ratio
for year t, defined by equation (1). (R&D/T A)i,t is R&D expenditures scaled by total assets.
(P P E/T A)i,t is property, plant, and equipment scaled by total assets. (Cash/T A)i,t is cash and
short-term investments scaled by total assets. (Debt/T A)i,t is debt, which is the sum of total long-
term debt and short-term debt (debt in current liabilities), scaled by total assets. (N et Debt/T A)i,t
is net debt scaled by total assets, where N et Debti,t = Debti,t − Cashi,t . σi,t is individual stock
                         idio is individual idiosyncratic return volatility, both calculated from a rolling
return volatility, and σi,t
window of the past 360 daily returns for each stock. σP,t is value-weighted portfolio return volatility
       idio is idiosyncratic value-weighted portfolio return volatility, calculated from the past 360
and σP,t
daily returns for the value-weighted portfolio of biopharma stocks. σ̂T is the monthly estimate of
average stock volatility, given by (3), and σ̂Tidio is the monthly estimate of average idiosyncratic
volatility given by (4). βt,mkt , βt,SM B , and βt,HM L are the betas of the market, size, and value
Fama-French factors, estimated using a rolling 2-year window of daily value-weighted portfolio
returns. All variables run from 1950 to 2012. All financial characteristic variables are winsorized
at the 1% level.

                     Variable          Mean    SD    p25   Median                  p75
                     CRt (4)           0.387 0.066 0.339    0.368                0.453
                  (R&D/T A)i,t         0.317 0.354 0.066    0.183                0.426
                  (P P E/T A)i,t       0.173 0.165 0.039    0.125                0.267
                  (Cash/T A)i,t        0.447 0.324 0.131    0.420                0.765
                  (Debt/T A)i,t        0.258 0.465 0.0003   0.087                0.286
                (N et Debt/T A)i,t     −0.185 0.635 −0.679 −0.248                 0.104
                        σi,t           0.031 0.015 0.018    0.027                0.043
                          idio
                       σi,t            0.029 0.014 0.016    0.025                0.039
                        σP,t           0.010 0.004 0.008    0.009                0.011
                          idio
                       σP,t            0.005 0.002 0.004    0.005                0.006
                        σ̂T            0.166 0.086 0.090    0.160                0.217
                       σ̂Tidio         0.141 0.077 0.076    0.127                0.186
                       βt,mkt          0.904 0.173 0.779    0.892                1.060
                      βt,SM B          −0.087 0.258 −0.247 −0.130                 0.086
                      βt,HM L          −0.362 0.339 −0.578 −0.298                −0.144




                                                    19
3.3     Time-Series Evidence on Average Trends

Measures of Competition

The top two graphs of Figure 2 show the value of of the Concentration Ratio for the bio-
pharma industry over time. As can be seen from the graphs, the Concentration Ratio has
shown a steady decline over time from 1950 until the mid 1990s, and then has exhibited
a slight upward trend.16 Similarly, the number of competitors in the industry has steady
increased until the mid-1990s, after which it has remained relatively flat. Overall, both
the Concentration Ratio and the number of competitors in the industry indicate that con-
centration in the biopharma industry has gone down (and thus that competition has gone
up) substantially over time from 1950. This is consistent with existing papers (e.g. Caves,
Whinston, and Hurwitz (1991), Grabowski and Vernon (1990, 1992), and others), who have
shown that the industry has become more competitive over time.


Financial Characteristics

Taking this increase in competition over time as a given, we now examine the financial
characteristics of firms in the biopharma industry. Figure 3 shows how the financial charac-
teristics of the biopharma industry have evolved over time. The mean and median values of
(R&D/T A)i,t , (P P E/T A)i,t , (Cash/T A)i,t , (Debt/T A)i,t , and (N et Debt/T A)i,t are calcu-
lated for each year. In order to distinguish these trends from larger trends that may also be
taking place in other industries, the mean values of these variables are also included for all
other industries apart from the biopharma industry.
    The graphs presented in Figure 3 are consistent with predictions 1 and 2 of the theoretical
model. In particular, as competition has increased over this time period, both mean and
median R&D expenditures have increased, while assets-in-place (measured by PPE) have
  16
     For robustness, in Figure B1 of the Appendix, we also present the same trends for alternative sales-based
competition ratios: the 8-firm Concentration Ratio (where M = 8 in (1)), the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index,
and the Hannah and Kay (1971) Index. The results are qualitatively similar.




                                                     20
                        Figure 2: Competition in the Biopharma Industry
These figures present estimates of competition over time for the biopharma industry. The top
figure gives the 4-firm Concentration Ratio. The ratio is calculated for each year using equation
(1), and a higher number indicates increased concentration. The bottom figure gives the number
of competitors in the biopharma industry over time.


                                                                    4-Firm Concentration Ratio CR(4)
                                   .5          .4 5
                 C o n c e n tra tio n R a tio
                    .3 5           .4
                                   .3
                                   .2 5




                                                      1950   1960         1970      1980       1990    2000   2010
                                                                                      Year




                                                                          Number of Competitors
                                   800   600
                 N u m b e r o f F irm s
                         400       200
                                   0




                                                      1950   1960         1970      1980       1990    2000   2010
                                                                                      Year




                                                                                    21
                                            Figure 3: Financial Characteristics over Time
These graphs show the mean (solid blue line) and median (dashed red line) values of financial
characteristics for the biopharma industry in each year. The green dotted lines represent the mean
values of financial characteristics for all other industries.

                                              R&D Expenditures                                                                                                                       Assets-in-Place
           .5




                                                                                                                                        .4
           .4




                                                                                                                                        .3
               .3
      R & D /T A




                                                                                                                                 P P E /T A
                                                                                                                                    .2
     .2




                                                                                                                                        .1
           .1
           0




                    1950   1960           1970          1980                         1990           2000           2010                 0        1950         1960            1970           1980      1990           2000       2010
                                                  Data Year - Fiscal                                                                                                                          Year

                                  Biopharma Mean                                            Biopharma Median                                                         Biopharma Mean                           Biopharma Median
                                  Other Industries Mean                                                                                                              Other Industries Mean



                                                 Cash Holdings                                                                                                                               Debt
                                                                                                                                        .5
           .6




                                                                                                                                        .4
           .5




                                                                                                                                            .3
               .4
     C a s h /T A




                                                                                                                                  D e b t/T A
     .3




                                                                                                                                 .2
           .2




                                                                                                                                        .1
           .1




                                                                                                                                        0




                    1950   1960           1970            1980                       1990           2000           2010                          1950         1960            1970           1980      1990           2000       2010
                                                           Year                                                                                                                               Year

                                  Biopharma Mean                                            Biopharma Median                                                         Biopharma Mean                           Biopharma Median
                                  Other Industries Mean                                                                                                              Other Industries Mean



                                                                                                                          Net Debt
                                                                      .2      0
                                                              N e t D e b t/T A
                                                             -.2      -.4




                                                                                  1950         1960            1970           1980                  1990           2000           2010
                                                                                                                               Year

                                                                                                      Biopharma Mean                                       Biopharma Median
                                                                                                      Other Industries Mean




                                                                                                                          22
decreased sharply.17 Moreover, cash holdings have increased substantially over this time
period. Finally, while the mean level of debt has increased over time (mostly in the 1970s
and the 2000s), the median level of debt has declined consistently from the mid-1970s. As the
summary statistics also indicated, the debt levels are cross-sectionally skewed across firms,
with some firms holding very large amounts of debt—this drives the mean values upwards.
But the median debt levels indicate that the majority of firms have decreased their debt
levels in the industry. Net debt shows a similar trend, although the decline in both mean
and median values are more marked until the late-1990s. While the mean level increases
after that point (concurrent with the increase in debt), the median level of net debt stays
relatively flat, consistent with how the competition measures behaved over this period. For
all of the variables, the trends for the biopharma industry are more striking than those for
other industries, suggesting that the trends we observe for the biopharma industry are not
driven by aggregate trends affecting all industries.18


Stock Return Volatility

For the volatility time-series trends of the biopharma industry, we begin by examining the
rolling total and idiosyncratic stock return volatility of individual stocks in the biopharma
                                                                  idio
industry, averaged at each date—i.e. the mean levels of σi,t and σi,t  at each date. The
results are shown in panel (a) of Figure 4. The evidence is consistent with the predictions
of the model. Specifically, total stock return volatility and idiosyncratic volatility have both
increased substantially over time, as competition has also increased. This effect is the most
striking for the post-1960s time period, when the number of firms increases substantially.
  17
     The secular increase in mean R&D expenditures understates an interesting cyclicality. One explanation
for this cyclicality is a change in profitability each year, which partly determines how much firms are able
to spend on R&D—and which in turn is partly dependent on the overall state of the economy. A graph of
R&D expenditures scaled by earnings reveals a smoother trend over time.
  18
     The trends for R&D, cash, and assets-in-place remain relatively flat until the mid-1970s, while debt
increases during this early time period. While this is in contrast to the reduction in the Concentration
Ratio during this time period, this is consistent with the number of competitors (as shown in Figure 2 ) also
being relatively flat during this period. As previously discussed, sales-based measures of competition may
not be ideal for this industry, and thus these measures may not accurately gauge competition during certain
periods.


                                                     23
       Panel (b) of Figure 4 depicts the rolling total and idiosyncratic stock return volatility
                                                                                     idio
of a value-weighted portfolio of biopharma firms over time (represented by σP,t and σP,t  ).
The dotted red lines represent trend lines. In general, the level of volatility is lower for
the portfolio, as a result of diversification. While not as striking as the results in panel (a)
of Figure 4, both total and idiosyncratic volatility have trended upwards (as shown by the
dotted red trend lines). Total stock return volatility exhibits a number of periods of large
spikes in volatility, especially after the mid-1980s. The same is true for idiosyncratic stock
return volatility after the 1970s, which in addition also has a very large spike around 2001,
which may be attributable to the September 11th attacks and also the bursting of the private
equity bubble. While there is a substantial decline in volatility in the years following that,
both graphs generally show an increased number of periods of high volatility over time.
       The evidence in both panels of Figure 4 is consistent with the predictions of the model.
Specifically, total stock return volatility and idiosyncratic volatility have both increased
substantially over time, as competition has also increased. This effect is the most striking
for the post-1960s time period, when the number of firms increases substantially. These
results are also consistent with the findings of Irvine and Pontiff (2009), who argue that
an increase in idiosyncratic volatility of the average stock is attributable to more intense
economy-wide competition.
       We next examine the volatility of the biopharma industry using non-overlapping monthly
volatilities. Figure 5 depicts average monthly stock volatility as in Bali et al. (2005),
as described in equations (3)–(4). In panel (a) of Figure 5, the left graph shows total
stock volatility (described by equation (3)), while the right graphs shows idiosyncratic stock
volatility (described by equation (4)). Panel (b) of Figure 5 illustrates a simple 12-month
moving average of the graphs in Panel (a). Overall, the graphs illustrate a clear trend of
increasing volatility over time, consistent with the predictions of the model as competition
has increased.19 For further robustness, Figure B2 in the Appendix gives additional monthly
  19
    A possible concern is that the upward trend in volatility is stochastic rather than deterministic in nature.
To examine this, we also run Augmented Dickey-Fuller tests on the monthly series to test for the presence


                                                      24
                                    Figure 4: Total and Idiosyncratic Stock Return Volatility
Panel (a) shows total and idiosyncratic volatility for the biopharma industry, calculated as the
average, at each date, of total and idiosyncratic stock return volatility of individual stocks. The
left figure of panel (a) shows total stock return volatility for the biopharma industry, while the right
figure of panel (a) shows mean idiosyncratic stock return volatility for the biopharma industry. Total
stock return volatility is calculated using the rolling standard deviation of the past 360 days of daily
returns and then averaged across all firms each day, while idiosyncratic volatility is calculated using
the rolling standard deviation of the past 360 days of individual daily idiosyncratic returns from (2)
and then averaged across all firms each day. Panel (b) shows total (left figure) and idiosyncratic
(right figure) volatility for a value-weighted portfolio of firms in the biopharma industry. Total
stock return volatility is calculated using the rolling standard deviation of the past 360 days of
daily value-weighted portfolio returns, while idiosyncratic volatility is calculated using the rolling
standard deviation of the past 360 days of daily idiosyncratic portfolio returns from (2).

                                                                                                  idio
                                                                     (a) Mean Levels of σi,t and σi,t
                                           Total Stock Return Volatility                                                            Idiosyncratic Stock Return Volatility
                .0 8




                                                                                                             .0 8
                .0 6




                                                                                                             .0 6
     M e a n V o la tility




                                                                                                  M e a n V o la tility
            .0 4




                                                                                                         .0 4
                .0 2




                                                                                                             .0 2
                0




                                                                                                             0




                             1950   1960     1970        1980        1990      2000   2010                                1950   1960      1970        1980        1990     2000   2010
                                                           Year                                                                                          Year




                                                                                                    idio
                                                                            (b) Levels of σP,t and σP,t
                                           Total Stock Return Volatility                                                            Idiosyncratic Stock Return Volatility
                .0 2 5




                                                                                                             .0 1 5
                .0 2
     V o la tility




                                                                                                  V o la tility
                                                                                                         .0 1
          .0 1 5.0 1




                                                                                                             .0 0 5
                .0 0 5




                             1950   1960     1970        1980        1990      2000   2010                                1950   1960      1970        1980        1990     2000   2010
                                                           Year                                                                                          Year




                                                                                             25
estimates of value-weighted portfolio volatility.


Betas

The betas of a value-weighted portfolio of biopharma firms are shown in Figure 6. The
dotted lines represent trend lines for the different beta estimates. As can be seen in the
figure, the beta estimates for all three factors have generally declined from 1950 and onward.
The market beta exhibits a somewhat gradual decline over the time period, from slightly
over 1.0 in 1950 to roughly 0.7 in 2012. However, the decline over time is more striking
for the SMB and HML factor betas. The SMB factor beta shows a clear downward trend
from 1950 until 2000, though it has trended upward since 2000. The HML factor beta
also exhibits a striking downward trend from 1950 through the mid-to-late 1990s. While
this trend does not continue after the late 1990s, this coincides with the slight increase in
concentration in the industry around the same time, as depicted in Figure 2. In addition, the
two large spikes during this period may be attributable to the bursting of the dot com bubble
in the late 1990s and the September 11th terrorist attacks in 2001/bursting of the private
equity bubble. The beta estimates may be affected by the changes in debt and cash levels
over time; hence, we re-ran our analysis using unlevered stock returns—constructed using
a simple unlevering formula—and our results and main findings are unchanged.20 Overall,
the declines in beta over time are consistent with the predictions of the model that firms
will substitute investments in assets-in-place (which carry systematic risk) for investments
in R&D (which carry idiosyncratic risk).
    Table B1 of the Appendix summarizes the direction and significance of the relationship
between the various financial characteristics and measures of competition through time-series
regressions.
of a unit root. For both total volatility and idiosyncratic volatility, Augmented Dickey-Fuller tests reject the
presence of a unit root at at least the 5% level when up to 5 lags are included, regardless of whether a trend
is included.
   20
      Results available upon request.




                                                      26
                                 Figure 5: Total and Idiosyncratic Stock Return Volatility
Monthly estimates of total return volatility and idiosyncratic volatility. Panel (a) depicts of monthly
estimates of average (across all firms in a given month) total and idiosyncratic stock volatility, as
in Bali et. al. (2005). The left graph of panel (a) is total stock volatility, as described by equation
(3). The right graph of panel (a) is idiosyncratic stock volatility, as described by equation (4).
Panel (b) gives 12-month simple moving averages of the graphs in panel (a).

                                                                              (a) Levels of σ̂T and σ̂Tidio
                              Monthly Standard Deviation---Total Volatility                                                          Monthly Standard Deviation---Idiosyncratic Volatility
            .8




                                                                                                                         .8
            .6




                                                                                                                         .6
     V o la tility




                                                                                                         V o la tility
          .4




                                                                                                              .4
            .2




                                                                                                                         .2
            0




                                                                                                                         0




                     1950        1960        1970         1980         1990         2000    2010                              1950         1960        1970        1980        1990          2000   2010
                                                            Year                                                                                                     Year




                                                                   (b) Moving Average of σ̂T and σ̂Tidio
                       Monthly Standard Deviation---Total Volatility (Moving Average)                                    Monthly Standard Deviation---Idiosyncratic Volatility (Moving Average)
            .5




                                                                                                                    .4
            .4




                                                                                                                    .3
     V o la tility




                                                                                                         V o la tility
             .3




                                                                                                                    .2
            .2




                                                                                                                    .1
            .1




              1950m1           1960m1       1970m1       1980m1      1990m1       2000m1   2010m1                          1950            1960        1970       1980        1990           2000   2010
                                                            Year                                                                                                    Year




                                                                                                    27
                      Figure 6: Biopharma Industry Value-weighted Betas
This figure shows the betas of a value-weighted portfolio of biopharma stocks, calculated via the
Fama-French 3-factor model using a rolling 2-year window of daily stock returns. The blue line
represents the market factor, the green line represents the market-to-book factor (HML), and the
red line represents the size factor (SMB). The dotted lines are trend lines for the factors.
             1 .5
             1
             .5
          B e ta
             0
             -.5
             -1
             -1 .5




                     1950    1960    1970      1980       1990         2000    2010
                                                 Year

                                            Market               SMB
                                            HML




                                               28
4     Differences-in-Differences Analysis

While the previous empirical evidence is consistent with the predictions of the model, a
limitation of the evidence is that it treats the increase in competition as exogenous over
time. However, this assumption may be violated in practice. For example, R&D outlays
by incumbent firms can act as a competitive entry barrier, thus creating an endogeneity
problem—R&D is affected by competition, but competition is also affected by R&D. In
order to overcome this, we exploit the exogenous variation in competition introduced by the
passage of the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984.
    The Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984 (informally known
as the Hatch-Waxman Act, and henceforth referred to as such) was introduced for the
expressed purpose of increasing competition in the drug marketplace, by facilitating the
entry of generic drugs after the expiration of a patent. Prior to the passage of the Hatch-
Waxman Act, onerous Food and Drug Administration requirements made it necessary for
generic drugs to replicate many of the original drug’s tests in order to gain market approval.
However, once the law was passed, generic drugs only needed to prove bioequivalence to the
original drug, thus greatly decreasing the barriers to competitive entry. A number of papers
have provided evidence that the Hatch-Waxman Act did indeed increase competition and
facilitate the entry of generic drugs. See, for example, analysis and evidence by Grabowski
and Vernon (1986, 1992), who look at entry, market share, and price data for a sample of
drugs after the enactment of the law, as well as Grabowski (2007) for an overview.
    Evidence of the effect of the law on competition in the biopharma industry can also be
seen empirically through the competition measures. As shown in Figure 2, the number of
new entrants increases substantially after 1984, although there is an increasing trend in the
years prior. The Concentration Ratio experiences a signficant drop around 1990. While
this drop occurs a number of years after the passage of the Hatch-Waxman Act, this delay
is consistent with the Concentration Ratio being a sales-based competition measure. Since
all drugs must first pass the FDA approval process before they can be sold, which takes a

                                             29
                      Figure 7: Biopharma Patent Applications
This figure depicts the number of new whole patent applications from 1975 to 1990 by U.S.
firms in the pharmaceutical and medicines industry. Data is taken from the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office.                    2500
             N u m b e r o f P a te n t A p p lic a tio n s
                  1500               1000  2000




                                                              1975   1976   1977   1978   1979   1980   1981   1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990
                                                                                                                 Year



number of years, new entrants will not be expected to affect the sales of the industry until
several years after their entry. We therefore present an additional indicator of competition
in the industry—the number of patent applications filed by biopharma firms. As patent
applications can be filed even in the early stage of a drug’s development, the number of
patents filed can be viewed as an indicator of the intensity of R&D competition. Figure 7
graphs the number of whole patent applications filed by U.S. biopharma firms around the
introduction of the Hatch-Waxman Act.21 As can be seen from the figure, the number of
new patent applications is flat before 1984, but starting in 1984 the number of applications
began to sharply increase. This is consistent with the Hatch-Waxman Act facilitating greater
competition amongst biopharma firms.
 21
      Data is taken from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO).



                                                                                                               30
4.1       Empirical Methodology

The ideal test is to find two groups of firms with similar characteristics (as defined by the
theory), exogenously change the degree of competition for one group, and then see if the re-
sulting difference conforms to the predictions of the theory. We use the Hatch-Waxman Act
as a source of exogenous variation in order to conduct a differences-in-differences analysis to
provide cleaner empirical support for the predictions of the theory. As the Hatch-Waxman
Act specifically influenced the biopharma industry through an increase in competition, the
treatment group consists of biopharma firms (SIC codes 2830-2836). Since the theory is
applicable for firms in R&D-intensive industries, we choose firms from the five top R&D-
intensive industries other than biopharma as our control group.22 A concern is that the
control group has different characteristics and is thus not properly comparable to the bio-
pharma industry. To account for this, we therefore use propensity-score matching to choose
firms from the other R&D-intensive industries that are comparable to the firms in our bio-
pharma sample based on observable characteristics in the period before the law was passed.23
The pre-period is from 1975 to 1983, while the post-period is from 1984 to 1995. The result-
ing sample consists of 959 firms, for a total of 4,596 firm-years of data for the control group,
and a total of 4,374 firm-years of data for the treatment group.
       A critical assumption of the differences-in-differences framework is that the treatment
and control groups exhibit parallel trends in terms of the outcome variables prior to the
event in question. For the financial characteristic variables, Figure 8 provides graphical
  22
      These industries are identified by the NSF (National Science Foundation (1999)) as being the top R&D-
intensive industries, and include: Industrial and other chemicals (2-digit SIC code 28, excluding 3-digit code
283), industrial and commercial machinery and computers (2-digit SIC code 35), electrical equipment (2-digit
SIC code 36), transportation equipment including aircraft and missiles (2-digit SIC code 37), and measuring
and analyzing equipment (2-digit SIC code 38).
   23
      More specifically, we choose firms in the other R&D-intensive industries that match biopharma firms
based on observable characteristics in the years between 1975 and 1984. The matching characteristics are:
size (log (T A)), profitability (EBIT /T A), capital structure (N et Debt/T A), dividend payout, and investment
opportunities as proxied by market-to-book (M E/BE). We allow matches between multiple firms (i.e. we
implement matching with replacement, allowing up to three matches), although this assumption does not
have a material impact on our results. We further restrict our choice of control firms to the ones which are
on a common support in terms of these observable characteristics before the implementation of the law. Our
results are also robust to a one-to-one matched biopharma and control group sample over the sample period.


                                                      31
evidence for the years surrounding the passage of the Hatch-Waxman Act, that examines
this assumption for the control group. In these graphs, the solid blue lines represent average
values for the biopharma industry, while the dashed red lines represent average values for
other R&D-intensive firms. The vertical red lines represent the year that the Hatch-Waxman
Act was implemented. The levels of R&D expenditures, cash holdings, debt, net debt, and
assets-in-place are all similar for both biopharma and the control group in the pre-period,
showing that these two industries are similar in terms of these financial characteristics.
Moreover, these characteristics exhibit strong parallel trends before the Hatch-Waxman Act
was implemented. After the Act was implemented, the values for the two groups diverge in
a way consistent with the predictions of the model. Specifically, in the period following the
enactment of the law, R&D expenditures and cash holdings for biopharma firms appear to
increase sharply relative to the control group, while debt, net debt, and assets-in-place appear
to decrease relative to the trend for the control group. Overall, the graphs provide evidence
supporting the appropriateness of the differences-in-differences analysis in this setting, and
also provide suggestive evidence for the effect of the Hatch-Waxman Act on the financial
characteristics of the biopharma industry.24
       For a more formal analysis, we estimate the following regression for the financial charac-
teristic predictions:


  Yi,t = γ0 + γ1 HWt + γ2 Biopharmai + γ3 HWt × Biopharmai + ηXi,t + µi + λt + εi,t . (5)


In (5), Yi,t represents the dependent variable of interest for firm i in year t, predicted to vary
  24
     A further assumption of the differences-in-differences framework in this setting is that the event (i.e.
the Hatch-Waxman Act) increased competition for the biopharma industry relative to the control group.
While the Hatch-Waxman Act dealt with drug development and thus was targeted specifically toward the
biopharma industry, we explicitly test this assumption in order to rule out any sharp changes in competition
that may have affected the control group at the same time. Figure B3 of the Appendix examines changes in
competition as measured by the Concentration Ratio (CR(4), both graphically and through a differences-in-
differences regression. While the Concentration Ratio and other sales-based measures of concentration are
likely imperfect measures of competition for the biopharma industry, as we previously argued, the results
show that the Concentration Ratio dropped for the biopharma industry relative to the control group after
the Hatch-Waxman Act, which is consistent with it increasing competition for the biopharma sector.



                                                     32
 Figure 8: Financial Characteristic Trends for Treatment and Control Group
Trends for financial characteristic variables for R&D expenditures, cash holdings, debt, net debt,
and assets-in-place, all scaled by total assets. All variables are averages for each group. The solid
blue lines give averages for the biopharma industry, while the red dashed lines give averages for the
propensity-score-matched sample of R&D-intensive firms. A vertical red line is included in each
graph, representing the year that the Hatch-Waxman Act was implemented.

                                         R&D Expenditures                                                                                                           Cash Holdings




                                                                                                                             .5
             .4




                                                                                                                             .4
             .3




                                                                                                                    C a s h /T A
     R & D /T A




                                                                                                                          .3
        .2




                                                                                                                             .2
             .1




                                                                                                                             .1
             0




                       1970   1975           1980                         1985          1990             1995                           1970       1975             1980            1985              1990    1995
                                                    Year                                                                                                                   Year

                                 Biopharma                          Other R&D-intensive Firms                                                           Biopharma                 Other R&D-intensive Firms



                                                    Debt                                                                                                               Net Debt
             .3 5




                                                                                                                             .2
             .3




                                                                                                                             .1
                                                                                                                    N e t D e b t/T A
                .2 5




                                                                                                                                  0
      D e b t/T A




                                                                                                                     -.1
     .2      .1 5




                                                                                                                             -.2
                                                                                                                             -.3
             .1




                       1970   1975           1980                         1985          1990             1995                           1970       1975             1980            1985              1990    1995
                                                    Year                                                                                                                   Year

                                 Biopharma                          Other R&D-intensive Firms                                                           Biopharma                 Other R&D-intensive Firms



                                                                                                        Assets-in-Place
                                                                   .3
                                                                   .2 5
                                                      P P E /T A
                                                                   .2
                                                                   .1 5




                                                                          1970         1975             1980                            1985        1990            1995
                                                                                                                Year

                                                                                            Biopharma                           Other R&D-intensive Firms




                                                                                                               33
as a function of competition by the theoretical model. HWt is an indicator variable which
takes a value of 1 if the year is 1984 or later, which is the period after the Act was enacted into
law. Biopharmai is an indicator variable which takes a value of 1 if firm i is in the biopharma
industry. It follows that the that the regression estimate of γ3 is the differences-in-differences
estimator—the effect of the increase in competition stemming from the Hatch-Waxman Act
on Yi,t . For the financial characteristics, the dependent variable Yi,t represents the variable of
interest for firm i in year t, as predicted by the theoretical model. Specifically, for the financial
characteristics, we examine (R&D/T A)i,t , (P P E/T A)i,t , (Cash/T A)i,t , (Debt/T A)i,t , and
(N et Debt/T A)i,t as choices for Yi,t . In order to control for the possibility of differential
trends between the control and treatment groups, Xi,t is a vector of control variables that
may also covary with the dependent variable.25 Finally, µi represents firm fixed effects, to
control for time-invariant firm characteristics, and λt represents year fixed effects, to control
for time-trends. Equation (5) is estimated for the period from 1975 to 1995.26
       We also examine the effect of the Hatch-Waxman Act on the stock return risk variables.
Specifically, we estimate a differences-in-differences regression for the period surrounding the
implementation of the Act (from 1975 to 1995), in order to examine how the volatility and
betas of biopharma and control R&D-intensive firms changed after the Act was put into
law. Consistent with the approach in Section 3.1, the volatility and beta variables which we
use as dependent variables are calculated for value-weighted portfolios of biopharma firms
and control R&D-intensive firms. For the volatility variables, we calculate yearly values of
                                              idio
total and idiosyncratic volatility (σP,t and σP,t  ) for value-weighted portfolios of both groups
of firms using the standard deviation of each portfolio’s daily total or idiosyncratic returns
over the year. For the beta variables, we calculate yearly beta estimates of value-weighted
  25
      Control variables included in Xi,t for the financial characteristic variables include: log (N Ai,t ) (where
N A = T A − Cash), (P P E/T A)i,t , (Cash/T A)i,t , (EBIT /T A)i,t (earnings as a fraction of total assets to
control for profitability), (M E/BE)i,t (market value of equity to book value of equity), and (Div/T A)i,t
(the amount of common/ordinary dividends paid). Cash and PPE are excluded as control variables in the
cases when they are the dependent variables of interest.
   26
      We choose this estimation window in order to capture any delayed effects of competition on the variables
of interest, given the long gestation periods of biopharma projects. However, our results still hold for a shorter
estimation window.


                                                       34
portfolios of biopharma and control firms via equation (2), using the past 720 days of daily
returns.27


4.2       Results and Discussion

We begin by examining the effect of the increase in competition caused by the Hatch-Waxman
Act on the financial characteristic variables predicted by the theory, and then examine the
impact of Hatch-Waxman on the risk variables for the biopharma industry.


Effect on Financial Characteristics

The estimation results for regression (5) are included in Table 2. Results both with and
without control variables and fixed effects are included.
       Overall, the results from the differences-in-differences analysis are consistent with the
predictions of the model. The differences-in-differences estimator for R&D is positive and
significant with or without control variables and fixed effects (columns (1) and (2)). This
indicates that, as the Hatch-Waxman Act increased competition for the biopharma industry,
firms in the industry increased their R&D relative to the control group. The differences-in-
differences estimator for P P E is negative and significant in column (3), which is consistent
with the prediction of the model, but is insignificant in column (4) when including con-
trols and fixed effects. Thus, the evidence for assets-in-place in this setting is mixed. The
differences-in-differences estimator for Cash is positive and significant whether controls are
included or not, indicating that firms in the biopharma industry increased their cash hold-
ings as a result of the Hatch-Waxman Act. The differences-in-differences estimator for Debt
is negative and significant in column (7), and is also negative though insignificant in column
  27
    Figure B4 of the Appendix graphs trends for the risk variables and the control group surrounding the
passage of the law. For the volatility estimates, both total and idiosyncratic volatility are at roughly the
same level and exhibit strong parallel trends prior to the passage of the law, but then increase more for the
biopharma industry than for the control group after the passage of the law. All three beta estimates drop
by more for the biopharma industry than the control group following passage of the law. However, while the
HML beta shows roughly parallel trends prior to the passage of the law, the parallel trend assumption may
not hold well for the market beta and SMB betas.


                                                     35
                           Table 2: The Effect of the Hatch-Waxman Act on Financial Characteristics
     This table estimates the differences-in-differences regression (5) for financial characteristics. The sample consists of biopharma firms
     and a control group consisting of propensity-score matched R&D-intensive firms, matched on size, profitability, capital structure, and
     market-to-book. The sample period spans from 1975 to 1995. The dependent variables consist of R&D, P P E, Cash, Debt, and N et Debt,
     each scaled by total assets. HW t is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if the year is 1984 or later, and a value of zero otherwise.
     Biopharmai is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if firm i is in the biopharma industry, and a value of 0 otherwise. Control
     variables include log (N Ai,t ), (P P E/T A)i,t , (Cash/T A)i,t , (EBIT /T A)i,t , (M/B)i,t , and (Div/T A)i,t . Controls for cash and PPE are
     excluded when they are the dependent variable of interest. Year and firm fixed effects are included where indicated. Robust standard
     errors are given in parentheses, and standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%,
     and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                               Dependent Variable:
                              (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)      (6)           (7)          (8)        (9)           (10)
                              R&D        R&D         PPE          PPE         Cash     Cash          Debt         Debt       N et Debt     N et Debt
      HWt × Biopharmai        0.168***   0.023**     −0.033**     0.009       0.191*** 0.030*        −0.066**     −0.014     −0.256***     −0.056*




36
                              (0.017)    (0.010)     (0.014)      (0.012)     (0.021)  (0.017)       (0.028)      (0.020)    (0.039)       (0.030)
      Biopharmai              0.024**                0.025                    0.037*                 0.048**                 0.012**
                              (0.012)                (0.015)                  (0.019)                (0.020)                 (0.031)
      HWt                     0.020***               −0.026***                0.008***               0.051***                0.042**
                              (0.006)                (0.007)                  (0.009)                (0.018)                 (0.022)
      Constant                0.071***   0.111***    0.250***     0.270***    0.164*** 0.601***      0.204***     0.343***   0.040***      −0.422***
                              (0.006)    (0.017)     (0.008)      (0.017)     (0.007)  (0.019)       (0.009)      (0.047)    (0.015)       (0.040)

      Controls                No         Yes         No           Yes         No          Yes        No           Yes        No            Yes
      Firm Fixed Effects      No         Yes         No           Yes         No          Yes        No           Yes        No            Yes
      Year Fixed Effects      No         Yes         No           Yes         No          Yes        No           Yes        No            Yes
      Observations            7,502      6,448       8,479        7,223       8,487       7,223      8,465        7,223      8,465         7,223
      Number of Firms         871        783         938          848         939         848        939          848        939           848
      Adjusted R2             0.117      0.820       0.015        0.783       0.164       0.831      0.002        0.575      0.044         0.696
(8), providing some evidence that firms in the biopharma industry decreased their debt as a
result of the increase in competition. However, the estimator for N et Debt is negative and
significant in both columns (9) and (10), indicating that net debt also fell as a result of the
increase in competition for the biopharma industry.


Effect on Risk Variables

The estimated impact of the Hatch-Waxman Act on the risk variables for the biopharma
industry are given in Table 3. For both total and idiosyncratic stock return volatility, the
differences-in-differences estimator is positive and significant, indicating that both total and
idiosyncratic return volatility increased significantly more for the biopharma industry than
for the control group immediately following the passage of the Hatch-Waxman Act, which
is consistent with the predictions of the theory.
   For the betas, the coefficient for HWt × Biopharmai is negative though insignificant
for the beta of the SMB factor, but is negative and significant for the betas of the market
and value (HML) factors. This decline in betas compared to the control group immediately
following the Hatch-Waxman Act is consistent with the predictions of the theory. However,
the results for the betas should be interpreted with some caution, as the parallel trends
assumption may not hold well for the market and SMB betas.
   Overall the empirical results for the risk variables support the predictions of the theory
and suggest that the increase in competition brought by the Hatch-Waxman Act led to
increased volatility but reduced betas for biopharma firms.


4.3    Robustness: A Falsification Test

As a robustness check to account for the possibility that our results are being driven by
trends that started before our sample period, we conduct a falsification test for the financial
characteristic variables, where we run regression (5) for the sample period from 1960 to
1980, but falsely specify that the Act was implemented in 1969. As before, biopharma firms


                                              37
                Table 3: The Effect of Competition on Risk Variables
This table estimates the change in the stock return risk variables for biopharma firms versus control
group firms as a result of the Hatch-Waxman Act. The control group is a propensity-score matched
sample of R&D-intensive firms, matched on size, profitability, capital structure, and market-to-
book. The sample spans from 1975 to 1995. The dependent variables in columns (1) and (2) consist
of the total and idiosyncratic stock return volatilities of value-weighted portfolios of biopharma or
control firms (σt and σtidio ), calculated at the end of each year using daily returns. The dependent
variables in columns (3)–(5) consist of the betas of value-weighted portfolios of biopharma or control
firms, calculated as of the end of year t—the market beta βmkt,t , size beta βSM B,t , and value beta
βHM L,t . HW t is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if the year is after 1984, and a value
of zero otherwise. Biopharmai is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if sector i is the
biopharma industry, and 0 otherwise. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                Dependent Variable:
                               (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)
                               σ            σ idio      βmkt       βSM B       βHM L
      HWt × Biopharmai         0.004***     0.006***    −0.194** −0.092        −0.298*
                               (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.088)    (0.067)     (0.169)
      Biopharmai               0.001        −0.001*     −0.019     −0.144*** −0.328***
                               (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.070)    (0.045)     (0.042)
      Constant                 0.033***     0.032***    1.007*** −0.075*** −0.158**
                               (0.000)      (0.001)     (0.030)    (0.024)     (0.067)

      Year Fixed Effects       Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
      Observations             42           42          42           42            42
      Adjusted R2              0.926        0.905       0.245        0.579         0.432




                                                 38
are our treatment group, and we choose propensity-score matched (based on observable
characteristics in the period from 1960 to 1969) R&D-intensive firms as our control group.
As indicated in Figure 2, there are not as many biopharma firms operating during this period;
as a result, the sample consists of a total of 181 firms with 2,461 firm-years of data.
    The results of the falsification test are included in Table 4. R&D, assets-in-place, and
cash are all insignificant whether or not controls and fixed effect are included. Although debt
and net debt are significant (albeit with the opposite sign as predicted by the theory), they
are both insignificant when fixed effects and controls are included. Overall, these results
suggest that the results from the previous section are not caused by any long-term trends
between the treatment and control groups, as the same results are not found in a different
sample period.



5     Conclusion

In this paper, we explore the interaction between competition, R&D investments, and fi-
nancing choices, as well as the implications of this interaction for the firm’s risk profile. We
motivate our empirical hypotheses with a simple model which predicts that, as competition
increases, firms will increase R&D investment, reduce investment in assets-in-place, carry
more cash, and have a lower level of net debt. Moreover, firm betas will decline, but idiosyn-
cratic risk and total stock return volatility will rise. We provide time-series evidence about
firms in the biopharma industry that is consistent with these predictions. However, since
our predictions rely on an exogenous change in competition, whereas in reality competition
has both exogenous as well as endogenous elements, we have used the Hatch-Waxman Act of
1984 as an exogenous variation that increased competition in the biopharma industry, and
conducted a differences-in-differences test that produces evidence that strongly supports the
model. This approach allows us to overcome the endogeneity concern about competition.
Although we have focused on on the biopharma industry, our results are also applicable to



                                              39
                                Table 4: Falsification Test for the Differences-in-Differences Analysis
     This table estimates the differences-in-differences regression (5) for financial characteristics, but over the sample period from 1960 to
     1980. The sample consists of biopharma firms and a control group consisting of propensity-score matched R&D-intensive firms, matched
     on size, profitability, capital structure, and market-to-book. The dependent variables consist of R&D, P P E, Cash, Debt, and N et Debt,
     each scaled by total assets. Actt is a dummy variable which falsely specifies the passage of the Hatch-Waxman Act—it takes a value of
     1 if the year is 1969 or later, and a value of zero otherwise. Biopharmai is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if firm i is in
     the biopharma industry, and a value of 0 otherwise. Control variables include log (N Ai,t ), (P P E/T A)i,t , (Cash/T A)i,t , (EBIT /T A)i,t ,
     (M/B)i,t , and (Div/T A)i,t . Controls for cash and PPE are excluded when they are the dependent variable of interest. Year and firm
     fixed effects are included where indicated. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses, and standard errors are clustered at the firm
     level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                             Dependent Variable:
                             (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)            (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
                             R&D        R&D         PPE         PPE        Cash       Cash           Debt        Debt        N et Debt   N et Debt
      Actt × Biopharmai      −0.006     0.003       −0.017      −0.024     0.003      0.018          0.116***    0.027       0.106**     0.008




40
                             (0.010)    (0.006)     (0.020)     (0.017)    (0.024)    (0.015)        (0.027)     (0.019)     (0.044)     (0.028)
      Biopharmai             0.020*                 0.020                  0.038                     −0.060**                −0.089**
                             (0.010)                (0.022)                (0.023)                   (0.025)                 (0.043)
      Actt                   −0.013                 −0.014                 −0.039***                 0.025*                  0.065***
                             (0.008)                (0.011)                (0.014)                   (0.014)                 (0.025)
      Constant               0.056***   0.134***    0.295***    0.481***   0.140***   0.587***       0.168***    0.196***    0.027       −0.528***
                             (0.009)    (0.024)     (0.015)     (0.033)    (0.016)    (0.067)        (0.015)     (0.071)     (0.027)     (0.116)

      Controls               No         Yes         No          Yes        No            Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes
      Firm Fixed Effects     No         Yes         No          Yes        No            Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes
      Year Fixed Effects     No         Yes         No          Yes        No            Yes         No          Yes         No          Yes
      Observations           1,494      1,317       2,461       2,002      2,461         2,002       2,422       2,002       2,422       2,002
      Number of Firms        156        140         181         162        181           162         179         162         179         162
      Adjusted R2            0.051      0.862       0.007       0.829      0.035         0.739       0.062       0.736       0.045       0.770
other R&D-intensive firms.
   At a broad level, innovative industries like biopharma have been subject to increased
competitive pressures over time, through both regulation and technological breakthroughs
that have allowed easier entry (such as the Human Genome Project and increasingly faster
and cheaper sequencing technologies). We highlight how these changes in competition may
affect important financial characteristics and risk over time, which may, in turn, affect the
amount of funding that R&D-intensive firms are able to raise. For example, while increased
competition may spur innovation through increased R&D investment, it also increases id-
iosyncratic and total volatility, potentially affecting the appeal of these firms to investors.
   We do not view our framework as a complete characterization of the financial charac-
teristics of important R&D-intensive industries such as the biopharma industry, but rather
as a starting point for analyzing them. For example, an interesting extension would be to
account for R&D projects that may change over time as a result of the discovery of new
technology—this would affect the risk characteristics of R&D-intensive industries in ways
that are not explicitly considered in the model. Another interesting extension would be
to consider a portfolio of R&D projects, rather than the single R&D project in our analy-
sis. In the context of our analysis, one benefit to adopting a portfolio approach is reducing
the idiosyncratic risk in R&D due to the diversification provided by a portfolio of projects.
While a number of advantages of creating a portfolio of R&D projects have been pointed out
through the “megafund” idea of Fernandez, Stein and Lo (2012) and Fagnan, Fernandez, Lo,
and Stein (2013), our analysis suggests that a portfolio of projects may change the effects of
competition on innovation in important ways. Future work could extend our framework to
evaluate these effects as well as the impact of additional frictions related to moral hazard or
information asymmetries, and the new empirical predictions they generate.




                                               41
References

 1. Abel, Andrew B. “Optimal Debt and Profitability in the Tradeoff Theory.” Working
    Paper, 2014.

 2. Aghion, Philippe, Stefan Bechtold, Lea Cassar, and Holger Herz. The causal effects of
    competition on innovation: Experimental Evidence. No. w19987. National Bureau of
    Economic Research, 2014.

 3. Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt.
    ”Competition and Innovation: an Inverted-U Relationship.” The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 120, no. 2 (2005): 701-728.

 4. Aghion, Phillipe, Mathias Dewatripont, and Patrick Rey. ”Competition, Financial
    Discipline and Growth.” The Review of Economic Studies 66, no. 4 (1999): 825-852.

 5. Aghion, Philippe, Christopher Harris, Peter Howitt, and John Vickers. ”Competition,
    imitation and growth with step-by-step innovation.” The Review of Economic Studies
    68, no. 3 (2001): 467-492.

 6. Bali, Turan G., Nusret Cakici, Xuemin Sterling Yan, and Zhe Zhang. ”Does Idiosyn-
    cratic Risk Really Matter?” The Journal of Finance 60, no. 2 (2005): 905-929.

 7. Banks, Jeffrey Scot, and Joel Sobel. ”Equilibrium Selection in Signaling Games.”
    Econometrica 55, no. 3 (1987): 647-61.

 8. Bergemann, Dirk, and Ulrich Hege. ”The Financing of Innovation: Learning and
    Stopping.” RAND Journal of Economics 36, no. 4 (2005): 719-752.

 9. Bhattacharya, Sudipto, Jacob Glazer, and David EM Sappington. ”Sharing Productive
    Knowledge in Internally Financed R&D Contests.” Journal of Industrial Economics 39,
    no. 2 (1990): 187-208.

10. Bhattacharya, Sudipto, and Sergei Guriev. ”Patents vs. trade secrets: Knowledge
    licensing and spillover.” Journal of the European Economic Association 4, no. 6 (2006):
    1112-1147.

11. Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen. ”Identifying Technology
    Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry.” Econometrica 81, no. 4 (2013): 1347-1393.

12. Bolton, Patrick, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang. Debt, Taxes, and Liquidity. No. w20009.
    National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.

13. Brown, James R., Steven M. Fazzari, and Bruce C. Petersen. ”Financing Innovation
    and Growth: Cash Flow, External Equity, and the 1990s R&D Boom.” The Journal
    of Finance 64, no. 1 (2009): 151-185.



                                           42
14. Calomiris, Charles W., and Charles Milton Kahn. ”The Role of Demandable Debt in
    Structuring Optimal Banking Arrangements.” American Economic Review 81, no. 3
    (1991): 497-513.

15. Cassiman, Bruno, and Reinhilde Veugelers. ”In Search of Complementarity in Inno-
    vation Strategy: Internal R&D and External Knowledge Acquisition.” Management
    Science 52, no. 1 (2006): 68-82.

16. Caves, Richard E., Whinston, Michael D., and Mark A. Hurwitz, 1991, “Patent Ex-
    piration, Entry, and Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry”. Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics Vol. 1991, 1-66.

17. Cornaggia, Jess, Yifei Mao, Xuan Tian, and Brian Wolfe. ”Does banking competition
    affect innovation?” Journal of Financial Economics 115, no. 1 (2015): 189-209.

18. DiMasi, Joseph A., and Henry G. Grabowski. ”The cost of biopharmaceutical R&D: is
    biotech different?.” Managerial and Decision Economics 28, no. 4-5 (2007): 469-479.

19. DiMasi, Joseph A., Henry G. Grabowski, and John Vernon. ”R&D Costs, Innovative
    Output and Firm Size in the Pharmaceutical Industry.” International Journal of the
    Economics of Business 2, no. 2 (1995): 201-219.

20. DiMasi, Joseph A., Ronald W. Hansen, and Henry G. Grabowski. ”The Price of
    Innovation: New Estimates of Drug Development Costs.” Journal of Health Economics
    22, no. 2 (2003): 151-185.

21. DiMasi, Joseph A., Ronald W. Hansen, Henry G. Grabowski, and Louis Lasagna.
    ”Cost of innovation in the pharmaceutical industry.” Journal of Health Economics 10,
    no. 2 (1991): 107-142.

22. Fisher, Sara Ellison, Iain M. Cockburn, Zvi Griliches, and Jerry A. Hausman. ”Charac-
    teristics of Demand for Pharmaceutical Products: An Examination of Four Cephalosporins.”
    RAND Journal of Economics 28, no. 3 (1997): 426-446.

23. Fagnan, David E., Jose Maria Fernandez, Andrew W. Lo, and Roger M. Stein. ”Can
    Financial Engineering Cure Cancer?” The American Economic Review 103, no. 3
    (2013): 406-411.

24. Fernandez, Jose-Maria, Roger M. Stein, and Andrew W. Lo. ”Commercializing biomed-
    ical research through securitization techniques.” Nature Biotechnology 30, no. 10
    (2012): 964-975.

25. Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. ”Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
    Stocks and Bonds.” Journal of Financial Economics 33, no. 1 (1993): 3-56.

26. French, Kenneth R., G. William Schwert, and Robert F. Stambaugh. ”Expected Stock
    Returns and Volatility.” Journal of Financial Economics 19, no. 1 (1987): 3-29.



                                          43
27. Gans, Joshua S., and Scott Stern. ”Incumbency and R&D incentives: Licensing the
    Gale of Creative Destruction.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 9, no.
    4 (2000): 485-511.

28. Gans, Joshua S., and Scott Stern. ”The Product Market and the Market for “Ideas”:
    Commercialization Strategies for Technology Entrepreneurs.” Research Policy 32, no.
    2 (2003): 333-350.

29. Gans, Joshua S., David H. Hsu, and Scott Stern. ”When Does Start-up Innovation
    Spur the Gale of Creative Destruction?” RAND Journal of Economics 33, no. 4 (2002):
    571-586.

30. Gilbert, Richard J. ”Competition and innovation.” Journal of Industrial Organization
    Education 1, no. 1 (2006): 1-23.

31. Grabowski, Henry G. ”Competition between generic and branded drugs.” Pharma-
    ceutical innovation: incentives, competition, and cost-benefit analysis in international
    perspective (2007).

32. Grabowski, Henry, and John Vernon. ”Longer Patents for Lower Imitation Barriers:
    The 1984 Drug Act.” American Economic Review 76, no. 2 (1986): 195-98.

33. Grabowski, Henry, and John Vernon. ”A New Look at the Returns and Risks to
    Pharmaceutical R&D.” Management Science 36, no. 7 (1990): 804-821.

34. Grabowski, Henry G., and John M. Vernon. ”Brand Loyalty, Entry, and Price Com-
    petition in Pharmaceuticals after the 1984 Drug Act.” Journal of Law and Economics
    35, no. 2 (1992): 331-50.

35. Graham, John R., and Mark T. Leary. ”A Review of Empirical Capital Structure
    Research and Directions for the Future.” Annual Review of Financial Economics 3,
    no. 1 (2011): 309-345.

36. Grant, Robert M., and Judith J. Jordan. Foundations of Strategy. John Wiley & Sons,
    2015.

37. Haddad, Valentin, Ho, Paul, and Erik Loualiche, “Detail Disagreement and Innovation
    Booms.” Working Paper, 2014.

38. Hall, Bronwyn H., and Josh Lerner. ”The Financing of R&D and Innovation.” Hand-
    book of the Economics of Innovation 1 (2010): 609-639.

39. Hannah, Leslie, and John Anderson Kay. Concentration in modern industry: Theory,
    measurement and the UK experience. London: Macmillan, 1977.

40. Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. ”A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of
    Human Capital.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, no. 4 (1994): 841-879.



                                           44
41. Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. ”Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of Hard
    Claims in Constraining Management.” The American Economic Review 85, no. 3
    (1995): 567-585.

42. Irvine, Paul J., and Jeffrey Pontiff. ”Idiosyncratic Return Volatility, Cash Flows, and
    Product Market Competition.” Review of Financial Studies 22, no. 3 (2009): 1149-
    1177.

43. Jensen, Michael C. ”Agency cost of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers.”
    Corporate Finance, and Takeovers. American Economic Review 76, no. 2 (1986).

44. Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling. ”Theory of the Firm: Managerial
    Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure.” Journal of Financial Economics
    3, no. 4 (1976): 305-360.

45. Kogan, Leonid, and Dimitris Papanikolaou. ”Growth Opportunities and Technology
    Shocks.” American Economic Review 100, no. 2 (2010): 532-36.

46. Kogan, Leonid, and Dimitris Papanikolaou. ”Growth Opportunities, Technology Shocks,
    and Asset Prices.” The Journal of Finance 69, no. 2 (2014): 675-718.

47. Kreps, David M., and Robert B. Wilson. ”Sequential Equilibria.” Econometrica 50,
    no. 4 (1982): 863-94.

48. Langinier, Corinne, and GianCarlo Moschini. ”The Economics of Patents: An Overview.”
    (2002).

49. Lee, Cheng-Few, K. Thomas Liaw, and Shafiqur Rahman. ”Impacts of market power
    and capital-labor ratio on systematic risk: a Cobb-Douglas approach.” Journal of
    Economics and Business 42, no. 3 (1990): 237-241.

50. Lerner, Josh, Hilary Shane, and Alexander Tsai. ”Do Equity Financing Cycles Matter?
    Evidence from Biotechnology Alliances.” Journal of Financial Economics 67, no. 3
    (2003): 411-446.

51. Lyandres, Evgeny and Palazzo, Berardino, Cash Holdings, Competition, and Innova-
    tion (March 14, 2014). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2017222.

52. Morellec, Erwan, Boris Nikolov, and Francesca Zucchi. ”Competition, cash holdings,
    and financing decisions.” Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper 13-72 (2014).

53. Myers, Stewart C. ”Capital Structure.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, no. 2
    (2001): 81-102.

54. Myers, Stewart C., and Christopher D. Howe, 1997, A Life-Cycle Financial Model
    of Pharmaceutical R&D. Program on the Pharmaceutical Industry, Sloan School of
    Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.



                                           45
55. Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf. ”Corporate Financing and Investment De-
    cisions When Firms have Information that Investors do not Have.” Journal of Financial
    Economics 13, no. 2 (1984): 187-221.

56. National Science Foundation, National Patterns of R&D Resources: 1998, by Steven
    Payson, NSF 99-335 (Arlington, VA, 1999).

57. Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West. ”A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Het-
    eroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica 55,
    no. 3 (1987): 703-08.

58. Officer, R. R. ”The Variability of the Market Factor of the New York Stock Exchange.”
    The Journal of Business 46, no. 3 (1973): 434-53.

59. Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi. ”Technological Revolutions and Stock Prices.”
    The American Economic Review 99, no. 4 (2009): 1451-1483.

60. Pisano, Gary P. ”The R&D Boundaries of the Firm: An Empirical Analysis.” Admin-
    istrative Science Quarterly 35, no. 1 (1990).

61. Ross, Stephen A. ”The Determination of Financial Structure: the Incentive-signalling
    Approach.” Bell Journal of Economics 8, no. 1 (1977): 23-40.

62. Schwert, G. William. ”Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change over Time?” The
    Journal of Finance 44, no. 5 (1989): 1115-1153.

63. Stulz, Rene M. ”Managerial Discretion and Optimal Financing Policies.” Journal of
    Financial Economics 26, no. 1 (1990): 3-27.

64. Subrahmanyam, Marti G., and Stavros B. Thomadakis. ”Systematic Risk and the
    Theory of the Firm.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 94, no. 3 (1980): 437-51.

65. Thakor, Richard T., Nicholas Anaya, Yuwei Zhang, Christian Vilanilam, and Andrew
    W. Lo. “Financial Risk and Return in the Biotech and Pharmaceutical Industries from
    1930 to 2013”. Working Paper, Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute
    of Technology, 2015.

66. Tirole, Jean. The Theory of Industrial Organization. MIT press, 1988.

67. Zwiebel, Jeffrey. ”Dynamic Capital Structure under Managerial Entrenchment.” The
    American Economic Review 86, no. 5 (1996): 1197-1215.




                                          46
Appendix A: Analysis of the Formal Theoretical Model
A.1         Actors, Preferences, and Asset Pricing
Consider a biopharmaceutical firm that faces a decision to undertake a staged R&D investment.
There are two periods with three dates: t = 0, t = 1, and t = 2. At t = 0, the firm chooses an
amount to invest in either assets-in-place (such as existing products) or in R&D (for new products).
If it chooses to invest in an R&D project, the project has two stages. At t = 0, the first-stage
investment is made. At t = 1, the second-stage investment is made.
       At both of these dates, the firm may need to raise capital and can choose between issuing equity
and debt. This external financing is raised in an environment of adverse selection. Specifically,
there are two types of firms: good firms and lemons. The common prior is that the probability of
a randomly-chosen firm being good is g ∈ (0.5, 1) and being a lemon is 1 − g.28 The lemons are
firms that lack the ability to produce R&D products, so their R&D investment produces no payoffs
and their assets decline in value over time and also produce no cash-flows.29 The good firms are
described below. The firm privately knows at t = 0 whether it is good or a lemon. Given this
private information, we will model this as a game in which the informed firm moves first with its
capital structure decision and how much financing to raise for R&D (and when to raise it). The
uninformed capital market reacts to the firm’s choice and makes Bayesian rational inferences about
the firm’s payoffs, which then results in prices for the firm’s securities.
       At the final date, t = 2, all payoffs are realized, and shareholders and bondholders are paid off.
       The expected rate of return on an asset with systematic risk loading β is K(β). The riskfree
rate for a single period is r > 0 and is intertemporally constant. Systematic risk is priced, and
idiosyncratic risk is not. For example, assume that there is a linear factor model for returns:

                                             Ri = r + βi Γ + εi                                          (A.1)

where Γ represents a vector of returns of systematic factors, βi is a vector of loadings on those
factors for asset i, r is the riskless rate of return, and εi is a mean-zero error term that represents
the idiosyncratic portion of the return. The expected return on any such asset is thus given by:

                                       K(β) ≡ E[Ri ] = r + βi E[Γ].                                      (A.2)

The CAPM or Fama-French 3-factor model would be an example of such a model. Thus, securities
are priced so that investors who provide financing to the firm receive exactly the expected return
commensurate with the (priced) risk in the security.
  28
      The lower bound on g is to avoid a corner solution by ensuring that there are sufficiently many good
firms to allow financing to be raised.
   29
      This could be due to mismanagement or outright fraud. The lemons are able to produce what appears
to be sucessful first-stage R&D results, but the R&D is still worthless for these firms since they are not able
to make it produce any cash flows.


                                                      47
A.2        Investment Choices and the Effect of Competition
For simplicity, the existing products/assets of the firm have only systematic risk, with β = 1,
whereas R&D has only idiosyncratic risk with β = 0 (e.g. Pastor and Veronesi (2009)).30 Let
A > 0 denote the firm’s investment in existing products/assets-in-place. and R > 0 its investment
in R&D. Given managerial capacity constraints, we take the total investment size to be fixed at I.
Thus, A + R = I, so the firm invests a certain proportion of its capital in assets-in-place and the
remaining proportion in R&D. Our goal is to examine how A and R are determined.
       There are two states of the macroeconomy: an “up” state and a “down” state. The up state
occurs with probability p and the down state occurs with probability 1 − p. When the up state
occurs, the firm’s existing products pay off xH (A), and when the down state occurs they pay off
xL (A), with xH (A) > xL (A) ∀ A > 0. That is, the payoff from existing products is perfectly
correlated with the state of the economy, so the single-period discount rate applicable to these
payoffs is K(1) ≡ K. It is assumed that the NPV of investing in assets-in-place is non-negative,
even if the down-state occurs: xL (A)[1 + K]−2 ≥ A ∀A. We impose the standard assumptions on
the production function x (A):

                               ∂xH /∂A > ∂xL /∂A > 0,        ∂ 2 xH /∂A2 < 0,

                             ∂ 2 xL /∂A2 < 0,     ∂ 2 xH /∂A2 > ∂ 2 xL /∂A2 ,                           (A.3)

     We now model the effect of product-market competition. If the degree of competition is θ ∈
 
 θ, θ , then a competitor arrives with probability θ and if this happens, the firm’s profitability
on existing products declines—thus, a higher θ means greater product-market competition.31 For
simplicity, we assume that when a competitor enters, the payoff of assets-in-place in the up-state
becomes xL (A), an effect analogous to Bertrand competition.32
  30
     As noted, R&D involves new projects that are one-off stand-alone investments by individual firms and are
the resulting products also patent-protected, and hence uncorrelated with the economy. Existing products
contain systematic risk because they involve similar investments by many other firms.
  31
     In our model, changes in competition θ can be interpreted as structural changes in the industry or
other changes in competition that are exogenous to the individual firm. Important drivers of competition
to industries such as biopharma are exogenous technology or regulatory shocks that lower entry costs. For
example, the Human Genome Project represented a technology shock that was plausibly exogenous to any
individual firm’s decision, and it led to the entry of numerous small biotech firms into the industry (see
Thakor et. al. (2015)). Another example is the Hatch-Waxman Act, which was a source of exogenous
variation in competition for the biopharma industry, and something we use for identification purposes later
in our analysis. However, since R&D by incumbents can also affect the degree of competition, some portion
of the degree of competition is endogenous (e.g. Gans and Stern (2000)). Our empirical tests are designed
to tackle this potential endogeneity.
  32
     In other words, the incumbent firm and the competitor would each set their prices for existing products
lower in order to undercut each other, thus reducing profitability. We model this directly through a reduction
in profitability. Although not necessary for the analysis, we could assume that the present value of xL (A) is
A, i.e., that competition reduces the NPV of existing assets to zero. This would correspond to the situation
in Bertrand competition, where firms set their prices equal to their marginal costs



                                                     48
       Investment in R&D involves two phases. At t = 0, the firm makes its first-stage R&D investment
R. Then, if it observes at t = 1 that the successful state has occurred for R&D, it must invest a
larger additional amount ω̂R, ω̂ > 1, in order to realize the payoff conditional on success. This
larger second investment reflects the escalating resource commitments for subsequent clinical R&D
trials that biopharma firms face (see DiMasi, et al. (1991)). Absent this second-stage investment,
the R&D payoff at t = 2 is zero.
       If the firm invests R in R&D at t = 0, then at t = 1 it becomes publicly known whether the
first-stage R&D was very successful, modestly successful, or failed. The probability of the first-
stage R&D being very successful is q+ ∈ (0, 1), the probability of it being modestly successful is
q− ∈ (0, 1), and the probability of failure is 1 − q+ − q− . However, this observation does not resolve
the uncertainty about whether the firm is good or a lemon, since the lemon firm can be in each of
these three observable first-stage R&D outcome states as well, just like the good firm. But if the
firm is truly a lemon, then the second-stage R&D payoff is zero at t = 2 regardless of the first-stage
R&D outcome at t = 1. If the firm is good then the R&D payoff at t = 2 is a random variable ỹ,
where ỹ is zero almost surely if the first-stage R&D fails at t = 1, has a probability density ξ+ if
the first-stage R&D is very successful at t = 1, and a probability density ξ− if the first-stage R&D
is modestly successful at t = 1. We assume that ξ+ first-order stochastically dominates ξ− . The
expected payoffs are:                 ˆ
                                          ỹξ+ dỹ = y+ (R) + B > 0,                              (A.4)
                                      ˆ
                                          ỹξ− dỹ = y− (R) + B > 0,                              (A.5)

where y+ (R) > y− (R) ∀R > 0, y+ (0) = y− (0) = 0, and B > 0 is a non-contractible (knowledge)
benefit of R&D to the insiders of the firm that cannot be verified and pledged to investors to make
payments. We interpret B broadly to represent intangible payoffs that do not necessarily produce
cashflows, such as learning benefits for employees, generation of non-commercializable basic research
knowledge, or potential payoffs that may be expected to occur beyond the investment horizons of
investors. We assume that the larger the investment in R&D, the larger the expected payoff:

                                     ∂y+ /∂R > 0,          ∂y− /∂R > 0,

                                   ∂ 2 y+ /∂R2 < 0,        ∂ 2 y− /∂R2 < 0.                       (A.6)

The R&D payoff distribution is given in Figure A1.
       We assume that R&D output is patent-protected and hence immune to competitive pressures.
Thus, the arrival of the competitor has no impact on the firm’s R&D payoff.33 In other words,
changes in θ affect the profitability of existing assets (which have largely exhausted their patent
protection and are thus vulnerable to competitive pressures) relative to new, patent-protected drugs
  33
    Of course, when the patent expires, these products become part of the firm’s assets-in-place and are
subject to losses in profits due to competitive entry.


                                                      49
                                                     Very                    Payoff = ỹ,
                                                  Successful                   E[ỹ] =
                                                  Invest ω̂R                 y+ (R) + B
                                    q+

               Invest R             q−            Modestly                   Payoff = ỹ,
              (first stage                        Successful                   E[ỹ] =
             investment)                          Invest ω̂R                 y− (R) + B
                               1−
                                    q+
                                         −
                                             q−

                                                   Failure                   Payoff = 0

                t = 0                               t = 1                        t = 2
                    Figure A1: R&D Payoff Distribution Over Time

that have greater immunity to competitive pressures.
   The payoffs of assets-in-place and R&D are taxable at a rate of T ∈ (0, 1). We assume that
the cash flows (i.e. the pledgeable portion of the payoff) of the R&D investment of the good firm
creates value (and thus is positive NPV at t = 0 to the firm’s insiders as well as investors), so:

                   [q+ y+ + q− y− ] [1 + r]−2 (1 − T ) > R + ω̂R [1 + r]−1   ∀R > 0.             (A.7)

Note that, since R&D contains only idiosyncratic risk (hence β = 0) each side is discounted by the
riskfree rate 1 + r. We further assume that

                                         ĝy− [1 + r]−1 (1 − T ) < ω̂R,                          (A.8)

                                 y− [1 + r]−1 (1 − T ) + B > ω̂R + R,                            (A.9)

                                                   B < ω̂R.                                     (A.10)

where ĝ is the posterior belief of investors that the firm is good, conditional on a good signal being
received by bondholders; ĝ will be expressed explicitly later. Condition (A.8) implies that investors
will be unwilling to provide financing at t = 1 if the R&D is discovered to have either failed or
is only modestly successful, even if the bondholders’ signal is good. Condition (A.9) implies that
the firm’s insiders will wish to invest ω̂R at t = 1 even if the R&D is discovered to be modestly
successful, and will also view this investment as beneficial at t = 0, taking into account the initial
investment of R. And condition (A.10) ensures that the value of the non-contractible benefits to
insiders is not so large as to justify an investment with no cash-flow payoff.


                                                      50
A.3     Financing Choices
The firm has no internal funds available at t = 0. Therefore, in order to finance the existing product
line and R&D, it raises all the necessary financing by issuing debt and equity at t = 0 and t = 1,
which then determines its capital structure.
   Equity holders will be paid off at t = 2. In order to raise equity, the firm’s initial shareholders
(who we treat as insiders and who have no wealth of their own to invest) must give up ownership
α ∈ (0, 1) in order to raise the necessary capital. At any date (t = 0 or t = 1), shareholder
unanimity is needed to approve a capital raising decision. Thus, at t = 0 this decision is made to
maximize the wealth of the insiders (initial owners) plus the value of their non-contractible benefits,
B. At t = 1, this decision will require those who became shareholders at t = 0 to also approve.
Those new shareholders are pure investors who do not get any of the non-contractible benefits of
R&D enjoyed by insiders, benefits that include knowledge generation, learning, etc.
   If the firm issues debt, the face value of debt to be repaid at t = 2 is F . The initial debt
financing raised is D. Although bondholders cannot distinguish between good firms and lemons at
t = 0, they receive a noisy signal φ at t = 1 that indicates whether the firm is good or a lemon.
The probability distribution of φ is:

      Pr(φ = good | firm is a lemon) = Pr(φ = lemon | firm is a lemon) = δ ∈ (0.5, 1).          (A.11)

Upon receiving their signal, the bondholders can choose to wait until t = 2 to be paid, or to demand
early repayment at t = 1 at a cost c > 0. If repayment occurs at t = 1 the bondholders are paid
F1 ≡ F [1 + r]−1 < F . In equilibrium, since the firm produces no cash flows at t = 1, the firm is
liquidated to meet any repayment at t = 1 (if this is demanded) because it cannot meet the face
value owed to bondholders. This modeling setup for debt parallels that of Calomiris and Kahn
(1991). If the firm is a good firm, but is erroneously liquidated at t = 1 and the R&D is stopped,
then all that can be recovered is the present value of the smallest payoff from the assets-in-place,
xL (A)[1 + r]−1 , plus any cash on hand, where we discount at the riskless rate because liquidation
is analogous to making the asset payoff the minimum in all states. If the firm is a lemon, then only
the salvage value of assets-in-place can be recovered. Let this salvage value be S ∈ (0, A). The
value of the assets recovered in liquidation at t = 1 can only be determined after the liquidation is
completed. We assume that:

                              [1 − g][1 − δ]S            [1 − g]δ
                                                <c<                     .                       (A.12)
                            gδ + [1 − g][1 − δ]     [1 − g]δ + [1 − δ]g

We will show that (A.12) is sufficient to ensure that bondholders will liquidate the firm when
φ = lemon, but not when φ = good. We assume that all debt payments are tax deductible at the
corporate tax rate T . For debt to be tax deductible, the face value of the debt issued at t = 0




                                                  51
cannot exceed the total amount of financing raised at t = 0.34 The variables D, F , and α will all
be endogenously determined.
   We will assume henceforth that certain parametric restrictions hold:

                                       δ < δ̄ ∈ (0.5, 1),    B > B̄,                            (A.13)

where δ̄ is an upper bound and B̄ is a lower bound. Thus, (A.13) implies that the non-contractible
benefit of R&D to insiders is sufficiently high. The upper bound on δ means that there is sufficient
noise in the bondholders’ signal.


A.4      Analysis of the Model
We now present out analysis of the model. Throughout the analysis, we will focus on the good
type of firms. The reason is that the lemons will always mimic the strategy of the good type in
equilibrium, since acting otherwise would unambiguously reveal them. Nonetheless, the presence
of the lemons is needed for the liquidation strategy of the bondholders to be subgame perfect.
   We begin by presenting some preliminary results in which we take as a given A∗ and R∗ , the
investments by the firm in assets-in-place and R&D, as well as a conjectured face value of debt
issued at t = 0. We subsequently verify these equilibrium values. Because taxes play no role in the
first two results, we set T = 0 without loss of generality for now. The equilibrium concept for the
choices (and beliefs) at t = 0 is sequential equilibrium (Kreps and Wilson (1982)). The equilibrium
we focus on also satisfies the universal divinity refinement of Banks and Sobel (1987); details of
the proofs of the characterized outcomes satisfying the universal divinity refinement are available
upon request.

Lemma 1: Fix the optimal values of investments A∗ and R∗ by the firm in assets-in-place and
R&D, respectively. Suppose the firm issues debt with face value F = xL (A∗ ). Then it will be
subgame perfect for the bondholders to liquidate the firm at t = 1 if their signal is φ = lemon, and
allow it to continue if their signal is φ = good.

Proof: Suppose the bondholders’ signal at t = 1 says φ = lemon. Let

                                                                       [1 − δ]g
                      ĝl = Pr(firm is good | φ = lemon) =                           .          (A.14)
                                                                 [1 − δ]g + [1 − g]δ

For the bondholders to wish to liquidate the firm at t = 1, it must be true that:

                     [1 − ĝl ] S + ĝl xL (A∗ ) [1 + r]−1 − c > ĝl xL (A∗ ) [1 + r]−1 ,
                                                         
                                                                                                (A.15)
  34
     This is meant to capture the IRS limit on how much of a firm’s financing can count as debt for tax
purposes.




                                                     52
where the left-hand side of (A.15) is the expected value of what the bondholders collect at t = 1
and the right-hand side is the expected present value of what the bondholders collect if they wait
until t = 2. We see that (A.15) simplifies to
                                                             
                                              [1 − g]δ
                                                                  S > c,                        (A.16)
                                        [1 − δ]g + [1 − g]δ

which we know holds by (A.12). Now suppose the bondholders’ signal at t = 1 is φ = good. Let ĝ
be the posterior belief of the bondholders that the firm is good after having observed this signal.
Then for the bondholders to not liquidate the firm, we need

                     [1 − ĝ] S + ĝ xL (A∗ ) [1 + r]−1 − c < ĝxL (A∗ ) [1 + r]−1 ,
                                                      
                                                                                                (A.17)

where
                                                    δg
                                     ĝ =                       < c.                            (A.18)
                                            δg + [1 − δ][1 − g]
Substituting (A.18) into (A.17), we see that we need

                                           [1 − δ][1 − g]S
                                                             < c,                               (A.19)
                                         δg + [1 − δ][1 − g]

which holds by (A.12). 

Lemma 2: Fix the optimal values of investments A∗ and R∗ by the firm in assets-in-place and
R&D, respectively. Suppose the firm issues debt with face value F = xL (A∗ ). Then, for B large
enough, it will prefer to raise at t = 0 the present value of the second-stage financing that will be
needed at t = 1, and hold it as cash (invested it in the riskless asset) rather than wait until t = 1
to raise the financing.

Proof: Given this F , it is clear that in the down state of the economy for the assets-in-place,
(A.8) implies that the firm will be unable to raise second-stage financing for its R&D at t = 1 if
the R&D is modestly successful and the expected R&D payoff at t = 2 is y− (R∗ ). We will compare
the net benefit to the insiders from issuing equity at t = 0 to raise ω̂R[1 + r]−1 in financing with
the net benefit to them of issuing equity at t = 1 to raise the necessary financing. Consider first
the case of raising financing at t = 0, and let α̂ ∈ (0, 1) be the fraction of ownership given up in
order to raise ω̂R[1 + r]−1 . Thus, the competitive pricing condition implies

                                         ω̂R[1 + r]−1 = α̂gVE ,                                 (A.20)

where we define VE = δΩ0 + [1 − δ]ω̂R[1 + r]−1 and (suppressing the arguments of functions):
                                             


 Ω0 ≡ [1 + r]−1 [q+ y+ + q− y− ] + p[1 − θ] [xH − xL ] [1 + K]−2 + [1 − q+ − q− ] ω̂R[1 + r]−1 . (A.21)


                                                    53
So VE is the true value of the good firm’s equity at t = 0 as assessed by the insiders. Note that Ω0
can be understood as follows. The first term is the expected present value of the R&D payoff, the
second term is present value of assets-in-place (where we recognize that F = xL ) and the third term
is the additional R&D financing raised at t = 0 that remains idle at t = 1 because the R&D fails
the first-stage. The market value of this equity is gδVE because the market assesses the probability
of the firm being good as g, and δ is the probability that a good firm will be allowed to continue.
Note that 1 − δ is the probability that a good firm will be liquidated, in which case xL + ω̂R is
recovered. Since F = xL , the shareholders only collect ω̂R, with present value ω̂R[1 + r]−1 at t = 0.
This explains the [1 − δ] ω̂R[1 + r]−1 term in VE in (A.20). Thus,

                                                ω̂R[1 + r]−1
                                         α̂ =                .                                 (A.22)
                                                    gVE

The net wealth of the insiders plus the non-contractible benefits from raising extra financing at
t = 0 is:
                                 N W0 = [1 − α̂] VE + δ [q+ + q− ] B,                          (A.23)

where δ [q+ + q− ] is the probability that the extra R&D investment will be made at t = 1 and the
R&D will be continued. Thus, substituting (A.22) into (A.23):

                  N W0 = VE − ω̂R[1 + r]−1 g −1 + δ [q+ + q− ] B
                       = δΩ0 − ω̂R[1 + r]−1 g −1 − [1 − δ] + δ [q+ + q− ] B.
                                             
                                                                                               (A.24)

    Now consider financing at t = 1. There are two possible states related to the assets-in-place:
the up-state and the down-state. Moreover, financing will only be raised if: (i) the bondholders’
signal φ = good, and (ii) the R&D has been discovered to be very successful. Given (A.8) and
the need for approval from those who became new shareholders at t = 0 by purchasing the equity
issued by the firm then, it is clear that no financing can be raised at t = 1 if the R&D is only
modestly successful. Now, if φ = good, the posterior belief of the bondholders about the firm’s
type becomes
                                                                      δg
                       ĝ = Pr(firm is good | φ = good) =                         .            (A.25)
                                                              δg + [1 − δ][1 − g]
Let αu be the ownership the firm must surrender at t = 1 in the up-state to raise ω̂R then. This
means
                      αu ĝ y+ + [xH − xL ] [1 + r][1 + K]−1 [1 + r]−1 = ω̂R,
                           
                                                                                               (A.26)

which implies that
                                                     ω̂R
                                             αu =         ,                                    (A.27)
                                                    ĝVu1
where
                         Vu1 ≡ y+ + [xH − xL ] [1 + r][1 + K]−1 [1 + r]−1 .
                              
                                                                                               (A.28)



                                                   54
If αd is the ownership the firm must surrender at t = 1 in the down-state to raise ω̂R, then
αd ĝy+ [1 + r]−1 = ω̂R, which implies
                                                      ω̂R
                                             αd =          ,                                  (A.29)
                                                     ĝVd1
where
                                         Vd1 ≡ y+ [1 + r]−1 .                                 (A.30)

For the firm’s insiders at t = 0, their expected wealth from pursuing this strategy is

              E [N W1 ] = δ q+ p[1 − θ] [1 − αu ] Vu1 + [1 − q+ ] [xH − xL ] [1 + K]−1
                           

                          +δ q+ [1 − p[1 − θ]] [1 − αd ] Vd1 + q+ B ,
                             
                                                                                              (A.31)

where we note that the non-contractible rent B is available to insiders only if the R&D is very
successful. Expressing V̂u1 and V̂d1 as the date-0 present values of Vu1 and Vd1 respectively, we can
write
                        V̂u1 = y+ + xH − xL [1 + r]2 [1 + K]−2 [1 + r]−2 ,
                                                            
                                                                                              (A.32)

                                         V̂d1 = y+ [1 + r]−2 .                                (A.33)

Simplifying (A.31) by substituting (A.27) and (A.29), we get

        E [N W1 ] = δ q+ p[1 − θ]Vu1 − q+ p[1 − θ]ω̂Rĝ −1 + q+ [1 − p[1 − θ]]Vd1
                     

                    +δ −q+ [1 − p[1 − θ]]ω̂Rĝ −1 + q+ B + [1 − q+ ] [xH − xL ] [1 + K]−1 . (A.34)
                       


Simplifying, we can write the present value (at t = 0) of E [N W1 ] as:
                        n                                        o
          Ê [N W1 ] = δ q+ p[1 − θ]V̂u1 + q+ [1 − p[1 − θ]]V̂d1
                       +δ −q+ [1 + r]−1 ω̂Rĝ −1 + q+ B + [1 − q+ ] [xH − xL ] [1 + K]−2 .
                          
                                                                                              (A.35)

   The firm’s insiders will prefer to raise the extra R&D financing at t = 0 rather than at t = 1 if
N W0 > Ê [N W1 ], where N W0 is defined in (A.24). Upon simplification, this condition becomes
                                                                                     
                                                          1            1−δ
        q− B + y− [1 + r]−2 > ω̂R[1 + r]−1
                          
                                                                     −     − [1 − q− ] ,      (A.36)
                                                 gδ + [1 − δ][1 − g]    δ

which holds for B large enough. 

   Let F be the face value of debt if the bondholders wait until t = 2 to be repaid, and let F1 be
the face value if they ask to be repaid at t = 1. We can now write down the firm’s maximization
problem, taking as a given that it will raise R+ ω̂R[1+r]−1 for its R&D and A for its assets-in-place
through a mix of debt and equity financing at t = 0. The value of equity as assessed by insiders at




                                                   55
t = 0 is similar to the way it was expressed in the proof of Lemma 2:

        VE = [1 − T ]δ [1 + r]−2 [q+ y+ (R) + q− y− (R)] + p[1 − θ] [xH (A) − F ] [1 + K]−2
                      

                  +[1 − p[1 − θ]] [xL (A) − F ] [1 + K]−2 + [1 − q+ − q− ] ω̂R[1 + r]−1
                  +[1 − T ][1 + r]−1 [1 − δ] max 0, ω̂R + xL (A)[1 + r]−1 − F1 ,
                                                  
                                                                                                 (A.37)

where we recognize that a good firm will be liquidated at t = 1 with probability 1 − δ by the
bondholders, and the value of equity in this case will be equivalent to a call option on the liquidation
value of the assets with a strike price equal to what bondholders are owed, F1 . Note that the risk
associated with the noise in the bondholders’ signal is idiosyncratic.
   Now if α is the fraction of equity surrendered in addition to F , the face value of debt to raise
A + R + ω̂R[1 + r]−1 at t = 0, then α satisfies:

                           αVE (A∗ , R∗ ) = A∗ + R∗ + ω̂R∗ [1 + r]−1 − D,                        (A.38)

where D is the amount of debt financing raised at t = 0. So D satisfies:

  D = PV g δE2 [F ] + [1 − δ] min F1 , xL (A∗ ) [1 + r]−1 + ω̂R∗ + [1 − g]δS[1 + r]−1 ,
                                                             
                                                                                                 (A.39)

where PV is the present value operator and (A.39) reflects the fact that if the firm is good (prob-
ability g), then bondholders allow it to continue with probability δ, yielding an expected payoff
at t = 2 of E2 [F ] to the bondholders. If the good firm is liquidated, the bondholders receive
min F1 , xL (A∗ ) [1 + r]−1 + ω̂R∗ , whereas if the bad firm is liquidated, they receive S.
    

   The insiders of the firm choose the investments A and R and the mix of debt and equity to
finance them by solving the following problem:

                                      max               {[1 − α]VE + E[B]}
                             (A,R)∈R2 , α∈[0,1], F ≥0
                                       subject to (A.38) and (A.39).                             (A.40)

Here E[B] is the expected value of the insiders’ non-contractible benefits, where the expectation
depends on the firm’s chosen capital structure.
   We now establish a result about the firm’s capital structure choice.

Proposition 1: For any given A∗ and R∗ , the firm will set F = xL (A∗ ), F1 = F [1 + r]−1 .

Proof: Suppose counterfactually that F > xL (A∗ ). Then we will establish that the bondholders
will find it subgame perfect to liquidate the firm at t = 1 regardless of φ. To see this, suppose
φ = good. Then, the bondholders’ expected payoff at t = 1 if they liquidate the firm is ĝF +[1 − ĝ] S
since xL (A∗ ) [1 + K]−2 ≥ A∗ , so xL (A∗ ) [1 + K]−1 + ω̂R∗ > A∗ + R∗ , given ω̂ > 1 and F < A∗ + R∗ .



                                                         56
If they allow the firm to continue, then their expected payoff is
                                      (                ˆ   F −xL (A∗ )
                                                                                       )
                                               ∗
                                 ĝ   xL (A ) +                              ỹξ+ dy       ,    (A.41)
                                                       0


if the R&D is very successful. Since F > xL (A∗ ), it is clear that
                                                           ˆ       F −xL (A∗ )
                                 F > xL (A∗ ) +                                  ỹξ+ dy,       (A.42)
                                                               0

so the bondholders will liquidate the firm. If φ = lemon, the bondholders’ payoff with liquidation
is
                                               gl F + [1 − gl ] S,                              (A.43)

and with continuation it is           (                ˆ                               )
                                                               F −xL (A∗ )
                                 gl       xL (A∗ ) +                         ỹξ+ dy        .   (A.44)
                                                           0

Clearly, the liquidation payoff is higher. Given this, it is not optimal for the insiders at t = 0 to
set F > xL (A∗ ).
     Now suppose that F < xL (A∗ ). Then given Lemma 1, we know that the firm will be liquidated
if φ = lemon and continued if φ = good. Now, when F < xL (A∗ ), (A.37) can be written as:

            V̂E = [1 − T ]δ [1 + r]−2 [q+ y+ + q− y− ] + p[1 − θ] [xH (A) − F ] [1 + K]−2
                           

                     +[1 − p[1 − θ]] [xL (A) − F ] [1 + K]−2 + [1 − q+ − q− ] ω̂R[1 + r]−1
                     +[1 − T ][1 + r]−1 [1 − δ] ω̂R + xL (A)[1 + r]−1 − F1 .
                                                                         
                                                                                                (A.45)

Thus, the total value of the insiders’ claim plus non-contractible benefits is:

                                           [1 − α]V̂E + [q+ + q− ] B,                           (A.46)

where
                                                   A + R[1 + ω] − D
                                           α=                                     ,             (A.47)
                                                               g V̂E
                                                ω ≡ ω̂[1 + r]−1 ,                               (A.48)

and using (A.39), we can write

                               D = gF [1 + r]−2 + [1 − g]δS[1 + r]−1 ,                          (A.49)

where we recognize that if the firm is good, then the bondholders receive either F1 = F [1 + r]−1
at t = 1, or F at t = 2, so this payoff is riskless and has present value F [1 + r]−2 at t = 0. If the
firm is a lemon and the bondholders liquidate at t = 1 (joint probability [1 − g]δ), then their payoff


                                                           57
is S, with present value S[1 + r]−1 . Substituting (A.47) and (A.49) into (A.45) yields the insiders’
objective function:

          Ω = V̂E − αV̂E + [q+ + q− ] B
                      A + R[1 + ω] − gF [1 + r]−2 − [1 − g]δS[1 + r]−1
                    
            = V̂E −                                                      + [q+ + q− ] B
                                             g
                      A + R[1 + ω] − [1 − g]δS[1 + r]−1
                    
            = V̂E −                                       + F [1 + r]−2 + [q+ + q− ] B               (A.50)
                                       g

Thus,
                                 ∂Ω
                                    = −[1 − T ]δ[1 + K]−2 + [1 + r]−2 > 0.                           (A.51)
                                 ∂F
Thus, the firm will wish to increase F when F < xL (A∗ ). Since F > xL (A∗ ) has been ruled out,
it must be true that F = xL (A∗ ). 

   Next we examine how the firm determines A∗ and R∗ , taking as given the capital structure
choice just derived. That is, the firm solves:

                                                 (A, R) ∈ arg max Ω,                                 (A.52)
                                                                   R2

with A + R = I. The following result can now be proved.

Proposition 2: At t = 0, There is a unique optimal level of investment in assets-in-place, A∗ ,
and a unique optimal level of investment in R&D, R∗ , with ∂A∗ /dθ < 0 and ∂R∗ /dθ > 0.

Proof: The first-order condition that A∗ satisfies is ∂Ω/∂A = 0. Recognizing that A + R = I
and using (A.45) for V̂E , we can write the first-order condition as
             (                                                             
                      −2    ∂y+ ∂R              ∂y− ∂R                      ∂xH   ∂xL
     [1 − T ]δ [1 + r]                  q+ +                q− + p[1 − θ]       −       [1 + K]−2
                            ∂R     ∂A           ∂R      ∂A                  ∂A    ∂A
                             )
                                                            1 + ∂R
                                                             
                          ∂R                         ∂R         ∂A [1 + ω]
     + [1 − q+ − q− ] ω         + [1 − T ][1 − δ]ω        −                 =0               (A.53)
                          ∂A                         ∂A           g

Since ∂R/∂A = −1, we can write (A.53) as:
            (                                                                                            )
                       −2                ∂y+          ∂y−                 ∂xH   ∂xL          −2
    [1 − T ]δ −[1 + r]          q+             + q−          + p[1 − θ]       −       [1 + K] − [1 − q+ − q− ] ω
                                         ∂R           ∂R                  ∂A    ∂A
    −[1 − T ][1 − δ]ω − ωg −1 = 0                                                                          (A.54)

The second-order condition for a unique maximum is ∂ 2 Ω/∂A2 < 0, which translates to

                                                                   ∂ 2 xH   ∂ 2 xL
                                                                                  
                            [1 − T ]δ[1 + K]−2 p[1 − θ]                   −          < 0,            (A.55)
                                                                    ∂A2     ∂A2

                                                          58
given (A.3). To show that dA∗ /dθ < 0, we totally differentiate the first-order condition (A.53):

                                                                   ∂ 2 xL dA∗
                                                         2               
                        −2          ∂xH   ∂xL               ∂ xH
         [1 − T ]δ[1 + K]        −p     −       + p[1 − θ]       −                = 0,                  (A.56)
                                    ∂A    ∂A                 ∂A2   ∂A2      dθ

which yields                                             h                      i
                                                             ∂xH          ∂xL
                                       dA∗           p        ∂A   −      ∂A
                                             =               h                           i < 0,         (A.57)
                                       dθ        p[1 − θ]        ∂ 2 xH
                                                                          −     ∂ 2 xL
                                                                  ∂A2           ∂A2

since by (A.3), ∂xH /∂A > ∂xL /∂A and ∂ 2 xH /∂A2 − ∂ 2 xL /∂A2 < 0. The result that dR∗ /dθ > 0
follows from the fact that ∂R/∂A = −1. Thus, since dA∗ /dθ < 0, it follows that dR∗ /dθ > 0. 

       This proposition shows that as competition increases, the firm invests more in R&D and less
in assets-in-place that are used to support and expand existing products. The economic intuition
is that investing in coming up with proprietary new products/knowledge becomes more valuable
relative to investing more in the existing business as competition compresses margins in existing
products, but the output of R&D is patent-protected.
       Since existing products have systematic risk, whereas R&D has only idiosyncratic risk, one
implication of this result is that higher competition will lead to declining betas and increasing
idiosyncratic risk for firms.35 The volatility of payoffs associated with R&D is typically higher
than that associated with well-established existing products, so we should expect an increase in
the total volatility of stock returns as firms substitute investments in existing products with in-
vestments in R&D. Moreover, higher competition typically introduces greater uncertainty about a
firm’s prospects in any industry, leading to higher total stock return volatility. Because the higher
investment in R&D is caused by higher competition, we have another channel through which R&D
investments end up being positively correlated with total stock return volatility.
       We can formally derive the conditions under which a shift in investment from assets-in-place
to R&D increases the total volatility of the firm’s returns. For this, define Sx ≡ xH − xL as the
“spread” between the low and high payoffs for the assets in place and Sy ≡ y+ − y− as the “spread”
for the payoffs of R&D conditional on first-stage success. Then ∂Sx /∂A > 0 is the marginal impact
of investment in assets-in-place on the spread Sx and ∂Sy /∂R > 0 is the marginal impact of R&D
investment on the spread Sy . Then we have the following result:

Corollary 1: If Sy is sufficiently greater than Sx and ∂Sy /∂R is sufficiently greater than ∂Sx /∂A,
then the marginal impact of an increase in R&D investment accompanied by an equal decrease in
investment in assets-in-place is to increase the variance of firm value.
  35
     As argued by Myers and Howe (1997), an increase in R&D may also generate an “R&D leverage”
effect, which can increase systematic risk in a way similar to a financial leverage effect, by creating a series
of fixed obligations (R&D investments) that must be paid in the future. In our analysis, the additional
R&D investments are discretionary (i.e. the firm has no obligation to undertake them), and all the needed
investment is raised up-front, so the effect is not applicable in our setting.


                                                              59
Proof: Available upon request. 

    Thus, if the spread between the payoffs conditional on success is much larger for R&D than for
assets-in-place, and investment has a bigger marginal impact on this spread for R&D, we should
expect higher R&D spending to induce an increase in total volatility. A large spread of payoffs
conditional on success for R&D is consistent with the empirical evidence for pharmaceuticals of
Grabowski and Vernon (1990), who document a skewed distribution of returns for drugs in the
marketplace, with “blockbuster” drugs achieving much higher returns than other drugs.
    We now examine how competition affects the firm’s debt and cash positions.

Proposition 3: An increase in competition will reduce the debt issued by the firm and increase
the cash carried.

Proof: As shown in Proposition 2, ∂A∗ /dθ < 0, so an increase in competition θ reduces the
amount invested in assets-in-place. Since F = xL (A∗ ) and ∂xL /∂A > 0 from (A.3), it follows that
a smaller A∗ means a lower F , and hence less debt. In terms of the response of cash reserves to
competition, Lemma 2 shows that the firm will prefer to raise all of the financing that it anticipates
in the future at t = 0, and hold it as cash. The amount that the firm holds as cash for the future
R&D investment is ωR. Therefore, since ∂R∗ /dθ > 0 from Proposition 2, an increase in competition
θ increases the amount invested in R&D and hence the amount of cash that the firm holds at t = 0.


    The intuition is that an increase in competition will induce the firm to reduce its investment
in assets-in-place, which in turn reduces the amount of debt that the firm can carry since the face
value is set to the lowest payout from the assets-in-place. Put differently, an increase in competition
will reduce the collateral base of the firm that supports debt by reducing investment in assets-in-
place. The firm holds additional cash in response to competition due to a precautionary demand
for liquidity—it may not be able to raise enough financing in some states in the future. As the
relative attractiveness of R&D goes up due to higher competition, so does the excess cash the firm
carries to meet future liquidity demand. These two results also imply that net debt—defined as
debt minus cash—will decline as competition increases.


A.5     Model Extension: An Acquisition as an Alternative to R&D
A realistic alternative that a biopharma firm has to investing in R&D in-house is to purchase
another firm (such as a biotech firm) that has already successfully developed the R&D. To consider
this possibility, suppose that the biopharma firm has the choice to acquire a biotech firm whose
only asset is one R&D project that has successfully completed the first stage of R&D investment.
For simplicity, consider the case in which the R&D is very successful. Thus, the biopharma firm,
when it chooses to invest in R&D, may either invest in “internal” R&D by investing in the R&D

                                                  60
project described previously, or “external” R&D by acquiring the biotech firm. Acquisition occurs
at t = 0, in which case the acquiring biopharma firm would identify a biotech firm that has
successfully developed the R&D.
       Let V external be the value of the target (assumed to be unlevered, for simplicity) if it is not
acquired:
                                   V external = y+ R [1 − T ] [1 + r]−2 ,
                                                    
                                                                                                  (A.58)

which is conditional on investment of R in the R&D, and y+ and R correspond to the target’s
expected R&D payoff and investment, respectively. We assume that the target does not have
access to financing. If the target is purchased by the acquirer, then there is a synergy gain of 4,
so the value of the target (the external R&D project) to the acquirer is:

                                Vexternal = 4 + y+ R [1 − T ] [1 + r]−2 .
                                                   
                                                                                                  (A.59)

The target may also have non-contractible benefits, Bt , from the R&D that are not reflected in
(A.59) above and are not available to the acquirer. For simplicity, we assume that the target sells
at a price that is exactly equal to V External , so that the target receives the expected value of what
it would have received if it had the funds to invest in second-stage R&D, and the acquirer captures
the entire synergy gain.36
       When the good firm raises the financing it needs for its assets-in-place and to buy the target,
insiders will value the total post-acquisition equity in the firm at:

                          V̂Ei = [1 − T ]δp[1 − θ] [xH − xL ] [1 + K]−2 + Vexternal ,             (A.60)

whereas outsider shareholders will value it at g V̂Ei .
       Let Â be the investment in assets-in-place made by the acquiring firm. Then the share of
ownership, α̂, that must be sold to outside shareholders to raise the necessary financing satisfies:

                                        α̂g V̂Ei = Â + V external − D̂,                          (A.61)

where V external is the price paid for the target and D̂ is the debt level. As before,
                                                        
         D̂ = g F̂ [1 + r]−2 + [1 − g]δS[1 + r]−1 = gxL Â [1 + r]−2 + [1 − g]δS[1 + r]−1 .       (A.62)

       Whether the firm prefers to invest in internal R&D or external R&D (via acquiring another
firm) depends on whether
                                               Ω ≥ [1 − α̂] V̂Ei                                  (A.63)

holds. If (A.63) holds, the firm will invest in internal R&D. If (A.63) does not hold, the firm will
  36
    Alternative assumptions about the possible sharing of the synergy between the acquirer and the target
do not affect our analysis qualitatively.


                                                      61
prefer to acquire.
   Now, assume that there are two types of identifiably distinct acquirers: those with q+ + q− ≡ q1
and those with q+ + q− ≡ q2 , with q1 < q2 . Then we can prove the following result.

Proposition 4: If the good firm with q1 invests in internal R&D, so does the good firm with q2 . If
the good firm with q2 acquires another firm to obtain external R&D, so does the good firm with q1 .
There are exogenous parameter values for which the good firm with q1 acquires and the good firm
with q2 invests internally in R&D.

Proof: Using (A.50), we can write Ω as

   Ω = [1 − T ]δ [1 + r]−2 [q+ y+ + q− y− ] + p[1 − θ] [xH − xL ] [1 + K]−2 + [1 − q+ − q− ] ωR
                

       +[1 − T ][1 − δ]ωR − g −1 A + R[1 + ω] − [1 − g]δS[1 + r]−1 + F [1 + r]−2
                                  

           +qi B,                                                                            (A.64)

            i + q i , i ∈ {1, 2}. And:
where qi ≡ q+    −


             [1 − α̂] V̂Ei = [1 − T ]δp[1 − θ] [xH − xL ] [1 + K]−2 + Vexternal
                                   n                                    o
                             −g −1 Â + V external − [1 − g]δS[1 + r]−1 + F̂ [1 + r]−2       (A.65)

Note that ∂Ω/∂qi > 0. The result now follows. 

   The basic idea is simple. A firm with a higher probability of success with internal R&D is
more likely to invest in R&D, whereas a firm with a sufficiently low R&D success rate will prefer
to engage in external R&D by acquiring a firm that has already successfully harvested the result
of investing in R&D. Thus, acquiring firms will display lower R&D success rates than those that
engage in organic R&D, all else being equal. This is a testable prediction.
   Following from the analysis in the previous sections, it follows that an increase in competition
will induce more firms to engage in external R&D via acquisitions. These will be the firms which
have a lower probability of internal R&D success. Moreover, since external R&D involves less risk
than internal R&D, one would expect acquiring firms’ stock returns to have lower idiosyncratic risk
than the stock returns of firms that engage in internal R&D. We leave tests of these predictions to
future research.




                                                62
Appendix B: Supplemental Empirical Results

                                                              Figure B1: Additional Competition Measures
These figures present additional estimates of sales-based competition over time for the biopharma
industry. The top-left figure gives the 4-firm Concentration Ratio, calculated using equation (1).
The top-right figure gives
                         P the 2value of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) over time, which is
calculated as: HHIt = N     i=1 si,t , where si is the sales market share of firm i in year t. The bottom
figures give the value of the Hannah-Kay Index over time, which is defined as: HK t (α) = N             α
                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                   i=1 si,t .
A higher α represents a higher weight attached to larger firms in terms of sales. The bottom right
figure gives results for α = 1.5 (relatively more weight to smaller firms in terms of sales), while
the bottom right figure gives results for α = 2.5 (relatively more weight to larger firms in terms of
sales). For all measures, a higher value indicates more concentration (i.e. less competition).

                                                      8-Firm Concentration Ratio CR(8)                                              Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)




                                                                                                               .1 2
                      .8           .7




                                                                                                               .1
     C o n c e n tra tio n R a tio




                                                                                                             HHI
                                                                                                             .0 8
                   .6




                                                                                                               .0 6
                      .5




                                                                                                               .0 4
                      .4




                                        1950   1960         1970      1980       1990    2000   2010                  1950   1960         1970       1980       1990   2000   2010
                                                                        Year                                                                          Year


                                                             Hannah-Kay HK(1.5)                                                            Hannah-Kay HK(2.5)
                      .3




                                                                                                               .0 4
                                                                                                               .0 3
                      .2 5
     HK




                                                                                                                HK
                                                                                                             .0 2
                      .2




                                                                                                               .0 1
                      .1 5




                                                                                                               0




                                        1950   1960         1970       1980       1990   2000    2010                 1950   1960         1970       1980       1990   2000   2010
                                                                        Year                                                                          Year




                                                                                                        63
                                     Figure B2: Total and Idiosyncratic Stock Return Volatility
This figure shows the monthly estimates of value-weighted portfolio volatility, following Schwert
(1989). In panel (a), the left graph depicts total stock return volatility, calculated by forming a
value-weighted portfolio of biopharma stocks, and then estimate the monthly standard deviation
of the total portfolio as the square root of the sum of the squared    qP daily excess (over the mean
                                                                            DT              2
daily return in the month) returns over the month: σ̂P,T =                  t=1 (RP,t − µT ) , where RP,t
is the daily portfolio return for date t and µT is the mean daily portfolio return for month T .
In a similar
         qP way, the right graph in panel (a) depicts idiosyncratic volatility, which is given by:
  idio =     DT          idio 2 , where 
σ̂P,T        t=1 P,t − µT                P,t is the idiosyncratic return of the value-weighted portfolio
                idio
for day t and µT is the mean idiosyncratic return in month T . Augmented Dickey-Fuller tests
were also run on these monthly series to test for the presence of a unit root. For both total volatility
and idiosyncratic volatility, Augmented Dickey-Fuller tests reject the presence of a unit root at at
least the 5% level when up to 5 lags are included, regardless of whether a trend is included.

                                                                                                               idio
                                                                                     (a) Levels of σ̂P,T and σ̂P,T
                                     Monthly Standard Deviation---Total Volatility                                                         Monthly Standard Deviation---Idiosyncratic Volatility
                     .3




                                                                                                                        .1
                                                                                                                        .0 8
                     .2




                                                                                                                             .0 6
     V o la tility




                                                                                                                 V o la tility
                                                                                                              .0 4
                     .1




                                                                                                                        .0 2
                     0




                                                                                                                        0




                            1950        1960        1970         1980         1990         2000   2010                              1950         1960        1970        1980       1990           2000   2010
                                                                   Year                                                                                                    Year




                                                                                                            idio
                                                                          (b) Moving Average of σ̂P,T and σ̂P,T
                              Monthly Standard Deviation---Total Volatility (Moving Average)                           Monthly Standard Deviation---Idiosyncratic Volatility (Moving Average)
                     .0 8




                                                                                                                     .0 8
                                                                                                                     .0 6
                     .0 6
     V o la tility




                                                                                                                 V o la tility
                                                                                                              .0 4
                     .0 4




                                                                                                                     .0 2
                     .0 2




                            1950        1960         1970        1980         1990         2000   2010                           1950            1960        1970       1980        1990           2000   2010
                                                                   Year                                                                                                   Year




                                                                                                         64
         Figure B3: Changes in Competition Around Hatch-Waxman Act
Panel (a) depicts the 4-firm Concentration Ratio CR(4) for the biopharma industry (the solid
blue line) and the propensity-score matched sample of other R&D-intensive firms (the dashed
red line) around the enactment of the Hatch-Waxman Act. Panel (b) estimates a differences-in-
differences regression for the effect of the Hatch-Waxman Act on the Concentration Ratio CR(4) of
the biopharma industry versus other R&D-intensive firms. The regression is run at the industry-
year level. CRi,t (4) is the value of the 4-firm concentration ratio for group i, either the biopharma
industry or other R&D-intensive industries. HW t is a dummy variable which takes a value of
1 if the year is 1984 or later, and a value of zero otherwise. Biopharmai is a dummy variable
which takes a value of 1 for the biopharma industry, and a value of 0 otherwise. Robust standard
errors are given in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

                  (a) Competition Trends for Biopharma and Control Group
                                             .4             .3 5
                          C o n c e n tra tio n R a tio C R (4 )
                        .2          .2 5     .1 5.3




                                                                   1970         1975           1980             1985              1990    1995
                                                                                                       Year

                                                                                   Biopharma                  Other R&D-intensive Firms




            (b) Differences-in-Differences Estimation for Changes in Competition
                                                                          Dependent Variable:                           CRi,t (4)
                                                                          Biopharmai × HWt                             −0.057***
                                                                                                                         (0.010)
                                                                          Biopharmai                                   0.182***
                                                                                                                         (0.008)
                                                                          HWt                                            −0.006
                                                                                                                         (0.006)
                                                                          Constant                                      0.201***
                                                                                                                         (0.006)

                                                                          Observations                                       42
                                                                          R2                                               0.953




                                                                                                      65
      Figure B4: Risk Variable Trends for Treatment and Control Group
Trends for risk variables. Beta variables are yearly estimates, calculated from a value-weighted
portfolio of biopharma or propensity-score matched R&D-intensive firms using the previous 2 years
of daily portfolio returns as of the end of each year. Volatility variables are yearly estimates,
calculated using the daily returns over the year of a value-weighted portfolio of biopharma or
control firms. The solid blue lines give estimates for the biopharma industry, while the red dashed
lines give estimates for the propensity-score-matched sample of R&D-intensive firms. A vertical red
line is included in each graph, representing the year that the Hatch-Waxman Act was implemented.

                                                Market Beta                                                                                                         SMB Beta
                     1 .2




                                                                                                                            .2
                                                                                                                            0
                     1
     B e ta




                                                                                                            B e ta
                                                                                                              -.2
                     .8




                                                                                                                            -.4
                     .6




                            1975   1980               1985                    1990                 1995                     -.6    1975              1980               1985                  1990         1995
                                                      year                                                                                                              year

                                   Biopharma                   Other R&D-intensive Firms                                                             Biopharma                 Other R&D-intensive Firms



                                                                                                     HML Beta
                                                             .5
                                                             0
                                                           -.5
                                                        B e ta
                                                             -1
                                                             -1 .5




                                                                     1975              1980               1985                              1990                 1995
                                                                                                          year

                                                                                       Biopharma                             Other R&D-intensive Firms



                                               Total Volatility                                                                                             Idiosyncratic Volatility
                     .0 5




                                                                                                                            .0 5
                     .0 4




                                                                                                                            .0 4
     V o la tility




                                                                                                            V o la tility
                     .0 3




                                                                                                                            .0 3
                     .0 2




                                                                                                                            .0 2




                            1975   1980               1985                    1990                 1995                            1975              1980               1985                  1990         1995
                                                      year                                                                                                              year

                                   Biopharma                   Other R&D-intensive Firms                                                             Biopharma                 Other R&D-intensive Firms




                                                                                                      66
                                                      Table B1: Time-series Regressions
     Time-series regressions of the effect of competition on levels of financial characteristics. Each entry in the table is a univariate regression
     of the effect of the indicated measure of competition on the indicated financial characteristics for the biopharma industry. All variables
     are yearly estimates, yielding 63 observations per regression. For the competition measures, Number Competitors is the number of firms
     in the biopharma industry each year, CR(M ) is the M -firm Concentration Ratio, HHI is the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, and HK(α)
     is the Hannah-Kay Index with weight α. An increase in the concentration index measures indicates a decrease in competition. R&D,
     P P E, Cash, Debt, and N et Debt are median estimates, calculated by first scaling each variable by total assets at the firm-year level,
     and then taking the median across all firms (other than debt, which has a skewed distribution as previously explained, results are robust
     to using mean levels of these variables). σ is mean total stock return volatility, while σ idio is mean idiosyncratic stock return volatility,
     each calculated by taking the standard deviation of the past 360 days of daily total or idiosyncratic returns as of the last day of each
     year for each firm, and then averaging across all firms. βmkt,t , βSM B,t , and βHM L,t are betas of a value weighted portfolio of biopharma
     firms, calculated using (2) for the past 2 years of daily returns as of the last day of each year. Autocorrelation-adjusted (for up to 5 lags)
     standard errors are in parentheses, calculated following Newey and West (1987), while R-squared estimates are given in brackets. *, **,
     and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

      Independent                                                         Dependent Variable
      Variable         R&D          Cash          PPE          Debt      Net Debt       σ             σ idio       βmkt          βSM B       βHM L
      Number        0.0003***     0.0007***    −0.0004***    −0.0001    −0.0005***    0.00005***   0.00005***   −0.0005***    −0.0006***    −0.0004*




67
      Competitors    (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)     (0.0001)    (0.0001)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)      (0.0001)      (0.0002)     (0.0002)
                      [0.895]       [0.906]      [0.962]      [0.075]     [0.620]       [0.694]      [0.716]       [0.473]       [0.365]      [0.105]
      CR(4)         −0.828***    −1.479***      1.011***      −0.271      0.803*      −0.170***    −0.167***      1.895***      3.285***     3.212***
                      (0.198)       (0.376)      (0.173)      (0.165)     (0.432)       (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.325)       (0.600)      (0.761)
                      [0.393]       [0.311]      [0.513]      [0.075]     [0.100]       [0.585]      [0.606]       [0.478]       [0.663]      [0.408]
      CR(8)         −0.658***    −1.144***      0.774***      −0.191      0.666*      −0.137***    −0.134***      1.454***      2.551***     2.573***
                      (0.153)       (0.330)      (0.148)      (0.137)     (0.391)       (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.330)       (0.641)      (0.696)
                      [0.351]       [0.265]      [0.428]      [0.053]     [0.100]       [0.537]      [0.558]       [0.400]       [0.569]      [0.372]
      HHI           −2.983***    −5.369***      3.805***     −1.207**      2.602      −0.625***    −0.612***      7.087***     12.165***    11.176***
                      (0.779)       (1.555)      (0.684)      (0.568)     (1.689)       (0.088)      (0.087)       (1.175)       (2.231)      (2.599)
                      [0.374]       [0.300]      [0.532]      [0.110]     [0.076]       [0.577]      [0.595]       [0.490]       [0.666]      [0.362]
      HK(1.5)       −1.824***    −3.307***      2.257***      −0.545      1.798*      −0.364***    −0.356***      4.049***      6.743***     6.110***
                      (0.436)       (0.929)      (0.403)      (0.343)     (1.010)       (0.049)      (0.049)       (0.695)       (1.390)      (1.507)
                      [0.442]       [0.360]      [0.592]      [0.071]     [0.115]       [0.618]      [0.637]       [0.502]       [0.646]      [0.342]
      HK(2.5)       −5.740***    −10.359***     7.533***     −2.775**      4.550      −1.242***    −1.217***     14.378***     24.994***    22.869***
                      (1.614)       (3.114)      (1.383)      (1.105)     (3.346)       (0.186)      (0.184)       (2.263)       (4.047)      (5.152)
                      [0.331]       [0.267]      [0.498]      [0.138]     [0.056]       [0.545]      [0.562]       [0.481]       [0.671]      [0.362]
