                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        COMPARABLE WORTH IN A
                      GENERAL EQUrLIBRIUM MODEL
                         OF THE U.S. ECONOMY




                          Perry C. Beider

                        B. Douglas Bernheim

                          Victor R. Fuchs

                           John B. Shaven




                       Working Paper No. 2090




                NATrONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMtC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            December 1986




 This study was Supported in
                             part by a grant from the Alfred P.
 Sloan and Rockefeller Foundations
                                   to the National Bureau of
 Economic Research for the
                           project "Women's Quest for Economic
Equality." Partial support was also provided by the Center for
Economic Policy Research at Stanford
                                      University. Data inputs and
suggestions from Joyce Jacobsen and Leslie Perreault are also
gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Labor
                                  Studies. Any Opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those
                                        of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #2090
                                                        December 1986
          Comparable Worth in a General Equilibrium
                                                       Model of the U.S. Economy


                                         A8STRACT

           This paper presents a computable general equilibrium model that

   simulates the effects on employment,
                                            output, wages, and economic efficiency of
   introducing comparable worth into the U.S. economy. The model calculates

   economy-wide aggregate impacts and disaggregated results for individuals

   grouped by sex, marital status, and education.

          The effects depend on the hiring rules that would accompany comparable

  worth, the source of existing male-female
                                                wage differentials, the extent of
  coverage of comparable worth, the intra-household behavior of
                                                                       married couples,
  and demand and supply elasticities.
                                          If, after comparable worth is introduced,
  employers are constrained to employ men and women in historical proportions,

  the adverse effects on
                             aggregate employment, output, and efficiency would be
  much larger than if the employment constraint is based on applicant
                                                                      propor-
  tions. If existing wage gaps are the result of sex differences in productiv-

  ity, the adverse effects of comparable worth
                                                    are relatively large; but if they
  are   the result of discrimination, the efficiency losses are much     smaller. If
  only   part   of the economy is subject to comparable worth, the efficiency loss

  is reduced under the productivity
                                       gap assumption, but increased if the wage
  gap is the result of discrimination.

          The redistributive effects of comparable worth on married men and women

  are sensitive to assumptions about intra-household behavior and the size of

  the
    gains from marriage. By contrast, unmarried women appear to benefit from
 comparable worth under most sets of assumptions while unmarried men lose.

Perry C. Beider                                      Victor R. Fuchs
B. Douglas Bernheim                                  John B. Shaven
NBER                                                 FIBER
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard                         204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
Stanford, CA 94305                                   Stanford, CA 94305
415/326—7160                                         415/326—7160
  1.    Introduction

          The l960s were a period of significant
                                                   changes in public policy with
  respect to gender issues in the labor market. In 1963
                                                             the Equal Pay Act
  outlawed separate pay scales for men and women performing similar
                                                                         jobs, and
  Title 1111 of the 1964 Civil Rights Act
                                              prohibited all forms of discrimination
  in employment. Despite these laws the women/men wage ratio in 1979 showed

  little change from the level of about .6
                                                that prevailed prior to the anti-
 discrimination legislation. Between 1979 and 1983 the ratio advanced five

 percentage points, but even after that gain the
                                                      average hourly earnings of men
 were about 50 percent above those of
                                           women of comparable age race, and
 education. Moreover, a sharp increase in the percent of women not married (and
 therefore not benefitting from a husband's higher income) and a relative
 increase in women's financial
                                   responsibil.ity for children tended to offset the
 gains made by women in employment and relative
                                                     wages (see Fuchs 1986).
         recent years numerous additional changes in public policy have been
        In

 advocated in order to help women economically. They include affirmative action
 programs,     paid maternity leaves, subsidized daycare services, and perhaps most

 significantly, equal pay for work of "comparable
                                                       worth" (U.S. Commission on
Civil Rights 1984). Advocates of comparable worth note that jobs held

primarily by women pay substantially lower wages than jobs held primarily by

men, even when education and other attainments of the
                                                           women equal or exceed
those of the men. They claim that jobs can be evaluated by objective standards

such as educational requirements and
                                     degree of responsibility, and that wages
should be set according to those standards. Numerous lawsuits have been

brought      under this theory, and some state and local governments have adopted
the   comparable worth approach in principle. Neither the federal government nor

any state has yet attempted to enforce a comparable worth standard on the

private sector, but that is the goal of many supporters of women's rights.


                                          I
       Economists have not been slow to address the issue of comparable worth

  (Livernash 1980). Attention has been directed
                                                  to questions about the existence
  and magnitude of occupational
                                   segregation and discrimination (Treiman and
  Hartmann 1981), and the direct costs to employers of implementing
                                                                     comparable
  worth (Oi 1986; Remick 1984; Treiinan, Hartmann and Roos 1984). Several
                                                                          papers
  set forth the theoretical case
                                  against comparable worth (Killingsworth 1985;
  Fischel and Lazear 1986), while some defend it on theoretical grounds

  (Bergmann 1985; Aldrich and Buchele 1986).

       Largely missing from the debate are
                                             quantitative estimates of the
 employment, efficiency, or distributional
                                              consequences of comparable worth
 (however, see Johnson and Solon 1984; Sorensen
                                                    1986). Economic theory suggests
 that administratively determined wages are likely to be less efficient than

 those set by the interplay of demand
                                      and supply. But will the loss be small or
 large? What about the redistribution5 that
                                            would occur? Who would gain? Who
 would lose? And by how much?

      This paper presents a general equilibrjwn model that makes possible
                                                                          the
 calculation of the effects on
                               employment output, wages, and economic

efficiency of introducing comparable worth into the U.S. economy. We
                                                                     use a
computable general equilibrium (CGE) model rather than relying on inferences

from a theoretical model for
                                several reasons. First, full implementation of
equal pay for women and men would
                                     represent a very large discrete change from
the current situation. The usual method of theoretical analysis
                                                                   through
comparative statics is most applicable for
                                              small changes at the margin.
Second, the model, though highly aggregated, does attempt to capture several

complex interrelationships that it would be extremely difficult to sort out,

t.n!lsri; e.g.. the multiple effects on different
                                                     industry sectors, types of
jobs, and kinds of households.1
                                  Finally, the CCE approach is sufficiently
flexible to permit comparison of results under a variety of
                                                            assumptions

                                        2
       Through simulations we estimate effects for the
                                                          economy as a whole, and
  separately by production sector and for individuals
                                                        grouped by sex, marital
  status, and education. We do not attempt to estimate the extent of

  discrimination (choosing rather to simulate the effects under alternative

  estimates), nor do we estimate the administrative
                                                      costs of implementing a
 comparable worth policy. We do consider alternative
                                                        hiring rules that would
 probably accompany a comparable worth wage policy, we examine the effects of

 introducing comparable worth into some sectors but not others, and we study

 the consequences of alternative
                                   assumptions about utility maximization in
 married households.

      The next section provides a more complete discussion of the modeling

 issues. Then we present the model--its
                                           elements, structure, and assumptions
 The simulation results follow, with emphasis on how effects depend on various

 policy rules, behavioral assumptions, and exogenous parameters. The final
 section discusses the implications of the results for public policy and for
 future research.
     The mode], presented in this paper is highly aggregated and static. It is
only a rough approximation to the "real world," but we believe that much can
be learned about comparable worth from it. The process of model construction
forces a consideration of issues such as hiring rules or the nature of the
utility function in married households that have often been ignored in
theoretical discussions. The general equilibrium properties of the model
permit the investigation of the effects on employment, output, and the like
after allowing for demand and supply responses to changes in relative prices
and wages. We hold no brief for any particular assumption or result, but we
believe that the simulations taken as a whole provide many useful insights
concerning the possible effects of comparable worth on the U.S. economy.


                                       3
  2. Modeling Issues

       General equilibrium calculations
                                            require a fully specified model of the
  economy. Each conceivable specification necessarily reflects different

  assumptions    concerning the nature of economic behavior   and institutions. In
  the context of   a controversial policy issue such as comparable worth, it
  should not be surprising that there is
                                            little agreement concerning the
  validity of certain critical assumptions. We emphasize that computational

 general equilibrium simulations cannot resolve such
                                                         disagreements. Rowever,
 they do serve to clarify the links between assumptions and implications.

 Accordingly, this section discusses several critical
                                                         modeling issues, and
 thereby provides backgrouncj for the
                                        assumptions employed in section 4. The
 reader should bear in mind that we do not mean to endorse any particular

 assumption by including it in our analysis.



      A. Pay Differentials

      The object of comparable worth is to narrow or eliminate male-female
                                                                                pay
 differentials. To model the effects of this
                                                policy one must adopt some view as
 to why these differentials exist in the first
                                                 place. This immediately embroils
us in controversy.

     Classical economic analysis attributes wage gaps to productivity

differences. The sources of such differences
                                                may be quite subtle. For example,
if women are more likely to leave the labor force (perhaps for
                                                               childbearing),
then firms may be reluctant to train women for jobs that require specific

skills, and women would be reluctant to invest
                                                   in such training. Women might
then be forced to settle for lower
                                      wages, commensurate with their expected net
marginal products. Under this view, women with
                                                  strong attachments to the labor
force are the victims of "statistical discrimination"
                                                         (Phelps 1972).
Alternatively,    one might argue that wage gaps do not reflect differences in


                                        4
  expected marginal products. This requires one to formulate
                                                               an explicit theory
 of discrimination which accounts for the
                                            persistence of wage gaps and the
 failure of classical equilibriating forces.

      In his seminal work, Becker (1971) developed various theories of

 discrimination based upon personal tastes. Under this view, the employment of

 certain individuals creates disutility for
                                              employers, co-workers, suppliers of
 capital, or consumers. In equilibrium, employers
                                                    pay such workers their
 marginal products, net of external effects. This gives rise to pay

 differentials.

      More recently, some analysts have devoted increased attention to the

 possibility that wage gaps are attributable to market
                                                         imperfections arising
 from informational problems. One such theory has been dubbed the "invisibility

 hypothesis" (Milgrom and Oster 1984). Under this view employers have private

 information concerning the abilities of their employees. Promotion signals

 competence; promotion of a woman signals exceptional
                                                        competence. Thus, an
employer may prefer not to promote a competent woman in order to extract more

surplus associated with her employment.

     Other authors have suggested models of
                                               discriminatory hiring policies.
For example, Bulow and Summers (1985) have argued that this phenomenon arises

naturally   whenever job terminations are used to discipline workers for
shirking. In their model, men and women are equally productive, and therefore
must receive the same wage. However, since women are assumed to be less averse
to nonmarket activity, the threat of   terminations will fail to induce

satisfactory effort unless, in equilibrium, women have
                                                         more difficulty finding
new jobs once terminated.                                       -




    Another   set of theories envisions discrimination as the consequence of
self-fulfilling prophecies (see, for example, section 4 of Arrow 1971).

                                        S
  Under this view, low compensation and
                                             poor employment prospects discourage
  women from expending effort or acquiring essential
                                                         skills. Employers in turn
  pay women less and withhold promotions because women
                                                           are less diligent or
  skillful. These theories have an interesting and important implication:

 policies which force employers to treat men and
                                                      women equally may alter
 incentives for women, thereby causing women to perform on par with men. This

 creates a new self-fulfilling prophecy in which discrimination is nonexistent.

      Unfortunately, these more recent models of discrimination do not lend

 themselves to a computational framework.
                                               Equilibria in models with
                                                                           uncertainty
 and private information tend to be
                                      extremely complex, and generally depend
 upon underlying distributions about which we have no information. When

 attributing wage gaps to discrimination, we will therefore
                                                                 adopt Becker's
 framework. In particular, we will assume that discrimination arises from the

 tastes of employers.

      We acknowledge that this view is not
                                               entirely satisfactory. Specifically,
 if the preferences of employers are at all heterogeneous, it becomes
                                                                      very
 difficult to explain the persistence of
                                              discrimination. Nondiscriminatory
 firms clearly have lower costs of production. In the short run (with fixed

capital and, consequently, decreasing marginal returns to labor), such firms

will operate on a larger scale than their
                                               discriminatory competitors. In the
long run, capital will flow to the lower cost firms and discriminatory

employers will disappear entirely. Even if the bulk of capitalists

discriminate as well, nondiscriminatory
                                             capitalists will earn higher returns
and eventually dominate. Thus, wage gaps persist only if discriminatory firms

have monopsony power. Theories of wage gaps based upon the preferences of

consumers or co-workers also encounter difficulties, in that long-run

equilibriuju would tend to entail some
                                         appropriate degree of segregation.



                                         6
 Accordingly, Becker concluded that discriminatory pay differentials were

  likely to be relatively transient.

        One need not, however, take the restrictive view that Becker's

 discrimination coefficients reflect only the innate preferences of employers

 or other groups. Rather, we prefer to think of these coefficients as stylized

 analytic tools for introducing wage gaps which are unrelated to productivity.

        Various commentators have suggested that the adoption of comparable worth

 may hasten the erosion of discrimination against women, or
                                                              may provide
 incentives which lead to the elimination of
                                               productivity differences (see the

 discussion of self-fulfilling prophecies above). We will briefly consider

 policy effects under such scenarios by assuming that discrimination

 coefficients or productivity differences change systematically subsequent to

 implementation



       B. Household Behavior

       It is important to recognize that comparable worth might have a different

 impact on single individuals who are concerned only with their own   market
opportunities than on married individuals who also care about the market

opportunities of their spouses. In order to shed light on this and associated
issues we require an explicit model of household behavior.
       One alternative, which we take as the standard case, is to assume that
the   household acts as a single utility-maximizing agent. It is possible to
justifythis assumption in at least three ways. First, spouses may bargain
over possible actions. As long as bargaining always results in Pareto-
efficient outcomes (a standard axiom in cooperative game theory), the
household behaves as if it maximizes a single utility function. Second, under
certain conditions, family members who are linked to a household head through
operative resource transfers will act to maximize the utility of the head

                                       7
  (Becker 1974). Third, it may be customary for the household head to act

  effectively as a dictator.

        There are, however, two significant drawbacks
                                                                 to modeling households in
  this way. First, unless one adds additional structure it is impossible to

 assess the effect of comparable worth on the
                                                         well-being of married women as
 distinct from married men. Second, the
                                                   adoption of comparable worth may alter
 the balance of power in the hOusehold's
                                                    decision-making process, thereby
 invalidating the practice of using the households
                                                                 current utility function
 for policy simulations.

        To address these issues, we consider a second model of household behavior

 which imposes more structure
                                      upon decision-making. Specifically, we assume
 that spouses bargain over possible actions, and that the outcome of this

 process   corresponds to Nash's two-person bargaining solution (Nash 1950). This
 implies that the household acts as if            it maximizes


                   -
             (UM       jJ*)C(jJ   -




where      is the utility of spouse i (i—My), u is the utility associated with
spouse i's   threat      point (more on this below), and is a
                                                                      parameter reflecting
relative bargaining strengths. Nash derived this solution concept from more

primitive axioms (he also imposed a syametry axiom, which effectively implies

that a —   1/2). Other authors have since provided alternative
                                                               Justifications
based upon explicit models of the negotiation process (Rubinstein 1982). The

Nash solution has previously been used in a wide range of applied contexts,

including the study of household decision-making (Kotlilcoff
                                                                        and Spivak 1981,
Manser and Brown 1980, and McElroy and Homey 1981).

     This franiework allows us to differentiate between the impact of

comparable worth on individual spouses. However, its
                                                                 implementation requires



                                              8
  us to specify the parameter .*, and the threat points, U. Throughout our

 analysis we assume that    —   1/2. Essentially, this implies that husbands and
 wives are equally skilled at bargaining. It is doubtful that our results

 (which concern the effects of policy changes)
                                                 are highly dependent upon the
 value of a (which determines levels of well-being). On the other hand one

 might argue that a would change in response to comparable worth policies- •as

 women become more successEul in the labor market,
                                                      they may also become more

 effective negotiators. By ignoring this possible effect, we may understate the

 desirability of comparable worth to married women.

      Conceptually spouses' threat points correspond to attainable utility

 when negotiations are abandoned. It is natural to think of this outcome as

 divorce. Household decisions, therefore, ought to depend both upon the

 economic opportunities available to single individuals2 and upon the costs of

 divorce. We identify two polar cases. In the first case, divorce is costless.

 Spouses' threat points then correspond to the levels of economic well-being

which they could obtain as single individuals.
                                                 Marriage alters economic well-
being only to the extent it generates a surplus
                                                   (perhaps through economies of
scale in production): spouses bargain over the division of this surplus. In

the second case, divorce is prohibitively costly, possibly because of

emotional stress, loss of "marriage-specific
                                               capital." and/or social stigma.

Economic status subsequent to marital dissolution is then of negligible

importance in determining the allocation of resources within a marriage.

     The specification of threat points turns out to be a critical modeling

choice. When divorce is costless, a rise in women's wages necessarily benefits

married women, since their threat points improve. This remains true even if

men's wages fall simultaneously, as long as the economic surplus associated

with marriage does not shrink too much. However, when the costs of divorce are

prohibitive, a rise in women's wages may hurt married women and benefit


                                        9
  married men- Indeed, this paradoxical result is quite likely to hold when

  women's wages rise and men's wages fall by roughly the same absolute amounts.

       We illustrate this possibility in Figure 1. Suppose that the threat

 points are always given by 4      —    — 0 (the consequences of divorce are

 disastrous to both partners). Suppose further that, at initial wages, the

 utility possibility frontier is P°. The pair (U, U), given by the tangency
 of        with a rectangular hyperbola, represents the Nash bargaining solution.

 Now suppose the woman's wage rises and the man's falls. Maximum attainable

 utility for the man is higher than before (the woman works full time at a

 higher wage to support his leisure); for the woman, it is smaller. Thus, the

 utility possibility frontier rotates. If wage changes are such that it rotates

 around the initial solution (to P1), then the new solution necessarily

 involves higher utility for the man and lower utility for the woman.

 Intuitively, this change raises the cost of
                                                providing utility (through
 leisure) to the woman and lowers the cost of
                                                 providing utility to the man. The
 woman is worse off because she is compelled to increase her share of the

 family's market work.


      C.     Implementation

      Some practical difficulties involved in the implementation of comparable

worth have been widely discussed (see, for example, Raisian, Ward, and Welch

1985). First among these is the determination of an appropriate index of

"Worth' from a large set of relevant factors,
                                                  including necessary

qualifications, responsibilities, working conditions, and flexibility of

hours. Second, there is the problem of
                                          enforcement: a conglomerate might, for
example, circumvent a requirement that it pay truck drivers and textile

workers equally by divesting itself of either firm. We abstract from these

difficulties and assume that the standard of comparable worth under


                                        10
                                Figure 1

     Cffect of a Wage Change on the Family's Bargaining Equilibrium




U1
 4




0
UN




                                              p0

           1           o
          UF          UF                                         U




                                 U
  consideration is precisely defined and enforceable. We do, however, examine

  two other implementation issues, the first being the choice of a standard for

  fair hiring practices.

       Some such standard is clearly
                                       necessary, since employers might otherwise
  attempt to circumvent comparable worth by hiring men exclusively.

  Discriminatory hiring practices are indeed prohibited under current laws; the

  issue is how these laws will be interpreted
                                                to identify firms engaged in such
 discrimination. While one could envision
                                             an enormous spectrum of possible
 standards, we will focus on two standards which
                                                   seem particularly natural.
 First, courts might Judge a firm in violation of the law if it hired men and

 women in proportions which were significantly at variance with application

 ratios. We will refer to this as the
                                        applicant hiring rule. Second, courts
 might prevent firms from lowering the fraction of women hired in each

 occupation subsequent to adoption of the policy. We will refer to this as the

 'historical hiring rule." We suspect that courts' interpretations of statutes

 prohibiting discriminatory hiring practices will correspond more closely to

 the applicant hiring rule, and therefore adopt it as part of our standard

 case. We consider the results of the historical
                                                   hiring rule primarily to
 illustrate that the effects of comparable
                                             worth are extremely sensitive to
 this aspect of implementation.

     The second implementation issue we address is whether comparable worth

standards, if adopted, would apply to the entire economy, or some significant

subset of industries. Pressure for remedial
                                              legislation might, for example, be
concentrated primarily in the government and manufacturing sectors. Indeed,

some states have already moved to adopt standards of
                                                       comparable worth for
government employees. It is therefore important to consider cases in which the

wage policy covers the entire economy ("full"
                                                implementation), as well as



                                       12
 cases in which it applies to a limited number of sectors ("partial:'

 implementation).

      The potential importance of implementation issues can be illustrated by

 examining efficiency effects within a simple partial equilibrium setting. In

 Figure 2 we exhibit a standard supply and demand curve for some good, X, which

 the reader may interpret as female labor. In the absence of government

 intervention, the price of X equilibrates at              and agents trade the amount
 X'. Now suppose   that the   government artificially imposes a price floor, Pf

 (set equal to the comparable male wage). Since the short side of the market

 ordinarily determines exchange, agents will trade the amount Xf. However,

 suppliers will wish to sell X --     (X   -
                                               Xf)   represents unemployment.

     The deadweight loss associated with this policy depends on the allocation

of demand among suppliers. First suppose that the allocation is efficient, in

the sense that the lowest cost units are supplied first (e.g., because

suppliers can freely trade the rights to sell units of output). Deadweight

loss (DWL), which equals the sum of foregone consumer and producer surplus, is

given by the area of the shaded triangle. Simple algebra reveals that


                        p _p* 2
          DVL i(    2          ) (P*X*)C(l+c/c),
                                       D   D S


where 6D and       are the elasticities of demand and supply, respectively. This

formula bears a strong resemblance to the standard computation for excise

taxes. The first two terms are, of course, the square of the price markup, and

expenditures on I. In addition, note that DVI. rises with CD just as it does

for an excise tax. However, note that DWL falls with
                                                               , in   sharp contrast

with standard results on taxation. The intuition is, however, clear: since

suppliers are rationed, C does not affect Xf. A higher elasticity, therefore,

simply reduces the producer surplus associated with the foregone units.


                                           13
                                      Figure 2

        Efficiency Effects of a Price Floor with Optimal Rationing




p




Pf




    *
p




                                  I              I




                                  I



                               *
                   xf         x                  x                   x




                                        14
       Alternatively, if rationing is completely random (as it is in our

 experiments), some higher-cost suppliers participate in the market. Assuming

 for simplicity a linear supply curve with intercept P. the average cost of

production for selected suppliers increases to (Pf + P)/2. Thus, the

deadweight loss associated with inefficient rationing is given by the shaded

area in Figure 3. One should add this to our DWL measure, above.

       From this simple analysis, we can draw two important lessons. First, any

factors which dampen the demand response may reduce the distortions associated

with comparable worth. Thus, hiring quotas may be a good second-best policy,

and quotas which lead to greater demand for women (such as the applicant

hiring rule) may be preferable. Likewise, it may be desirable to implement

comparable worth on an economy-wide basis rather than partially, in order to

reduce shifts of demand away from covered sectors. Second, note that the

elasticity of labor supply is high whenever there are other profitable ways of

employing     labor. Thus, in contrast to our last remark, partial implementation
may be preferable to full implementation, since uncovered sectors can absorb
displaced     workers; this argument is strengthened if the rationing is

inefficient.

       In   the preceding discussion, we have implicitly assumed that purchasers

do not discriminate against X. If discrimination is present, then the true

marginal     social benefit (laB) of using X at any level of output      is greater
than the price at which consumers would just be willing to purchase that level
of output. As shown in Figure 4, this increases the deadweight loss associated
with   imposing a price floor by an amount equal to the area of the shaded
rectangle. Thus, in    the   presence of discrimination, it   becomes   even more
important to impose quotas which require employers to maintain high         levels of
female employment.



                                          I5
                             Figure 3
           Efficiency Effects with Stochastic Rationing




      p




      P1




(P+P)
  2




      p




                                                          x
           Xf




                               16
                         Figure 4

    Effects of Discrimination on Efficiency Losses




P




                                              S




                                                     MSB




                     *
          Xf
                    x                                      x




                            17
      Economists have long been aware that partial equilibrium analysis may be

 very misleading (see Harberger's (1961] seminal analysis of the corporate income

 tax). The reader may be struck by the similarity between a partial factor tax

 and a price floor on one factor input, especially when this floor applies only

 to employment in certain sectors. This analogy calls into question the

 robustness of conclusions based on partial equilibrium analysis, and

underscores the importance of conducting general equilibrium simulations.



 3. Model Description

     To describe the implementation of our comparable worth experiments, we

 turn to the specific structure and features of the model. This section details

the set of economic actors, the behavioral specifications, the alternative

assumptions concerning the initial wage gaps, and finally the meaning of

 'labor market equilibrium" under   comparable worth.   A full technical

description of the behavioral specifications is given in Appendix A, and our

benchmark data set is provided in Appendix 5.



     A. Elements of the Model

     As with all other computable general equilibrium analyses, we employ a

highly   aggregated framework. Our simplified U.S.      contains five
                                                     economy

production sectors (each comprising one "representative' price-taking firm),
one government, and eight representative households. There are four job types:
'high-skill   male-dominated," "low-skill male-dominated," "high-skill female-

dominated," and "low-skill female-dominated." Each occupational category from

the 1979 Census is placed in one of these four aggregates according to the

majority sex of its workers and their median educational attainment (with 14

or more years of school used as the definition of "high-skill').3 Our job



                                       18
definitions lead naturally to the specification of eight household types:

there are four representative married households, classified by the skill

levels of wife and husband, and four single types, defined by sex and skill

level. The five production sectors are agriculture, goods (including

manufacturing), trade and services, real estate, and government enterprises.

       The inclusion of only four jobs, leading to just two wages under economy-

wide comparable worth,4 is a simplification imposed by computational

requirements. More disaggregation of jobs would be desirable but it      is   not

clear a priori that the estimated effects of comparable worth on efficiency

are biased in a systematic direction. On the one hand, with a dichotomous

skill, level as the only dimension of "worth," the model overstates the extent

of the restrictions on wage rates. On the other hand, actual employers would

have more opportunities for substitution among the more numerous and narrowly-

defined jobs, and it is these opportunities that produce efficiency losses to

the economy.

       Additional production sectors would not be a major computational burden;

the motivation for parsimony here was data limitations. Given that the

relative sectoral effects were not our primary interest, we sought to avoid

increasing the number of required production function parameters. Preliminary

analysis with a 20-sector model suggested that the macro and gender-related

effects are probably not sensitive to the number of sectors.

       The   transactions between economic agents are as follows. Household;
purchase the outputs of the five sectors, and provide     capital services and the

four   types of labor to these sectors plus government. The household objective
is to maximize the utility obtained from leisure and consumption. Producers
combine the factor supplies with intermediate inputs purchased from other

sectors, so as to maximize profits from the sale of output to other fins,

household    consumers, and the   government. Finally, the government produces


                                          19
 public services using labor and goods purchased with revenues from household

 income taxes; the scenarios reported below are wequalyield experiments" in

 which the marginal tax rates are adjusted so as to maintain constant real

 government output.5

      We turn next to the functional specifications that drive these

 interactions.



      B. Behavioral Specifications

     The responses of firms and the government to changes in market

 conditions are determined in accordance with their respective production

 functions. As illustrated in Figure 5, we assume a nested-CES function for

value-added. In the innermost nests, composite high-skill and low-skill labor

result from the hours supplied in the respective male- and female-dominated

jobs. At the next level, these composite labor inputs are combined with

capital to produce high- and low-skill value-added. The final CES stage

aggregates these into value-added, which is then combined with intermediate

goods in fixed proportions. The figure shows the substitution elasticities

used in our standard case, and also the initial shares of "high-skill capital"

that we assume in calibrating each sector's production function.

     We also use a CES specification for utility in unmarried households;

here, the CES function combines composite consumption and leisure, where

 leisure" is defined as the difference between a maximum possible work week

and actual market work time. Composite consumption is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate

of the goods and services purchased from the five production sectors.7 Note

that each "representative' worker spends some hours in both the male- and

female-dominated jobs at his or her skill level; thus "leisure" must also be

some kind of composite that reflects the worker's preferences for allocating



                                     20
                                            Figure 5

                Structure of Production, with Standard Assumptions




                                                                                              Fixed
                                          Value                                               Proportions
                                          Added
                             CES
                                                                              Inputs



         High—skill                                                           Low—Skill
         Value Added
                                                                                          CES




CaPitalft5                                                                                           CaPitalLS
                       CES
                                                                       CF.S




                   H—S Male—       H—S Fenale—          Male—
                   Dominated Dominated              Dominated   Dominated                     0
                                                                                           55
                                                                              a           0
                                                        03       a4               5             a1

  Agriculture                       0.1       0.4       1.0      0.1          0.3      0.05
  Goods                             0.15      0.4       1.2      0.1          0.45     0.1
  trade and Services                0.6       0.7       1.0      0.4          0.8      0.2
  Real Estate                       0.6       0.7       0.7      0.2          0.8      0.5
  Government Enterprises            0.6       0.5       1.2      0.5          0.75     0.3
  General Government                0.6             *            0.5          0.75


     *
         See note 6.




                                                  21
time between the two jobs.8 We make two assumptions here: that the maximum

work week is divided between the two jobs in the same ratio as actual 1979

Census work hours for that type of worker;9 and that composite leisure is

again a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of leisure in each of the two jobs. Formally,

using ML for leisure, "V for available hours, and "H" for hours worked,



              L — (T1    -                -
                             H1)'(T2


where                          —              and        —
                  T1 +             Ttot


     For married couples, two alternative extensions of the single-person
formulation    are included. Our standard case defines "household utility" as a
CES function of three terms- -household consumption, husband's leisure, and
wife's leisure (where each of these terms is again a composite). The merits
and limitations of this representation were discussed in the previous section.

In our alternative Nash-bargaining formulation, husbands and wives have

distinct single-worker type utility functions, and agree to maximize the

product of their benefits from marriage. As a crude representation of the

various sources of benefits (e.g., economies of scale, love, children, etc.),

we include a single utility bonus factor "g" (>1), which increases the utility

of any combination of own consumption and leisure by a fixed percentage. The

spouses' threat points (or bargaining positions) are determined by the utility

they would attain if single, scaled by a term "T" (<1) representing the

psychic and/or financial costs of divorce. Using "U" to represent the utility

levels within the marriage, "V" to indicate the maximum attainable utility if

single, and 'h" and "W" subscripts for husband and wife, the formal problem is

to maximize




                                                    22
                   (gUs -   TV)(gU        -




subject   to the household budget constraint.

       The substitution elasticities used in the household utility functions are

derived from estimates of labor supply elasticities. The supply assumptions

and resulting substitution elasticities for our standard case are given in

Table I. The income elasticity of labor supply is directly determined by the

maximum work week parameter; in the standard set, we use 60 hours/week for

everyone, with implied income elasticities as shown in the table. Table 2

provides   the inalogous figures (along with the capital ownership assumptions)
for married couples in the Nash bargaining formulation, under our base
assumptions g —     1.2   and t   — 1.0       (i.e., a 20 percent utility bonus and costless
divorce10).


       C. Wage Gap Assumptions

       According   to Census data, women's wages in the four jobs are 18 percent
to 39 percent below men's wages;11 we assume that employers consider the sexes
perfect   substitutes in each job at the given wages)2 As discussed above,

these differentials can be explained in various ways; the model takes an

agnostic position, allowing any fraction of the within-Job gaps to be

attributed to Beckerian discriminatory preferences by employers,'3 with the

remainder specified as due to productivity differences between men and women.

Of course, the source of the wage gaps between the male- and female-dominated

Jobs plays a major role in the comparable worth controversy. Here, the model

is less flexible; we assume that these differences are solely the result of

the balance between profit-maximizing demands and utility-maximizing supplies.

If   anything, this assumption understates              the efficiency costs of comparable

worth: whatever the source of         the inter-Job gaps, employers will shift away

                                                   23
Table 1. standard household assumptions by household type.


                                             Marrieds                                 Singles


Male skill level/         High! High/ Low/               Low/
                                                         Low
                                                                     High/ Low/                               /
female skill level        High         Low       High                                     High         Low


Assumed labor
supply elasticity         0.1          0.15       0.25   0.3         0.0       0.2        0.35         0.55

Resulting substi-
tution elasticity              572      .707      .843 1.011          .599 1.012          .785         .952

Labor income elas-
ticitya implied
by      —60              -.644 -.711 -.588 -.750                     -.583 -.654         -.863 -1.070


aElasticity with respect to pta-tax money income.




Table 2. Assumptions for husbands and wives in the standard Nash case.
                        (g — 1.2, r — 1.0, Ttot — 60)

Skill level of
husband/wife                High/High                High/Low              Low/High              Low/Low


Share of house-
hold capital
ownership                 .6            .4         .7      .3         .5         .5         .6           .4

Assumed labor
supply
elasticity               0.0          0.35         0.0    0.55       0.2        0.35        0.2         0.55

Substitution
elasticity               .518          .523       .566    .634       .961       .677      1.010          .752

Own- income
labor supply
elasticity           -   .559        -2.149      -.628 -2.217    -   .583     -1.777      - .837       -2.624

Spouse-income                                                                                      .
labor supply
elasticity           -.005            -.057      -.004   -.329   -.025         -.017      -.037         -.340




                                                   24
from the female-dominated jobs when their relative wages rise, and this shift

will have a greater output cost the more productive those workers are (i.e.,

the more the gaps are due to discrimination).14

         The model also allows experiments in which initial efficiency gaps and/or

discrimination coefficients disappear subsequent to the enactment of

comparable worth. As explained above, such scenarios correspond to some recent

theories of wage differentials. For productivity increases, the further

question arises of whether these gains are at all costly to women workers

(e.g.,    in terms of reduced energy available for nonmarket pursuits). Again, we
take     an agnostic position: any perceived cost between 0 and 100 percent of

the efficiency gain is allowed in the model.



         D.   Constrained Equilibrium under Comparable Worth

         Both within-job and between-job wage gaps are eliminated by the

comparable worth wage rule, which specifies that all women and men of the same

skill level be paid the same wage.15 Given our assumption that the sexes are

considered perfect substitutes at the initial within-job differentials,

employers will prefer to hire men at any unisex wages. As noted in the last

section, we impose one of two hiring constraints to represent existing equal-

opportunity statutes: in the historical hiring rule, employers must continue

to employ female and male labor in each of the four jobs in the same

proportions as they did before comparable worth; under the applicant

proportions rule, women and men must be hired in the ratios by which they come

seeking employment. Without some such hiring rule to prevent employers from

exchanging wage gaps for employment discrimination, the model would find a

very high-wage equilibrium in which the demand for labor was reduced to a

level that could be supplied by men alone.



                                          25
     Although firms are thus constrained in their responses within each job,

neither hiring rule affects their ability to substitute away from the female-

dominated jobs, at a time when those jobs are becoming more attractive to

workers;16 thus neither rule produces full equilibrium in the labor market.

The form of the imbalance may not be immediately clear: are wages high with

some female-job aspirants unable to find desired employment, or do low wages

prevent firms from finding enough male-job workers? The answer is the former;

nothing prevents employers from raising wages to attract enough labor of any

type, but an underemployed female-job worker has no comparable ability to bid

the wage down,   since   firms must pay the same in both jobs and a below-market

wage would cause them to lose all their male-job workers.

     Therefore, both men and women will face employment constraints in the

female jobs, under either hiring rule, With the applicant proportions rule.

both sexes will face the same percentage constraint in these jobs, and both

will be fully employed (i.e., face no constraint) in the male jobs, by

construction. Under the historical rule, supply and demand sex-ratios will not

coincide, and thus one sex (almost certainty women) will be constrained in the

male jobs as well.

    A worker facing a binding constraint on market hours in one job will

compensate according to his or her utility function- - in part by working more

in the other job at that skill level (unless a binding constraint exists there

as well), and in part by accepting more-than-desired leisure, (Married

couples may also substitute more spousal work time.) Note that the model

imposes the same constraints on all workers, rather than identifying some as

completely unemployed under comparable worth, and others as able to work as

many hours as desired.17 We feel this is a reasonable representation, given

the trend toward shorter work weeks (prompted in part by the decline of full-



                                         26
time homemakers, who can be expected to become even rarer under comparable

worth).

       The preceding describes the model implementation of economy-wide

comparable worth; however, the model also allows "partial coverage"

experiments in which the wage restrictions apply only to a subset of

employment sectors. When there are covered and uncovered sectors, we model the

rationing of the covered sector employment by a lottery; each worker is either

a 'winner or a "loser" in each of his or her two jobs, and calculates desired

hours accordingly. This all-or-nothing approach differs, but perhaps not

unrealistically,     from our treatment of   unemployment under universal coverage.

Note   that with enough   of   the economy not covered, no unemployment   occurs: the

lottery percentages adjust to clear the covered labor markets, and the

uncovered-sector wages adjust freely to clear the others.



       In sunary. a complete specification of an experiment with this model

involves the selection of the wage rule (see footnote 15), hiring rule,

efficiency/discrimination proportions in the intra-job wage gaps, continuation

or disappearance of these two pay factors, utility formulation for couples,

and sectors covered. In each case, the model solves for the wages, capital

rental rate, equal-yield tax rate multiplier, and the relevant employment

constraints.

       Among   the modelts more important limitations is the absence of dynamics;
we do   not study the transition costs to the comparable worth equilibrium. The

model   also ignores possible effects on fertility or investment in physical or
human capital;    social and political changes that might result from comparable
worth   are also largely outside the     scope of this   paper.




                                           27
4. Results

      As is typical in research with computable general equilibrium models, we

calibrate our model to reproduce exactly a benchmark data set, and report the

counterfactual simulation results as changes from this base equilibrium.

Before proceeding to the results, it may be useful to take a brief look at the

benchmark labor market.

      The first panel of Table 3 shows that slightly less than one-fourth of

employment hours are worked in jobs which we classify as high-skill, and that

the ratio at female to male wages in a particular job category ranges from 60

percent to 82 percent. Women get the lowest relative wage in the male

dominated high-skill category. The second panel in the table shows the

allocation of labor across sectors and the degree to which the labor force in

each sector is male or female. "Trade and ServiceC and "Goods" each account

for roughly 40 percent of total employment in the economy. Almost half of work

hours in Trade and Services are performed by women, but the fraction is only

one   quarter in the Goods sector. Employment in the   "General Governmenr

sector   is   even more female intensive than in Trade and Services, with women's

hours accounting for S2 percent of the total. The third panel shows that

married women work slightly more total hours than single women, whereas

married men provide a much greater share of total hours than do single men.

      Tables 4 through 10 display the results for four sets of different

specifications of the model and of comparable worth policy. Each set comprises

two experiments: one in which the existing wage differentials within jobs are

due to differences in productivity, and one where they are due to

discrimination. (We have computed intermediate cases where the wage

differential is due to some of each and the results closely approximate a

linear combination of the two extreme cases shown here.) Table 4 contains the



                                         28
                                                               TABLE 3
                                          INITIAL   WAGES AND EMPLOYMENT     OISTPIBIJTIONS


                                 HIGH SKILL            HIGH SXILL           LOW SKILL           Loll SKILL
                                MALE DOMINATEO      FEMALE (XJMINATED     MALE DOMINATED      FEMALE DOMINATED
                                 WOMEN     MEN       WOFEN        MEN      WOMEN     r€N        WOIEN     MEN


H%E (1977 DOLLARS)               6.51     10.72        6.60       8.04      4.74     7.21        4.23        6.51

SIF OF      EMPLOYMENT   HOtS    4.00     12.50        4.40       1.40      8.60    43.50      20.80         4.70


                                                    TRADE S      PER..      GOVT     GENL
                                AGRIC    GOODS      SERVICES    ESTATE     ENTER     GOVT


      (19?? DOLLARS>             7.00     6.83         6.57       ?.5       6.63     6.72
                                                                            1.80
l
PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL
EIWL.OYI€NT HIJJRS
                                  1.10   41.30        38.60       0.99              16.40


PERCENT OF HJJJRS   WKED         14.10   24.70        47.10      40.80     27.00    51.90
BY   mIEN

                                         MARRIED     SINGLE     MARRIED   SINGLE
                                  ALL    WOMEN        WOMEN        MEN       MEN


IE    (1977 DOLLARS)             6.72      4.89        4.84       7.93      7.64

9I     OF EPWLOYMENT HOURS      100.00    20.80       17.00      44.40     17.70
macro or aggregate results for percentage change in CNP and total work hours

and the change in a measure of economic efficiency, while Tables S through 10

contain the microeconomic impacts in terms of employment, welfare, and output.

Since it is difficult to explain the aggregate results without reference to

the underlying allocational changes, we discuss these tables as a group rather

than examining them sequentially. Our measure of efficiency is the traditional

sum across households of Hicksian equivalent variations, expressed as a

percentage of base CNP. This measure is strictly appropriate for a Benthamite

social welfare function and is the construction universally used to measure

costs in cost-benefit analyses.

     As an arbitrarily chosen "standard case," we consider full (economy-wide)

comparable worth, accompanied by a rule that hiring must be proportional to

applicants, and with family behavior governed by a single utility function.

Table 4 indicates that the macro effects of such a policy depend considerably

on the cause of the existing wage differentials. Considering first the case

in which they are due to efficiency differences, GNP and total work hours are

predicted to fall by 3.5 percent and economic efficiency is found to decrease

by almost two percent of CNP. Besides the direct deadweight cost illustrated

in Figure 3, the loss in economic efficiency is increased by the tax wedge

between the value of leisure and the social marginal productivity of work;

with this tax wedge, any policy which reduces the market labor usage will tend

to lead to a welfare loss.

     The changes in GNP and economic efficiency calculated for the standard

case with efficiency differences are large relative to the corresponding

figures for other policies that have been explored with this type of model.

For example, Harberger (1966) and Fullerton, King, Shoven, and Whalley (1981)

find that the efficiency cost of the double taxation of corporate equity



                                     30
                                                                     TABLE 4
                                                        MACRO EFFECTS OF COMPRPABLE WORTH


                                      EFFICIENCY GAPS ASSUMPTION             DISCPIMINATION GAPS ASSUMPTION
                                      GNP        WORK        ECON              GrIP       WORK        ECON
                                                 HOURS    EFFICIENCY                      HOURS    EFFtCIENCY
                                   X change    Z change      of GrIP       Z change    Y    change   X   of   GrIP
1.      STMIDA      CASE

     Full Camprable Worth,
     Applicant Hiring Rule,         —3.51       —3.62         —1.96          —1.56         -2.57     —0.24
     Faily     Utility Function


2.          HIRIPG RULE

     Sam. as     *1, .Mcept         -5.56       —9.14         —2.35          —5.32         —7.46     —2.69
     Historical     Hiring Pule

3.             COI.€RAGE

     Sn   as SI,     but only       —1.41       -1.15         —1.36          —0.80         —1.09         —0.70
     sectors     2,5,6 covered

4.      HOUSEHtLD SlIPPING

     Sam.   as   *1, encept         —2.50        3.64         —1.08          —1.31                       —0.33
     spousal     Nh   Bargaining
income (at both the corporate and personal levels) is roughly between half and

one percent of GNP. Here, the efficiency cost figure is at least double that.

It should be pointed out that the loss in economic efficiency in this case is

not 1.96 percent of one year's GNP, but is equivalent to the annual loss of

that percent of the value of output- -i.e., a loss of roughly two percent of

the   total human and nonhuman capital in the economy.
       If    the wage gaps are due to discrimination,   the CNP loss incurred with
the introduction of comparable worth in our standard case is 1.5 percent and

the loss in economic efficiency is just .24 percent. To understand why the

macro results are so different, one must refer to Table S which shows that in

both cases the composition of the labor force is significantly altered by

comparable worth: women's labor supply increases roughly S to 11 percent and

men's decreases about 10.5 percent. If women are as productive as men, as in

the case where the wage gaps are due to discrimination, this substitution of

women for men in the work force does not reduce GNP and efficiency as it         would
if the initial gaps were due to efficiency differences.

         One   might   wonder why the discrimination gaps case does not show a

significant      increase in economic efficiency. The answer is that eliminating
the   discriminatory wage differentials does not nullify the employers' taste

for discrimination. Firms now consider women more costly than men, and while

they must obey the hiring rule in employing the sexes within each lob, nothing

prevents a demand shift away from those Jobs and sectors that are female-

intensive.'8 (This is equally true in the efficiency gaps cases.) Thus, the

perception     of a wage "gap" is not eliminated, but transferred from the supply
side to the demand side; under the assumptions of our standard case, this
leaves      economic welfare largely unaffected.

      The expected patterns of employment changes are found in the micro

tables. Table 6 shows that the employment of both men and women declines in


                                           32
                                                                              TA6LE 5
                                                          SPECIFIC EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF COMPAPAULE WOPTH
                                                                         percentage change
                                          top   *   refers to efFiciency gap cases, bottom * to discrimination gaps
                                                ALL          WOMEN        MEN       MAPPIED     MAPlE[I     SINGLE    SINGLE
                                                                                     WOMEN        MEN        WOMEN      MEN
      1.      STDAPO       CASE

           Full Comparable Worth,               -3.62         7.65      -10.49       24.5?      —12.65      —13.01     —5.06
           Applicant Hiring Pule,            -2.57           10.60      -10.59       20.33      -12.94      -11.06     —4.70
           Family   Utility    Function

      2.          HIPING RULE

           Same as Vi, e.ccept                  —9.14       -15.70       -5.09      -11.34       -5.35      —21.21     —4.43
           Historical Hiring  Rule              —7.46       -12.50       -4.39       —7.94       —4.74      -18.07     —3.51
t#1
U,
      3.            COVERAGE

           Same   — It,but only                 —1.15         3.79       —4.16       15.52       —5.45      -10.55     —0.94
           sectors 2,5,6 covered                —1.09         4.22       —4.34       16.10       -5.67      -10.38     -0.99


      4.      HOLSEHOLO SHARING

           5ame            eicept               —3.64        —3.06       —3.99        0.64       -3.89       -7.64     —4.23
                     *1,                                                 -3.39        3.28       —3.37       —4.61     -3.44
           spousal Nash     Bargaining          —2.21        —0.27
                                                                             TABLE 6
                                                            SPECIFIC EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OY 308          AND SEX
                                                                        percentage change
                                      top   S   refers    to eFficiency gap cases, bottorn $ to         discrimination gaps
                                ALL                                    MEN                                           WOMEN
                                                   HS           HG        LS             LS        H5            HS          LS            LS
                                                Male    Dam   Fern 0cm Male Dam       Fern Dam   Male   Dorn   Fern Darn   Male   Darn   Fern Dom
1.      STF*IDAPD CASE

     Full   Comparable Worth,   —3.62             —4.06       -11.49         —8.68    —41.94       33.53        —5.70        59.94       —16.09
     Applicant Hiring Pule,     —2.57             —5.57        —9.00         —9.16    —37.54       32.11        —4.19        57.46        —9.76
     Family Utility Function

2.          HIPItI3   RULE

     Same as SI, except         —9.14              192          9.36         —3.76    —2456        —0.56        10.35         3.19        25.09
     Historical Hiring Pule     —7.46             —1.44        —8.11         —3.52    —19.24       -0.10        —8.93         2.95       —19.59


3.            COVERAGE

     Same as *1, but only       —1.15             —2.32         5.09         —5.30     -1.5?       12.2?        -6.01        31.61        -7.09
     sectors 2,5,6 covered      —1.09             —2.62         6.69         --5.66     0.01       10.76        -6.13        28.89        -5.02

4.      HOUSEHOLO SHAPING

     Same as *1, except         —3.64             —0.36         0.74         -2.83    —25.81       16.O        —10.73        31.66       —19.66
     spousal Nash Bargaining    —2.21             -0.34         2.60         —2.63    —20.47       16.62        -0.75        28.24       —13.5!
                                                                          TABLE 7
                                                         EMPLOYMENT RELATIVE TO DESIRED EMPLOYMENT

                                    top   *    refers   to   efFiciency gap   cases, bottom I to disorirnation gaps
                                      FILL              WOFEN         MEN         WIRPIEO    MAPRIEO      SINGLE      SINGLE
                                                                                   WOMEN       lIEN        WOMEN        MEN
     1.      STAPAQO CRS€
          FullComparable Worth,      88.73              75.51        101.80        73.64      104.36       79.03       96.35
          ApplicantHiring Rule,      09.69              77.59        101.65        75.87      103.99       00.82       96.66
          Fail9 Utility Function

     2.          HIPIN6 PtLE

          Sam, as $1, except         82.55              58.15        106.78        51.77      111.133      70.03       96.01
          Historical Hiring Rule     83.32              59.79        106.78        53.30      111.70       71.78       96.27
'a
UI
     3.            COVEPAGE

          Sac  as $1, but only            NA                 HA         NA           NA          NA          NA         MR
          sectors 2,5,6 covered           NA                 MA         NA           NA          NA          NA         NA


     4.      HOUSEHQ..D SHAPING

          Same as UI, except         92.64              84.55         90.44        84.99       98.94       83.98       97.22
          spousal Hash Bargaining    93.54              86.43         98.63        86.81       99.07       es.94       97.56
                                                                          TABLE B
                                                  EMPLOYMENT RELATIVE TO DESIPED EIIPLOYMENT BY JOB

                                       top *   refers   to eFficiency gap cases,       bottom *   to    discrimination gaps

                                                                    MEN                                                    WOMEN
                                       ALL         HS         HS           LS         LS               IS            HS          LS         LS
                                                Male Dam   Fern   0cm Male   Darn   Fern Don,   Male        Don,   Fern   0cm Male Darn   Fern   Don
     1.      STI*IOARO CASE

          Full Comparable Worth,     68.73       104.05      76.67        106.94     53.65        108.06            16.67      124.94      53.65
          Applicant Hiring Rule,     89.69       103.78      78.36        106.16     57.63        107.52            78.36      122.82      7.63
          Family Utility Function

     2.        HIRING PULE

          Same as    SI, encept      82.55       105.99      71.99        113.54     69.20         78.65            71.20       14.30      47.30
          Historical   Hiring Rule   83.32       105.91      78.78        112.89     73.68         78.23            71.65       73.51      50.26
'9
0'


     3.             COVERAGE

          Same as SI, but only         NA          NA          NA           NA         NA               NA                NA       MA        NA
          sectors 2,5,6 covered        NA          NA          NA           NA         NA               NA                NA       NA        NA



     4.      HOUSEHOLD SHAPING

          Same as    *1, except      92.64       101.46      84.09        102.59     64.45        107.44            83.85      141.22      63.6!
          spousal Nash Bargaining    93.54       101.33      85.57        102.27     68.84        106.78            65.34      136.23      68.04
                                                                                TABLE 9
                                                            SPECIFIC WELFARE EFFECTS or COMPARABLE NORTH
                                                                           p.rc.ntag. change
                                               top $ refers to etc icl.ncy gap cases, bottoM $   to
                                                                                                  discrinination gaps
                                               figures in parentheses are standard deviation, (is, percentag. points)

                                                                 MARRIED COUPLES fl                       SINGLE MEN             SINGLE WOMEN
                                                   H/H           H/L         L/H           L'L         HIGH          Loll      HIGH         LOR
1.     STANDARD CASE

     roll tonparebl. Worth,                      -5.12        —5.55        —1.60        -1.05         —8.20        -5.11       1.73        5.29
     Applicant Hiring Rul.,                       3.68        —1.13          0.28         0.21        —?.46        -1.2?       5.80        6.38
     F.,nly   Iitilitq   Function

2.          HIRING RULE

     Sene a, $1, eNcept                          -5.60        —6.10        —2.35        -1.50         —7.82        -1.5?       1.32        5.43
     Historical lUring Rule                      -6.53        —6.03        —2.9?        -1.63         —9.52        -1.55       3.29        5.28


3.            COVERAGE

     San.   .. $1, but only                 —2.85(1.85) -3.11(1.60) —1.25(2.81) -1.2(2.25) —3.15(0.85)        -2.rb.O.l1) 3.16(1.96)   2.32(1.09)
     sector.   2,5,6 covred                 —2.00(1.01) —2.11(1.60) -0.66(2.85) -0.89(2.26) —2.61(0.81)       -2.51(0.1fl 3.97(1.95)   2.?0(4.09)

1.      HOUSEHOLC SHARING

     Sept. a. $3, •..cept     hu:,b.nd.'wif. -0.91/2.21   —8.79/2.61 —6.32/1.33 -1.01/1.02            —7.26        -1.52       5.8?        6.15
     spousal Nasti Bargaining husband/site —8.63,2.13     —0.19/3.16   —5.63/1.53   -1.13/1.50        -P.11        .399        5.93        6.91


       H/L refers to a narri.d couple sith a high skill husband and a low skilL wife and
       .inilarly for couples with a diferent coMposition.
                                                               TABLE 10
                                                  OUTPUT EFFECTS OF COMPAPABLE I4OPTH
                                                          percentage change
                           top   S   refers   to efficiency gap cases, bottom * to discrimination gaps

                                     ALL4     RGQICULTURE    GOODS      TPAOE             PEAL    GOVEPNMENT
                                                                       SEPVICES         ESTATE   ENTEPPPISES
1.      STFI4OARO CASE

     Full                            —3.51        —2.08       -3.06       —5.97          -1.97          -3.72
            Compaable Worth,                                                             -0.56          -1.45
                                     —1.56        —0.51       -0.93       -3.4!
     Applicant Hiring Rule,
     Family Utility Function


2.          HIRING RULE

                                     —5.56        —3.84       -5.45       —8.63          —3.12          —6.04
     Same as *1, except
     Historical Hiring Qule          —5.32        -3.68        5.33       —8.47          -2.72


3.            COL,€PAGE

     Same as l, but only             —1.41        —1.82       -3.50        0.64          -0.03          —3.30
                                     —0.80        —1.36       -2.80        1.43          -0.65           2.54
     sectors 2,5,6 covered


4.      HOUSEHQO SHAPING
                                     —2.50        —1.26       -1.93       —4.69          -1.03          -2.41
     Same as •l, except
                                     —1.31        —0.32       -0.69       -3.10          -0.10          -1.07
     spousal Nash Bargaining

                                 $     includes General Government output, which   is   held constant
the female dominated jobs in the standard case. Table 10 shows that the

output of the Trade and Services sector, whose employees are almost half

women, declines by the Largest amount, significantly more than the other large

employment sector, the Goods sector. A result of the comparable worth wages

and the accompanying hiring rules is that single women, who desire to work

more at their newly higher wages, actually end up working less. They are

crowded out of employment by the very large increase in desired employment by

married women. In the standard cases, single women end up supplying 11 to 13

percent less labor <Table 5), although they would like to work about 25

percent more hours than are made available by employers (Table 7).

      Focusing further on the effects of the employment constraints, we now

examine the results under the rule that hiring must be done in historical sex

ratios. Table 4 shows that the loss in GNP, work hours, and economic efficien-

cy would be significantly, and in most cases dramatically, larger than if an

applicant rule were applied, under either explanation of the existing wage

differentials. With historical hiring proportions, the labor demand for women

is much lower. As before, the sectors and jobs which heavily utilize women's

labor are those which shrink due to the increased cost of female labor.

However, in this case women cannot increase their share of the work in other

jobs, and therefore they are trapped in declining jobs and sectors and suffer

significant     unemployment The later tables clarify   this. Table 5   shows that

the   gender   composition of the labor force is quite different with the histori-

cal ratio hiring rule. Both men and women work less with comparable worth

under this regime, with the hours of single women now down about 20 percent.

The toss in GNP is particularly great in the discrimination gaps case relative

to what it would be with an applicant rule, because the many women who are

unemployed in this case are as productive as their male counterparts.



                                         39
       Tables 6 through 8 further elaborate the differences between the results

with an applicant hiring rule and a historical hiring rule. The first rows of

Table 6 show a large shift of women between female-dominated jobs and male

dominated jobs. For example, in the standard case with existing wage

differentials due to discrimination, female hours in the low-skill female-

dominated jobs decline by 10 percent while female hours in the male-dominated

low skill jobs increase by almost 60 percent. With the historical hiring rule,

this large increase in female employment in the low skill male dominated jobs

is missing. Tables 7 and 8 show employment relative to desired employment by

sex and marital, status and also by job. Desired employment is the amount

someone would choose to work if there were no constraints on that person or,

in the case of married individuals, on the spouse. Table 7 shows that men

actually work more than they would if the comparable worth wages were not

accompanied by employment constraints; this is accounted for by married men,

who try to compensate for the restrictions that prevent their wives from

working as much as desired. This is particularly striking in the cases with

the historical hiring rule, where Table 7 indicates that married women work

only slightly more than 50 percent of their intended hours, and married men

work almost 112 percent of their desired hours. Table 8 shows that women move

from constrained to unconstrained jobs in the applicant hiring rule case, but

that   effectively all jobs are constrained for them in the historical hiring
rule. 19
       We conclude that as a hiring regulation to accompany a comparable   worth

wage   policy, the historical hiring rule is sharply inferior to the applicant
rule. This was evident in the aggregate results of Table 4 and also shows up
in the disaggregated welfare results of Table 9. Regardless of whether the
existing differentials are due to discrimination or efficiency differences,
all married couples are better off with an applicant rule than with a


                                       40
historical hiring rule, as are high-skill single women. Single men and low-

skill single women lose somewhat less with the historical hiring rule under

the efficiency gaps assumption although even they would prefer the applicant

rule under the discrimination gaps hypothesis. The reason that single men may

do better under the historical rule is that they are protected from increasing

competition from women in the male dominated jobs. Low-skill single women seek

fewer work hours than their married counterparts, and thus are relatively less

restricted by the absolute hour limits used with the historical hiring rule

than by the proportional limits of the standard cases (see note 17). This

less-burdensome constraint in the female job can be enough to compensate them

for the restriction on hours in the male Job.

     Still concentrating on the specific welfare effects under the two

alternative hiring rules, one major result in Table 9 is that only single

women are made   better   off with comparable worth. The magnitude of the changes

in welfare are considerable. With the applicant hiring rule, comparable worth

legislation increases the welfare of single women from 4.7 to 6.4 percent

while   decreasing the welfare of single men roughly 4 to 8 percent. Married
couples   are almost always made worse   off because the improvement in the wife's
wage fails to overcome the deterioration of the husband's work situation.
     Another notable feature of Table 9 is that high-skilled men, whether
married or single, do much worse than low-skilled men, under either hiring
rule. The same holds, less strongly, for single women.     This   is largely the
result of our elasticity assumptions: we allow employers to shift from the
female- to the male-dominated job more easily at the low-skill level than at
the high-skill level (i.e., a5    >    in   Figure 5); and we assume lower labor
supply elasticities, hence less ability to substitute consumption for higher-
cost leisure, for high-skill workers (see Table 1). This explanation is


                                         41
confirmed by a simulation not reported in the tables, in which these elasticity

assumptions were reversed in the standard efficiency differentials case; these

changes cut the high/low welfare effects gap to .3 percent for single men, and

more than reversed the single women's gap, with the high-skilled workers

benefiting 1.5 percent more than the low-skilled. (The welfare effects for

single men (and married couples) are not more completely reversed in this

experiment because switching the assumed labor supply elasticities is not

equivalent to switching the model's consumption/leisure substitution

elasticities: other variables from the base data set, such as capital income

and hours worked, influence the derived substitution elasticities.)

    We also examine in Tables 4 through 10 a case where comparable worth wage

equality is enforced only in the Goods sector and in Government Enterprises

and General Government. The aggregate results of Table 4 show that the

efficiency loss almost equals the percentage decline in GNP for this case, in

sharp contrast to the results of the other cases. The reason for this is that

partial coverage opens a new sort of intersectoral inefficiency, namely that

the wage costs differ between the covered and uncovered sectors. The strong

output effects of this are shown in Table 10 where the Trade and Services

sector, which is both labor intensive and female labor intensive, now grows

rather than shrinks. Because there is an uncovered sector to absorb all those

who want to work (at the relatively low wages which prevail there), aggregate

employment falls very little in this case. Technically, then, there is no

unemployment with partial coverage.

     Recall that our formulation of the partial coverage cases allows those

who get covered jobs to work as many hours as they choose, but rations access

to these jobs. The resulting specific welfare effects are shown on the third

set of rows in Table 9, with standard deviations given in parentheses. For

instance, for the efficiency gaps assumption, high-skill single women on


                                      42
average gain 3.46 percent, but one standard deviation adds or subtracts 4.96
percentage points to that figure. Women who are unable to find any covered
sector   employtnent are unambiguously worse off than if no comparable worth

policy existed.

     The final case covered in the set of Tables 4 through 10 is not a variant

of our model of comparable worth, but rather an alternative model of the

family. Here we adopt the approach described above in which Nash bargaining

determines the division of resources in marriages. In the cases shown in this

set of tables, we assume the gains from marriage (perhaps due to economies of

scale in consumption) are 20 percent. In this Nash bargaining framework we are

able to examine the welfare consequences for husbands and wives separately.

     The aggregate results of Table 4 are not too different in the Nash

bargaining case from those in the standard case, although under the efficiency

gaps assumption the percentage declines in ON? and aggregate welfare are now

noticeably smaller. This is because the composition of employment is very

different with Nash bargaining, as is evident in Table 5. Because of the

bargaining arrangement, much less substitution of women's work for men's work

takes place among marrieds. Overall, the labor force is more male intensive

with the Nash bargaining model, and since men are more productive in the

efficiency gaps case, GN? and total efficiency fall less. The specific welfare

results of Table 9 show separate compensating variation figures for husbands

and wives for the household bargaining mode].. In these cases, husbands lose

and wives gain. In fact, husbands lose more than single men of the same skill

level; this is because their threat points have weakened in their marriages

relative to those of their wives.

     In any simulation model, the results are a function of assumptions and

parameters.   This particular model is relatively complex   and involves a large

number   of assumptions, prohibiting systematic sensitivity analysis. Nonethe-

                                       43
less we have examined the results of some alternative parameter values, and

present the results in Tables 11 and 12. Two variants of the standard case

with efficiency gaps are presented, one which raises the total hours to be

allocated between work and leisure from 60 hours a week to 70 hours per week

(with other parameters recalibrated so that the model still replicates the

benchmark data in the base case), and the other triples the intra-skill

elasticities of substitution (04 and G). Changing the total amount of time to

be allocated affects the qualitative results of comparable worth not at all

and the quantitative results only slightly. Tripling the substitution

elasticities is a rather more drastic change in assumptions and hence causes

some important qualitative changes in the results. Fins can now substitute

male dominated jobs for female dominated ones much more readily, with the

result that women are much more constrained in the amount of work offered them

after comparable worth is implemented. Total work hours by women now decline,

total work hours in the economy fall by over 7 percent and the decline in GNP

and economic efficiency is correspondingly higher than in the standard case.

Interestingly. Table 12 indicates that all households are worse off with the

higher substitution elasticities, with the exception that low-skill single

men are slightly better off. Of course, the high elasticities simply allow a

wedge to cause greater distortions in the economy, as was described above.

     We also increased elasicities (in this case the labor supply elasticities

and all substitution elasticities in the Goods and trade and Services sectors)

in the standard case under the discrimination gaps hypothesis. Again, the

higher elasticities lead to larger welfare losses and a greater reduction in

labor market hours and GNP. The partial equilibrium analysis of section 2

predicted the opposite welfare result for the supply elasticities case;

however, that analysis took as given the wage floor Pf. Here, the greater

supply sensitivity means a greater increase in the share of women in the


                                     44
                                                                          TABLE 11
                                                    SENSITIVITY OF RESULTS TO ALTERNATIVE SPECIFICATIONS
                                                                     percentage change
                                                         Economic Efficiency measured as a   of NP

                                           GNP   ECON   EFF   TOTAL   WOMEN      MEN    MARRIED   MARRIED   SINGLE    SINGLE
                                                              HOURS   HOURS     HOURS     WOMEN       MEN     WOMEN      MEN
                                                                                          HOURS     HOURS     HOURS    HOURS

                                         —3.51     —1.96      —3.62   ?.65    —10.19     24.5?    -12.65    —13.01    —5.06
1.     Standard      efficiency   gapS
      case
IA.     Sam.        $1, except that                                                               -15.59    -12.9k    —4.88
                       weak raised       —3.78     —2.11      -3.48   11.3?   —12.51     31.21
       maximum
                 awork
       from 60    to 70   hrs
IS.      Sam.    a $1,    except that                                                             —10.41    —21.19     5.?4
       intra skill substitution          -5.54     —3.45       ?.?2   5.1?      9.0B      7.39
       elasicities are      tripled

                                         —1.56     —0.24      —2.5?   10.60   —10.59     28.33    -12-91    —11.06    —4.70
2.      Standard discrimination
       gaps Ca..
afi.     Same    $2, except that
                 a                                                                       31.6?              —'1.11    —0.30
            l.ba supply elasti—          —2.68     -0.65      —4.05   12.42   —14.00              —I6.6
       all
       cities increased by .2
28.      Same    —
                 $2, except that                   —0.9?      —4.25    5.78   -10.46     22.12    -12.11     11.19    —5.22
       substitution elasticitieS         —2.62
       doubled in sectors 2 & 3


                                         —2.50     -1.36      -3.64   —3.08    —3.99      0.61     -3.89     -7.64    —4.23
3.      Nash brgaining
       •fficiercy gaps case
                                         —2.01          NA    —2.11    4.1?    -5.96     14.04     -6.60     -7.88    —4.43
SA.      Same    *3, except that
                 a
       threat points set at tero


                                                   -0.33      —2.21   —0.2?    —3.39      3.28     --7.3?    —4.61    —3.44
4.      Nash be-gaining                  —1.31
       discrimination gaps case
4R.      Same as *4, except that                                                                   —4.39     —4.72    —3.49
                                         —1.26     —0.32      —2.16    1.08    —4.11      5.84
       marriage utility gain
       incr*as from 2Q to 50
                                                                                      TASLE 12
                                                       SPECIFIC WELFARE EFFECTS FOR ALTERNATIVE PARAMETER SPECIFICATIONS
                                                                                 percentage change
                                                           MARRIED COUPLES 4*                      SINGLE MEN
                                                H/H          H/L         L/H                                              SIN&LE WOMEN
                                                                                     L/L        HIGH         LOW        HIGH        LOW

      I.     Standard efficiency gaps         —5.12        —5.55        —1.60        —1.05         -6.28    5.14
            case                                                                                                      1.73        5.29
      IA.     Sa.,,e as *2, except that
            maximum tjork jeek rais.d         —1.83        —5.14        —l.5         —0.91         —?.G2
            from 60 to 70 hrs                                                                              —1.61      3.9?
     18.      Same as 11, except  that
            intra skitl substitution          —P.0?        —7.58        —2.95        —1.8?        —9.53    —5.00      3.11
            elasicitie, are tripled


     2.      Standard dascraminat ion         —3.68        -4.13        —0.20         0.21        —7.16    —1.2?      5.80        6.3')
            gaps case
0'   211.     Same as *2, except that
            all labor supply elasti—          —4.16        —1.51        —0.69
            cities increased by .2                                                   —0.01        -7.56    -1.16      5.39       6.01
     2G.      Same as *2, except that
            substitution elasticities         —3.66        -4.42        —0.53        —0.56        —7.01
            doubted in sectors 2 & 3                                                                       --1.71     5.95       5.59


     3.      Nash bargaining              —6.94/2.21   -8.?9/2.61   —6.32/1.33   —4.84/1.02       —7.26    —1.52     5.8?        6.45
            eflzciency gaps case
     3R.      Same as *3, except that     1.?9/—9.93 —1.48/—6.13    4.66/—6.28   4.011—5.73        ?.?5    —1.61
            threat potnts set at zero                                                                                .52         6.50


     I.     Nash bargaining               —8.63/2.43   -8.49/3.16   —5.63/1.53   —4.13/4.50       —7.11
           discrimination gaps   case                                                                      -3.99     5.93        6.91
     4A.  Same as *4, except that
       marriage utility gain         6.5?/—0.62 -?.02/—0.21 —3.17/2.09 —2.00/1.7?                 —7.18
        increased from 20 to 50X                                                                                     5.90        7.00
     *4 H/L refers to a married couple .4th a high skill husband and a lou skill
         similarly tor couples '.'ith different comporstion                                   jife an
work force, and hence a higher average wage perceived by employers. The

qualitative result that the efficiency cost of comparable worth is much

smaller if the existing differentials are due to discrimination remains, with

the efficiency loss numbers remaining under one percent of CS? even in these

cases with increased elasticities.

     We have done two sensitivity analyses for the Nash bargaining cases. In

the first of these, we set the threat points to zero for married couples in a

case where the existing differentials are due to efficiency differences.20

This effectively locks both spouses into the marriage and causes them to

engage in the same type of female for male labor substitution that is observed

with the model with family utility functions. In particular, Case 3A of Table

1.1 shows that married women work 14 percent more and married men 6.6 percent

less after comparable worth. This substitution was not apparent in the base

case where threat points were equal to a spouse's utility if single (i.e.,

with costless divorce). The most noticeable change caused by the removal of

threat points (which is analytically equivalent to an infinite marriage bonus)

is in the distribution of welfare within marriages. These figures are shown in

Table 12. With a 20 percent marriage bonus, wives gain and husbands lose due

to comparable worth; the womens gain arises from the strengthening of their

threat points. With zero threat points, the women work more and therefore

enjoy less leisure, while the husbands share in the income generated by the

wives. In fact, the husbands in some cases end up significantly better off

while all wives are worse off because of comparable worth. The second of the

Nash bargaining sensitivity cases increases the marriage bonus or the degree

of returns to scale in marriage from 20 percent to 50 percent, in a case where

the existing wage differentials are due to discrimination. This change barely

affects the aggregate results, although the labor substitution and the welfare

transfers noted above are also apparent for this case.


                                     47
       In addition to the above experiments with various comparable worth

specifications and parameter choices, we have conducted a third group of

simulations in which the discrimination or effiency differences that produce

male/female wage gaps in each job evaporate. We summarize the macroeconomic

results here but omit the detailed tables, partly for brevity and partly

because we don't feel that our model adequately captures the complexities of

the labor market theories that predict this elimination.

       Because discriminatory preferences affect the efficiency of resource use

at   the margin, while productivity gaps affect the value of all infra-marginal
resources, the disappearance of the former should provide smaller gains than
the elimination of the latter. The model confirms this: if pre-existing
discrimination evaporates under comparable worth,   GNP rises 2.2 percent and

overall   economic efficiency is boosted 1.6 percent of original 01W; for
vanishing productivity differences, the corresponding gains are 5.3 percent
and 7.5 percent. Even here, of course, the equality of wages between male- and
female-dominated jobs imposed by comparable worth is inefficient; if
discrimination or productivity gaps could be eliminated without comparable
worth, the gain in economic efficiency would be 3.6 percent or 9.7 percent.
respectively. (These latter figures are our model's estimates of the welfare
costs of the intra-job wage differentials, under the two alternative
assumptions concerning their origin.)
      We also considered cases in which productivity differences evaporate, but
at some cost to women workers throuzjt increased schooling, acceptance of less-
preferred careers, a reduction in ener available for non-market activities,
or the like. If women bear the full cost, then eliminating the productivity
gaps leads to no change in economic welfare; in a smaller number of hours,
women can produce as much as they did before for exactly the sane total pay


                                      48
and at precisely the same disutility cost from working. If comparable worth

is added to this situation, an efficiency loss of 1.0 percent is observed.

These    results   are somewhat non-linear with respect to the "effort cost"

assumption; for example, to equate the welfare change under the assumption

that women bear a cost of 90 percent of the productivity improvement with a

weighted average of the "full cost" and "zero cost" results, respective

weights of about 93.5 percent and 6.5 percent are required.



S.   Discussion

        The simulations reported in this paper reveal that both the implementa-

tion of comparable worth and the analysis of its effects are extremely com-

plex.    The results are very sensitive to assumptions about the hiring rules
that will    accompany the wage constraints and the source of existing male-

female wage differentials, the modeling of married households, and a number of

behavioral parameters.

        Consider the issue of hiring rules. Regardless of whether existing wage

gaps are due to efficiency differences or to discrimination, the introduction

of comparable worth on a large scale will cause employers to want to substi-

tute away from women workers toward men. Thus some constraints on hiring are

likely to be imposed. If, after implementation of comparable worth, employers

are required to maintain the same sex ratio of employees as before the new

policy    (historical proportions),   the   adverse   effects of the policy on employ-

ment, gross national product, and economic efficiency will be much greater

than if firms are required to employ men and women in the same proportion as

they appear in the pool of qualified applicants (applicant proportions).

        Marital status and the assumptions about the nature of marriage are very

important. The effects of comparable worth on employment, income, and utility

of single men and women are relatively easy to discern: single women are big


                                            49
winners, although their employment falls. Single men are unambiguously big

losers. The effects on married men and women, by contrast, are not easy to

predict. They vary greatly depending on whether married couples are assumed to

have a single utility function or to engage in bargaining. If the latter, the

results are additionally sensitive to the ease or difficulty of divorce and

the size of the gains from marriage.

     If existing wage gaps between men and women reflect efficiency

differences, comparable worth would have substantial adverse effects on

the economy as a whole, although women as a group might benefit, and single

women almost certainly would benefit under a variety of assumptions, If the

wage gaps are entirely attributable to discrimination, comparable worth would

have smaller effects on GNP. total employment and, particularly, aggregate

welfare. The simulation results based on assumptions of zero discrimination or

100 percent discrimination can be regarded as providing upper and lower bounds

of the effects of comparable worth within the limits of the model.

     As might be expected, if comparable worth is introduced in only part of

the economy (partial coverage), the effects in most respects are attenuated;

however, if the wage gap is the result of discrimination, the efficiency

losses are greater than they would be with full coverage. Also in line with

expectations, the efficiency losses increase if employers' elasticities of

substitution are larger.

     Regardless of assumptions, the redistributive effects of comparable worth

are likely to be substantial. Not only are men and women affected very differ-

ently, but there is an interaction between sex and marital status, and sex and

skill level. Those who oppose comparable worth because they expect it to have

adverse effects on aggregate economic well-being will find some support in

these results, but those who favor comparable worth because of its redistribu-

tive effects will also find support.


                                       so
        The work presented   here needs to be extended in a variety of ways.
First, the model     could be made more realistic by introducing more jobs,

other wage-determining characteristics     in addition to education,    and more

industrial sectors     and firms. Whether a more finely tuned comparable worth
policy    imposed on a mare disaggregated model would result in larger or

smaller changes in CUP and economic efficiency is not clear a priori. The

policy rule in our model, complete equality in pay between men and women

(in the two types of jobs) is clearly an extreme version, and to that

extent   exaggerates the impact of comparable worth. On the other hand, our
highly aggregated model understates the extent to which individual fins
and industries could react to comparable worth by reorganizing production
and substituting male for female labor. This reorganization and substitution
tends    to increase the efficiency losses. It is clear that greater disaggrega-

tion would tend to reduce the redistributive effects of comparable worth.

     Second, a more detailed model, should consider the effects of evasion

(perhaps analogous to partial coverage), as welt as the costs of enforcement

designed to reduce evasion. In addition to outright defiance of the law

(especially by small fins where enforcement would be extremely expensive),

employers    could resort to greater reliance on 'temporary" labor, more
purchased inputs, and similar restructuring that would tend to distort the
effect of the comparable worth policy. These "quasi-legal' evasions would
reduce the redistributive impact of comparable worth and probably increase its
adverse    effect on efficiency.

     Third,   it   would be useful to analyze the   transition   to comparable   worth.
Wage parity between women and men requires a steep rise in women's wages or a
steep fall in men's. The foner is likely to be more politically feasible;
therefore, if the policy were introduced all at once over the entire economy,


                                         51
the dynamic shock effects might be greater than those experienced when OPEC

raised the price of oil in 1973. Fourth, research is needed that considers

possible   long-run effects of comparable worth on marriage, divorce, fertility,
and educational   attainment. All of these factors have been held constant in
the simulations. Finally, this study clearly exposes the need        for more precise

understanding of intra-household behavior    in marriage,   the   sources of
existing wage gaps, and the demand and supply elasticities that help to

determine the effects of comparable worth.




                                      52
                                       FOOTNOTES




       I.    Note that there is a striking similarity between implementing

comparable worth in some subset of economic sectors, and imposing a partial

factor tax on capital in the corporate sector (i.e., a corporate income tax).

Previous studies of the corporate income tax have not only revealed the

importance of general equilibrium effects (see Harberger 1961), but have also

demonstrated the    value   of modeling the economy in detail, and employing

computational techniques (see Fullerton. King, Shoven, and Whalley 1981). If

anything, the effects of comparable worth are more complex. For example, while

the interpretation of a tax wedge is unambiguous, one must consider several

possible sources for male-female pay differentials.

        2.   Ideally, the opportunities available after divorce should include

the possibility of remarriage. Such "marriage market interactions are not

considered in the present model, but are the subject of current study by the

first author.

        3. other data sources include the 1977 Input-Output tables, the 1977

IRS tax tables, and the 1972-73 Consumer Expenditure Survey of the Department

of Labor. More recent CES data are now available, but our sectoral classifica-

tion is broad enough that updating the expenditure shares is unimportant.

       4.    We recognize that comparable worth would leave each firm free to      use

any   conception of worth that could be shown not to be sex-biased; we assume
within-skill-level wage equality across all employers covered by comparable
worth simply as a consequence of long-run competition.
       5. To accommodate the Input-Output data, we also have a rudimentary
foreign sector: U.S.    imports   in the five production sectors and net capital


                                          53
exports are both fixed in quantity terms, and U.S. goods exports adjust (in a

given Cobb-Douglas pattern) to maintain aggregate balance.

         6.    Since econometric estimates of the precise parameters we need are

generally unavailable, we have had to rely heavily on our own best guesses.

The only recourse in such a situation is to conduct sensitivity tests, some of

which are reported below. The government is assumed not to use any capital.

This assumption was chosen due to a lack of available data on government

capital ownership and use, and because it was not felt that the specification

of the government production function had a central impact on our results.

         7. Government spending does not enter explicitly into utility. Since

our experiments hold the size of government fixed, this simplification has no

effect on our conclusions. More generally, one could justify our approach by

assuming that utility is separable in privately and governmentally provided

goods.

         8. Alternatively, we could have subdivided the households by the job as

well   as     skill type of each worker. In this case, the model would require a

description of the willingness of people to transfer from one job (and hence

household category) to another, depending on wage and unemployment rates.

         9.    One should not interpret this assumption literally. It reflects an

abstract restriction on our functional specification, which generates

plausible behavioral responses. As discussed in the next section, our results

are not sensitive to the assumed length of the maximum work week.

       10. Although the model does have separate g and t parameters, it can be

seen from the Nash formula that only their ratio has any significance.

       11. In the original data, the average wage paid to a worker of a given

sex and job differs by employment sector. A number of factors may help explain

this, ranging from compensating worker preferences to disequilibrium in the

labor market, and almost certainly including differences by sector in the


                                          54
composition of our four aggregate wjobs._ We assume that the initial data do

reflect an equilibrium; and rather than define a vector to represent worker

tastes or employer requirements, we apply the economy-wide average wage to

each sector, and adjust the number of hours accordingly. In the latter case of

different equality mixes in different sectors, these adjusted figures can be

thought of as the efficiency hours demanded in each sector.

        12. This assumption follows naturally from the assertion that men and

women   are performing the same job. Of course, the jobs are only the same at
the model's level of aggregation, since the sexes are distributed differently
among the many occupations within each of our four jobs. The model does

include imperfect substitutability between work hours in male- and female-

dominated jobs; again, a more disaggregated model would be able to better

approximate the correct substitution possibilities, but at high costs in

computer time and presentational complexity.

     13. More precisely, since there is no identifiable class of business

managers in the model, we represent discrimination by capitalists, with the

discrimination income distributed to households in proportion to their

ownership of physical capital.

     14. This conclusion needn't hold if comparable worth would eliminate the

propensity to discriminate against female jobs, but not affect existing

efficiency differences.

     15. Two alternative wage rules of lesser interest are available: wages

can be equalized within each of the four jobs, but   not   across jobs in a skill

category; and wages within a skill, category can be equalized separately for

the two sexes.

     16. High-skill women are an exception; since they are initially paid

slightly more in the female-dominated job (see Table 3), comparable worth



                                       55
 makes that job sl.ightly less attractive to them in relative terms. However,

 the higher real wages increase these women's desired employment in both jobs.

      17.  Note that an absolute hour constraint (e.g.. 18.3 hours/week) may be
 binding on workers from one household type but not others. This is the type of
 constraint used with the historical hiring rule. Because of the 'equal
 proportions" nature of the applicant hiring rule, it is more natural to
 formulate    those constraints   in percentage terms (e.g., 83 percent of desired
hours);     clearly, this type is simultaneously binding on all workers. (The

obvious     strategic behavior is not allowed.)
      18.     Under the applicant hiring rule, the female- or male-intensity of a

sector depends on where the sexes choose to apply for work. For a given job,

we assume that women and men distribute their applications in such a way as to

increase (or decrease) the ratio of female to male hours worked by the same

percentage in each sector; i.e., we assume that the relative pattern of the

sectors' female-intensities will tend to persist under comparable worth.

     19. In the first two rows of Table 8. the figures for the two female-

dominated jobs are the same for men and women; this is no coincidence, but a

direct result of the applicant hiring rule used in the standard cases. This

equality does not obtain under the historical hiring rule.

     Although the Nash bargaining experiments reported at the bottom of the

table use the applicant proportions rule, women work a slightly smaller

fraction of their desired hours than do men in the constrained jobs: the

explanation is that in these experiments, "desired employment hours" are not

identical with the requests for work actually presented to employers. Desired

hours are calculated at the hypothetical resource allocation that would occur

if there were no employment constraints, whereas applications seen by fins

depend on the actual income division between husbands and wives, taking the

constraints into account. Since the employment rationing in female-dominated


                                         56
jobs is more costly to wives, the Nash bargaining process partially compensates

for this by increasing their share of household resources over what it would

be with no constraints; this lowers the female labor supply seen by firms, who

continue to accept equal proportions of actual labor applications from women

and men.

     20. We are unable to report an aggregate efficiency cost of comparable

worth in this case. Recall that our efficiency measure in the sum of Hicksian

equaivalent variations- -   i.e.,   the negative of the sum of the payments required

to make each individual as well off as before comparable worth. In the other

Nash bargaining experiments, it Is possible to bring both marital partners

back to their original utility levels by a suitable combination of payments to

(or from) each spouse; these payments affect not only the aggregate income of

the houshehold, but also the relative bargaining positions of the spouses.

However, in the "no divorce' case, the outside prospects of the husband and

wife are Irrelevant to the household bargaining, and giving more income to one

spouse or the other is equivalent to simply adding income to "the household.'

In general, and in our comparable worth experiment in particular, there is no

change in household income that will simultaneously restore the base utility

levels of both partners.




                                           57
                                   REFERENCES



Aldrich, Mark, and Robert Buchele. 1986. The Economics of Comparable Worth,

     Cambridge. MA: Ballinger Publishing Company.

Arrow, Kenneth. 1971. The Theory of Discrimination,' mimeo, Industrial

     Relations Section, Princeton University, Working Paper No. 30A.

Seeker, Gary S. 1974. A Theory of Social Interactions," Journal of

     Political Economy 82 (November/December), 1063-93.

Becker, Gary S. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination, Chicago: University

     of Chicago Press.

Bergmann, Barbara R. 1955. "The Economic Case for Comparable Worth," in

     Heidi I. Hartmann (ed.), Comparable Worth: New Directions for Research.

     Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Bulow,   Jeremy, and Lawrence Summers. 1985. "A Theory of   Dual   Labor Markets
     with    Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and Keynesian

     Unemployment," NBER Working Paper No. 1666 (July).

Fischel, Daniel R., and Edward P. Lazear. 1986. "Comparable Worth and

     Discrimination in Labor Markets,' Hoover Institution, Working Papers

     in Economics (#E-86-15. April), Stanford University.

Fuchs, Victor R. 1986. "Sex Differences in Economic Well-Being," Science

     232 (April 25), 459-464.

Fullerton, Don, A. Thomas King, John B.     Shoven, and John Whalley. 1981.
     "Corporate Tax Integration in the United States: A Ceneral Equilibrium
     Approach," American Economic Review 71 (September), 677-691.
Harberger,   Arnold C. 1961. "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax,"

     Journal of Political Economy 70, 215-240.



                                       58
__________    1966.   Efficiency of Taxes on Income from Capital," in M.

     Krzyzaniak (ed), Effects of Corporation Income Tax, Detroit: Wayne State

     University Press.

Johnson,   George, and Gary   Solon. 1984. "Pay Differences Between Women's

     and   Men's Jobs: The Empirical. Foundations of Comparable Worth
     Legislation,'    NBER Working Paper #1472 (september).

Killingsworth, Mark K. 1985. "The Economics of Comparable Worth:

     Analytical. Empirical, and Policy Questions," in Heidi I. Hartmann

     (ed), Comparable Worth: New Directions for Research, Washington. DC:

     National Academy Press.

Kotlikoff,    Laurence J., and Avis Spivak. 1981. "The Family As an
     Incomplete Annuities Market," Journal of Political Economy 89
     (April), 372-91.
Livernash, E. Robert      (ed). 1980. Comparable   Worth: Issues and
     tives (1st ed.; 1984 2nd ed), Washington. DC: Equal Employment Advisory
     Council.
Manser,    Marilyn, and Murray Brown. 1980. "Marriage and Household Decision-

     making: A Bargaining Analysis," International Economic Review 21

     (February), 31-44.

McElroy,    Marjorie B., and Mary Jane Honey. 1981. Nash-Bargained
     Household Decisions: Toward a Generalization of the Theory of
     Demand," International Economic Review 22 (June) 333-49.
Milgrom. Paul, and Sharon Oster. 1984. "Job Discrimination, Market Forces
     and the Invisibility Hypothesis," Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper
     No. 708    (June).
Nash, J. F. 1950. "The Bargaining Problem," Econornetrica      18, 155-62.

Ot, Walter T. 1986. "Neglected Women and Other implications of Comparable

     Worth," Contemporary Policy Issues IV (April). 21-32.


                                         59
Phelps. Edmund S. 1972. 'The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism,"

     American Economic Review 62, 659-661.

Raisian, John, Michael Ward, and Finis Welch. 1985. "Comparable Worth:

     Issues, Evidence, and Impacts," mimeo, Welch Associates, Santa Monica

     (March).

Remick, Helen. 1984. "Major Issues in a priori Applications," in Helen

     Remick   (ed.), Comparable Worth and Wage Discrimination: Technical
     Possibilities and Political Realities, Philadelphia: Temple
     University   Press.

Rubinstein, Ariel. 1982. 'Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,"

     Economett-ica 50, 97-109.

Sorensen, Elaine. 1986. "Implementing Comparable Worth: A Survey of Recent

     Job Evaluation Studies," American Economic Review, Papers and

     Proceedings 76 (May), 364-67.

fleinan, Donald J., and Heidi I. Hartmann (eds.). 1981. Women, Work, and

     Wages: Equal Pay for Jobs of Equal Value,   Final   Report, Committee on

     Occupational Classification and Analysis. Washington, DC: National

     Academy Press.

Treiman, Donald 3., Heidi I. Hartmann, and Patricia A. Roos. 1984.

     "Assessing Pay Discrimination Using National Data," in Helen Remick

     (edj, Comparable Worth and Wage Discrimination: Technical Possibilities

     and Political Realities, Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. 1984. Comparable Worth: Issue for the 80's,

     (Vol. I), A Consultation of the Committee on Civil Rights, Washington, DC.




                                      60
                                           APPESDIX A


              Technical Specification of Agents' Economic Behavior



1. Firms

     Intra—industry competition ensures that production takes place only at

the cost—minimizing point along the efficient production frontier, given the

prevailing wages and capital rental rate. Thus the representative firm sees

its output price P and value—added price PVA as determined by the industry cost

function, and chooses inputs of male and female labor (M and F) and of capital

for high—skill and low—skill workers (1(14 and 1(L) to attain this least—cost

solution while satisfying product demand. Let job subscripts 1 and 2 refer to

the male— and female—dominated jobs, with 3 and 4 denoting the male and female

low—skill jobs; and let LH and LL refer to composite high— and low—skill labor,

respectively. Then the problem for sector i (i—l,5) can be stated as


                          4
            MIN                                                  +
                              (WM M.. + [WF.+D )F. )
                                                 j     j   i.j                I
                                                                     r(K141+KL.)
     Mj .Fij .IUij .I(Li jl

     S.T.    Q      O[a11[a.2LHi
                                      1 + (l)KH            i'    "l12
                                                                           + (1—a.1) [c.3LL.


                                                           Q. 0 /Q•3           —lIPii
                                            +               i3 il '
                                                (l—a13)KL.


                                      —Q                                  _Q
            LH1 —    i4'il'l'il            "'
                                                + (l—cx4)(M.2+C2F2)
                                                                               1
                                                                                   }


                                      —p.
                                           iS
                                                                          —p.5
                                                                           1 —1/0
                                                + (l_cx5)fl4j4+E4Fj4)
            LLi     {cs5(M.3+e3F.3)



                                            (j=l,4)
                                                  61
where       r       capital   rental rate

    WM.,WF. = male, female wage rates (j=l,4)

           D.       psychic discrimination costs (j=l,4)

           Q.   = product     demand

           E.   = relative     efficiency of women to men (j=l,4)

                =
                    l/o.kl    (lel,5), where            is the substitution elasticity

          ik = share parameters (kl,5)
                    production intercept

                        under the historical hiring rule
   and
                                                             under the applicant hiring rule,


                          where SF. and SM. are female and male labor supply,

                          and superscript o refers to the base data.


Under comparable worth, WM1 = WF1              =          and WM3 =
                                                   WF2                WF3   WM4 WF4; otherwise,
market forces produce WF. =                 — D. for j1,4. This latter relation leaves

employers indifferent between hiring women and men, and thus willing to accept

the sexes in the ratios they come seeking work. Therefore, the 'applicant

hiring rule" formula for V is also imposed, as a non—burdensome market—clearing

mechanism, in experiments without comparable worth, and on the uncovered

sectors in the partial coverage cases. In the latter cases, the labor supply

figures in the V formula distinguish between workers in the covered and

uncovered labor markets; also, the wage rates differ by sector, but sectoral

subscripts are omitted here for clarity. The discrimination wages 5. are held

roughly constant in real terms by indexing them to the male wage in job 1:

        DWM1/WM. In text Figure 5, two substitution elasticities are given

 as 1.0; these are entered in the model as 1.001 to avoid degeneracy.




                                                   62
    Product demand                 is the sum of the demands for net exports, final

consumption by households and the government, and intermediate consumption by

other producers. Imports are fixed in reat terms; foreigners spend a part of

their dollar receipts on a fixed quantity of U.S. capital service exports,

and the rest on sectoral outputs in fixed (i.e., Cobb—Douglas) value shares.

Demand by the government and each household type is also allocated in fixed

value shares, and intermediate products are required in the same real proportions

as in the base input—output data. The output prices to which demands respond

are determined by the CES cost functions for value—added, augmented by the

costs of intermediate inputs.


         Q.                       +   ED.



hence               5
                                        where b. = (I—A] —ii
         Q                                                   liz


                        8                         5            ___
        I'D.
                    h1 ShjCh+GiCG+BEi( PI}1_rCAPEXP)1/P._IMi
                (




                    S
         P1 —               PVAtbtj
                9.— 1


                                                                       1_0i2

        PVA —                                     +
                {u°11[a0i2(°14
                                                      loll

                              + (1_,212)     r0t2J1_0i2 +

                                                                                 1


                              + ci.5,°15w °i5)'iS +          (l.3)' rll3]      i31/
                        iet +y           '
                                  (F1/M74)(WF44O,)
        W—                                                   (j=1,4)
                               l+11(F7j/Mij)E3

                                                      63
where               i,Zth element of the proportional input—output matrix A
          a1Q

          FD. =
            1
                    final     demand


bhiIBCSEi = household,              government, and export value shares   (h=l,8)


        Ch.CG =     household, government consumption expenditures        (h=l,S)

          I>!. =    imports      (exogenous)

       CAPEXP       capital exports (exogenous)

      P.,PVA.      output price, value—added price

and                 combined male—female perceived wage     rate     (j1,4).


2. The Government

       The specification of governnent behavior differs from that of firms In

three ways: real output is exogenous and fixed, rather than demand—sensitive;

value—added is again combined with aggregate intermediate inputs, but this

aggregate   is     here a Cobb—Douglas composite; and no capital is used in producing

value—added. Thus, the government's optimization problem is


                        4
                        V   (WM.M . +   [WT .i-5.JF   .)
                                Gj         j   j Gj
       MGJIFG.
                    jl

         S.T.
                    —                   Gl +
                    Q0       eG{GltHG            (laGl)LL


            FG/NQ. = yF°c./Mc°.                  (j=l,4)


with the same definitions as above.




                                                       64
      The price" of government production is relevant to the calculation of

equilibrium household tax races:


                                    s            a.
                                                 Gi
                    = PVAc +   C   •11 (P/S0.)
                                   1=1

                                                                     1-i
                                                                           GI.
                                                           1—',
                                                                  G4 li—a G4
          PVA
                C
                    =                                 )G4wG2
                                                                                      1

                                                                                     1Gl /

                           ÷ (1_,Gl) Ci [a w            G5 (laG5)
                                                                                 t
where       is the intermediate inputs ratio and W. (j1,4) is the average

perceived wage in job j            as    defined above.




3. Households

        Households seek to maximize utility, which is a CES function of consumption

and leisure; these in turn are bath Cobb—Douglas aggregates. There are four

types of married households, defined by the skill levels of husband and wife,

and four types of single households, classified by sex and skill level. For

convenience, let s index the household's four (two, for singles) work

possibilities; the household type h determines the market job to which a given

$   corresponds.        (For example, by numbering convention, h3 refers to married

couples with a low—skilled husband and high—skilled wife, and s4 indicates

the wife's work in her female—dominated job; thus the household wage

corresponds to WF2——women's wage in the female high—skill jab——in the previous

notation.) Let             denote household h's real consumption of good i, and

                         its (exogenous) available hours, actual work hours, and wage
Th. L and

                                                   65
in job s. For single households (h=5,8), the objective then is to choose Chi

and L        to maximize
       hs

                  (
                           SB                                                           —P1         h
             -
                  lah(n Ch')                + (lh)[(Thl Lhl) (Th2Lh2) h]


Under the joint household utility formulation, the maximand for married couples

is, similarly,



                                 B.
                  1
                  I   hl   1—1
                                 Ch.t)
                                           h
                                               + th2ThlLhl)
                                                                 Ohl
                                                                       (T1,—L12)    1

                                                                          1—6         —         —
                                                             3h2 —            h2          0h
                                 +
                                      (1_ahl_cxh2)[(th3_Lh3)    (Th4_Lh4)



In both cases, the household faces a budget constraint and possible employment

constraints



        VPC           C                                   + DIb) —
                          (l_th2) EEwhsIhs       + r(K.               thi   (l_th2)Yh —   thi
             L        <LM.AX
                 hs              hs
Here             is income from excess discrimination profits, distributed in proportion

to each household's (exogenous) capital ownership,



            01h             lD FjI)KfK.

The lump—sum tax rates thi are held roughly constant in real terms by pegging
                                                                  0
them to a consumption price index: thl                           thl rI(P./P.)      where .         is   the

value share of good i in base household consumption. The marginal tax rates

th2 are scaled up or down as needed to maintain government budget balance:



            th2 =         t2(PGG_I         POPktkl)/ POPkYkt2*


                                                            66
In comparable worth experiments, the values of t1       and t2 used   for single

women's households (h=7,8) are not those from the base data set. Since this

wage policy would tend to move single women into the same tax brackets as

single men of the same skill level, in these experiments we apply the men's

base tax rates as the starting points for single households of both sexes.

Regrettably, the tax rates in the partial coverage experiments are not specific

to each worker's luck in the covered—sector employment "lottery." LMAXh

(i.e., there are no binding constraints) in experiments without comparable

worth, and in those with partial coverage. In the latter, access Co employ—

ment in the high—wage sectors is rationed by the eight lottery ratios, which

adjust   to match the cemand for   workers in   each job/sex combination; thus,
each   household type is divided into sub—types (16 for married couples, 4 for
singles)   with different combinations of covered and uncovered wages in the
budget constraint.
       With full coverage of comparable worth, UIAXh depends on the hiring rule.
Under the applicant hiring rule, neither sex faces any constraints in the

male—dominated jobs (s—I or 3); in each of the two female jobs, all workers

are allowed to work the same fraction of hours they would have chosen in the

absence of any employment constraints; again, the two fractions are chosen to

match the levels of demand. Thus, each household optimization problem is

solved twice: once taking only the budget constraint into account, to calculate

"desired" hours, and the second time with the proportional limits imposed for

s2 and 4, to calculate the optimal adjustments in consumption and in hours

worked in the male jobs. With the historical hiring rule, desired hours have

no bearing on a household's LMAJL ; all workers in a given job are given the

same hour limit. This limit may not be a binding constraint in all households,

but it is set to restrict enough workers so as to equate constrained supply

with demand, given each sector's traditional sex ratio in that job. This

                                          6?
hiring rule produces unemployment of one sex (always women, in our experiments)

in the male—dominated jobs, as well as of men and women in the female jobs

(as with the applicant hiring rule).

        Under the Nash bargaining formulation, married couples choose an income

transfer from one spouse to the other so as to maximize



           (gU1 —   rVhl) (gUh2   —
                                      tVh2)

where        g =    marriage utility bonus
             I   = divorce    penalty

     Uhl.IJh2 =     utility   of spouses 1,2 after income transfer

     Vhl.Vh2 maximum attainable utility of spouses 1,2 as singles.

If and V are calculated as for a single household; V requires assumptions on the

spousal capital ownership shares and the tax brackets of each after divorce.

The former are shown in text Table 2; for the latter, we assume that a divorced

person would face the sane tax bracket as a currently—single person of the

same sex and skill level. (As noted above, only the skill level is relevant

in comparable worth experiments, because we equalize the two sexes' single—

household tax rates in those cases.)




                                              68
                                      APPENDIX B


                                  Benchmark Data Set

       As noted in   the text, a benchmark economic equilibrium is used as the

starting point for our comparable worth experiments. This appendix provides

the complete reference data set and some brief comments on its derivation.

       The two most important sources of data for our benchmark equilibrium are

the 1977 Input-Output tables given in the U.S.     Department of Commerce Surv
of Current ausiness for May 1984, and the 1979 Census of Population 1/1000 (A)

Public Use Sample. We aggregated the finer classifications of the I/O tables

to obtain our five-sector figures for the flows of goods (except to household

consumers) and payments to production factors, and sorted the Census data by

the model's household and job types to derive initial figures for household

characteristics and wage and employment patterns by job. The only Census data

excluded from consideration were those for people under 18 or in

institutions; non-workers were assigned a skill level on the basis of their

own   completed    schooling, rather than by the median educational attainment in

some occupation. Other sources included the 1972-73 Consumer Expenditure

Survey (CES) and the 1977 federal income tax tables. Because these sources

refer to various years and use divergent definitions, a number of adjustments

were   required.
       The first step was to adapt the patterns of labor and capital income from

the 1979 Census data to the factor payments of the 1977 I/O tables. The latter

provides the total wage bill for each sector, but does not break this down

into the eight job/sex categories, nor indicate actual work hours. We applied

each   sector's 1979 wage bill distribution by job and sex to the 1977 totals;
and for the eight wage rates needed to calculate work hours from these wage


                                         69
bills, we again took the pattern (i.e., the relative wages) from the Census,

scaled down by the 1977/1979 ratio of total labor income in the economy.

       The resulting labor demands were summed over employers to obtain total

hours worked by men and women in each of the four jobs. While the total value

(at the scaled-down wages) of all 1979 work hours equaled the total value of

these labor demands, the distribution by job and sex did not completely match.

Therefore, we increased or decreased the population of each type of household

so as to provide the required labor supplies by job/sex category, while

maintaining the Census figures on the total work hours by a household of each

type, and the relative contribution of each household type to each labor

supply. These revised population figures were used in allocating the capital

income from the I/O tables, again maintaining the Census pattern of capital

ownership ratios between households of different types.

       With factor incomes reconciled with the 1977 data, the next step was to

adjust the household expenditure figures. The federal income tax    tables   were

consulted to estimate a simple linear tax function for each household type;

since the I/O government category includes state and local government, the tax

parameters had to be scaled up so that total tax revenues equaled total

government   expenditures. Each type of household was assumed to allocate its
after-tax income across the five production sectors in the value shares
observed for households of that type in the CES 1972-73 interview survey. (The
term 'consumption" in this model includes savings; the I/O investment column
was used to distribute savings wexpenditures.!)
       The penultimate step was to scale up the I/O export   figures to attain
trade   balance. Finally, the RAS procedure was applied to the inter-industry

transactions matrix to accommodate the revised levels of household consumption

and   exports.
       The results of this process are shown in the accompanying tables.

                                       70
                                                                 TABLE Bi
                                            INITIAL PRODUCTION FLOWS (million 1977    $)




                                            Trade    &   Real       Govt.     General
     urchaseaser            Agri.   Goods   services     estate      enter.   govt.        Cons.   Exports   Imports   Totals
     Seller


     Agriculture            32.8     61.2      3.6         2.8        0.1       3.7         11.8     14.1      —3.0     127.1

     Goods                  34.0    888.1    143.7        46.4        8.1     136.4        687.7    114.5    —160.5    1898.4

     Trade   &   services   10.3    178.4    147.9        26.1        1.2     45.7         499.5     17.8      —9.7     917.2

     Real estate             3.7      8.2     17.7        16.7        0.1       4.0        210.0      3.9      —0.0     264.4

     Govt.   enterprises      0.5    14.0      9.4         2.1        0.3       2.2          8.8      1.3      —1.8      36.8

-J
I-
     Labor                  13.7    521.7    469.6        12.5       21.7     203.9                                    1243.1

     Capital                32.2    226.7    125.3       157.8        5.2                            23.5               570.6

     Total value—added      45.8    748.4    594.9       170.3       26.9     203.9                  21.5              1813.7
                                   TABLE B2
                          INITIAL EMPLOYMENT DATA


Employment hours          High—skill jobs               Low—skill jobs
of women/mets
(billions per year)   Male—          Female—        Male—         Female—
                      dominated      dominated      doninated     dominated

——By sector:
  Agriculture         0.01/0.09      0.003/0.001    0.18/1.56     0.08/0.02

  Goods               1.47/6.45      0.09/0.09      7.95/48.48    9.35/2.47

  Trade 6 services    3.31/11.77     3.09/0.71      5.45/21.02    21.80/4.35

  Real estate         0.32/0.51      0.008/0.008    0.13/0.42     0.21/0.04

  Govt. enterprises   0.04/0.16      0.007/0.003    0.49/2.07     0.35/0.16
  General govt.       2.35/4.09      4.98/1.86      1.67/7.02     6.76/1.62


——Totals              7.49/23.07     8.17/2.68      15.86/80.56   38.54/8.67



Share of female
hours in total           .245              .753        .165          .816


Female hourly wage    $ 6.51          $6.60          $4.74         $4.23

Male hourly wage      $10.72          $8.04          $7.21         $6.04

                         .606              .821        .658          .699
WE/tiM




                                      72
                                                            TABLE B3

                                                 INITIAL HOUSEHOLD DATA

                                                      Ilarrieds                                            Singles
Male   skill level/                    High/       Iligh/       Low/       Low/          High/     Low/               I
         skill level                   High        Low          High       Low                                 High       Low
female

                                        4.68        6.12         4.94      32.91          4.19     22.53        5.89      30.02
Number of households (millions)


Mans weekly work hours
                                       31.98       32.03        32.06      28.87         23.44     19.58
  ——in male—dominated job
  ——in female—dominated job             3.97        2.79         3.46       2.27          3.79      3.32


Woman's weekly work hours
                                        7.36        3.58         8.77       4.45                               11.27      10.84
  ——in male—dominated job
                                        8.88       11.80        10.47      10.02                                4.56      11.31
  ——in female—dominated job


                                                   33.608       30,428     20,102        20,394    10,063      15,330      6,718
Pre—tax income (1977       $)          41,087
                                                   11,109       10,753      S,267         5,742     1,619       7,792      3,108
  ——of which, capital income           16,060
                                                                                                    1   ,7S7    3,293           894
Tax    bill                             12,913      9,241        7,913      4,043         5,018
                                          .487        .418        .418       .290           .371        .267     .313*      .215*
Marginal      tax rate

Consumption shares                                                                                               .007       .011
                                          .007        .008        .008       .009           .006        .008
  ——Agriculture
                                          .508        .511        .516        .519          .405        .453     .443       .402
  ——Goods
                                          .333        .339        .348        .348          .376        .367     .347       .370
  ——Trade and      services
                                          .145        .136        .122        .117          .208        .166     .196       .209
  ——Real      estate
                                          .007        .006        .006        .006          .006        .006     .007       .007
  ——Govt.      enterprises

*To                accommodate the   progressivity of the tax          code1 single women are assigned the higher tax rates
       partially
 of    single   men   in the comparable worth simulations.
