ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP
Todd D. Gerarden
Richard G. Newell
Robert N. Stavins
WORKING PAPER 20904

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP
Todd D. Gerarden
Richard G. Newell
Robert N. Stavins
Working Paper 20904
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20904
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2015

This paper draws, in part, on a workshop held at Harvard, October 24-25, 2013, “Evaluating the Energy-Efficiency
Gap,” co-sponsored by the Duke University Energy Initiative and the Harvard Environmental Economics
Program. The workshop’s agenda is provided in Appendix 1, and the list of participants in Appendix
2. We are very grateful to all of the participants for the insights they provided on the questions addressed
at the workshop. In addition, we gratefully acknowledge valuable comments on a previous version
of the manuscript by Robert Stowe, editorial contributions by Marika Tatsutani, and generous financial
support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The authors, however, are fully responsible for any errors
and all opinions expressed in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Todd D. Gerarden, Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Assessing the Energy-Efficiency Gap
Todd D. Gerarden, Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins
NBER Working Paper No. 20904
January 2015
JEL No. L00,Q4,Q48,Q5
ABSTRACT
Energy-efficient technologies offer considerable promise for reducing the financial costs and environmental
damages associated with energy use, but these technologies appear not to be adopted by consumers
and businesses to the degree that would apparently be justified, even on a purely financial basis. We
present two complementary frameworks for understanding this so-called “energy paradox” or “energyefficiency gap.” First, we build on the previous literature by dividing potential explanations for the
energy-efficiency gap into three categories: market failures, behavioral anomalies, and model and
measurement errors. Second, we posit that it is useful to think in terms of the fundamental elements
of cost-minimizing energy-efficiency decisions. This provides a decomposition that organizes thinking
around four questions. First, are product offerings and pricing economically efficient? Second, are
energy operating costs inefficiently priced and/or understood? Third, are product choices costminimizing in present value terms? Fourth, do other costs inhibit more energy-efficient decisions?
We review empirical evidence on these questions, with an emphasis on recent advances, and offer
suggestions for future research.
Todd D. Gerarden
Harvard University
gerarden@fas.harvard.edu
Richard G. Newell
Nicholas School of the Environment
Duke University
Box 90227
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
richard.newell@duke.edu

Robert N. Stavins
JFK School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robert_stavins@hks.harvard.edu

assessing the energy-efficiency gap
Richard G. Newell, Robert N. Stavins, and Todd D. Gerarden1

1. introduction
Global energy consumption is on a path to grow 30-50 percent over the next 25 years, bringing
with it, in many countries, increased local air pollution, greenhouse gas emissions, and oil
consumption—and higher energy prices. Energy-efficient technologies offer considerable
promise for reducing the costs and environmental damages associated with energy use, but
these technologies appear not to be used by consumers and businesses to the degree that would
apparently be justified, even on the basis of their own (private) financial net benefits. Our purpose
is to advance understanding of this “energy paradox” or “energy-efficiency gap.”
We define the “energy paradox” as the apparent reality that some energy-efficiency technologies
that would pay off for adopters are nevertheless not adopted. This basic definition relates to the
issue of private optimality. We define the “energy-efficiency gap” as the apparent reality that
some energy-efficiency technologies that would be socially efficient are not adopted. This broader
concept relates to social optimality.
Adoption of energy-efficient technologies could reap both private and social rewards, in the
form of economic, environmental, and other social benefits from reduced energy consumption.
In response, governments and firms around the world have adopted policies to increase energy
efficiency and capture these benefits. Still, there is a broadly held view that various barriers to the
adoption of energy-efficient technologies have prevented the realization of a substantial portion
of these benefits.
1

Gerarden is a Ph.D. student in Public Policy at Harvard University; Newell is the Gendell Professor of Energy and Environmental
Economics at the Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University, Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, and University Fellow of Resources for the Future; and Stavins is the Albert Pratt Professor of Business and Government at
the Harvard Kennedy School, Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research, and University Fellow of Resources for
the Future. This paper draws, in part, on a workshop held at Harvard, October 24-25, 2013, “Evaluating the Energy-Efficiency Gap,”
co-sponsored by the Duke University Energy Initiative and the Harvard Environmental Economics Program. The workshop’s agenda is
provided in Appendix 1, and the list of participants in Appendix 2. We are very grateful to all of the participants for the insights they
provided on the questions addressed at the workshop. In addition, we gratefully acknowledge valuable comments on a previous version
of the manuscript by Robert Stowe, editorial contributions by Marika Tatsutani, and generous financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation. The authors, however, are fully responsible for any errors and all opinions expressed in this paper.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 1

Over the last several decades, a number of scholars have observed that cost-effective energyconservation technologies appear to diffuse at suboptimal rates. Shama (1983)2 and subsequently
the U.S. Department of Energy (1991) noted the paradoxically slow rate of penetration of various
energy-conservation technologies, and Jaffe and Stavins (1994a) provided a conceptual framework
for thinking about possible explanations (Figure 1).
Why do decision makers underinvest—or at least appear to underinvest—in energy-efficient
technologies, relative to the predictions of some engineering and economic models? Explanations
for the paradox and gap tend to fall into three broad categories: (1) market failures, (2) behavioral
effects, and (3) modeling flaws.
Potential market-failure explanations include: information problems (such as principal-agent
issues affecting decisions about the adoption of energy-efficiency technologies in renter-occupied
commercial and residential properties, and asymmetric information); energy market failures
(including environmental and national security externalities, and average-cost electricity pricing);
capital market failures (such as liquidity constraints); and innovation market failures (such as
information spillovers from research and development). Potential behavioral explanations include:
inattentiveness and salience issues; myopia and short sightedness; bounded rationality and
heuristic decision-making; prospect theory and reference-point phenomena; and systematically
biased beliefs.
Despite this extensive set of posited explanations for the energy paradox and the energyefficiency gap, there are also reasons to believe that the observed rate of diffusion of energysaving technology may not be as paradoxical as it may at first appear. Evidence for the energy
paradox typically involves assumptions about the economic costs and energy use of alternative
product choices, the usage profile and characteristics of consumers, and the interaction among
these factors. Predictions founded on incorrect assumptions could misstate the size of the energyefficiency gap. Hence, we characterize a third category of potential explanations as model and
measurement explanations. These include unobserved or understated costs of adoption; ignored
product attributes; heterogeneity in benefits and costs of adoption across potential adopters; use
of incorrect discount rates; and uncertainty, irreversibility, and option value.
Determining the validity of each of these explanations—and the degree to which each contributes
to the energy-efficiency gap—are crucial steps in crafting effective public policy responses and
in understanding the likely net benefits of such policies. Likewise, firms may identify different
internal policies or marketing strategies in response to each explanation. Our hope is that this
paper can help inform future research and policy by synthesizing past work and identifying key
gaps in knowledge.
2

All references may be viewed and downloaded from an online bibliographic library available to the public: www.zotero.org/groups/
energy_efficiency_gap.

2 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

In the context of Schumpeter’s classic trio of invention, innovation, and diffusion, our
investigation focuses primarily—but not exclusively—on the diffusion (adoption) of energyefficiency technologies.3 To provide structure to the many economic elements that enter into
adoption decisions related to energy efficiency, we find it useful in our review and synthesis to
think in terms of the fundamental elements of cost-minimizing energy-efficiency decisions. This
decomposition is deliberately simple in order to highlight the main features of the issue, and does
not explicitly account for all of the factors we consider in our analysis, such as uncertainty, the
dynamic nature of decisions (and resulting option value), and heterogeneity:

Where K(E) 		

= equipment purchase cost;

E		

= annual energy use;

O(E, PE)

= annual operating cost;

PE		

= price of energy;

D(r, T)

= present value factor;

r		

= discount rate; and

T		

= time horizon.

Based on this decomposition of cost-minimizing energy-efficiency adoption decisions, we organize
our assessment in the form of four fundamental questions (and a total of 23 sub-questions,
with each sub-question phrased so that an affirmative answer suggests that the respective factor
contributes to the energy-efficiency gap). Referring to the first term of the above equation, we
ask whether product offerings and pricing are economically efficient. This question is examined
in section 2 of the paper. Then, in section 3 of the paper, we ask whether energy operating costs
are inefficiently priced and/or understood. Next, in section 4, referring to the entire equation, we
ask whether product choices are cost-minimizing in present value terms. Finally, in section 5 of
the paper, we focus on the final term in the above equation and ask whether other costs inhibit
more energy-efficient decisions. Alternative explanations of the paradox and gap become parts
of sub-questions in these four sections of the paper. In section 6, we offer our conclusions and
suggestions for future research priorities.
3

On innovation, see Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins (1999) and Hall and Rosenberg (2010). For a review of technological change and the
environment more generally, of which energy-efficiency technological change is one component, see Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (2002);
Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (2005); and Popp, Newell, and Jaffe (2010).
DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 3

2. are the energy-efficiency and associated pricing
of products on the market economically efficient?
One set of possible explanations for the energy-efficiency gap is related to the potential economic
inefficiencies associated with the first element of the cost-minimization framework presented
above—namely, the variety of energy-efficient products on the market, their energy-efficiency
levels, and their pricing. Although the theory is clear, empirical evidence is—in general —very
limited. Going forward, more data that could facilitate potential future empirical research are
becoming available, although firm-level data are less available for research purposes than data on
consumer decision-making.
Given the range of existing public policies in this realm (such as minimum energy-efficiency
standards, labeling and other information policies, utility demand-side management programs,
and public funding of research), it is unclear whether there are issues related to the variety,
availability, and pricing of energy-efficient products, as distinct from many other types of products.
Partly because of this, we do not see this area as meriting a high priority for future research, with
the exception of empirical research on whether consumers have adequate information regarding
energy-efficient products. Given the many policies and programs in place that are intended to
improve consumer information on energy efficiency, research could be usefully directed toward
evaluating and improving the effectiveness and efficiency of current information policies.

2.1 Are there too few energy-efficient alternatives, is their energy efficiency
too low, or are they priced too high due to market power?
It is certainly conceivable that the socially optimal diversity of products may not be offered on
the market. This could be due to the presence of fixed costs and monopolistic competition. Two
forces contribute to this outcome. First, not all welfare-improving products are offered if firms
are unable to capture the consumer surplus associated with a given product due to the difficulty
of perfect price discrimination. Second, firms introducing a new product may not internalize the
impact of their product’s entry on other firms’ profits, which can then lead to too many products
on the market.4 Despite the soundness of this theory, there is no empirical evidence on the effect
of these factors in the energy-efficiency domain.
Economists generally consider energy-efficient products to be of higher quality than less efficient
but otherwise comparable products. The theory of vertical differentiation suggests that for a single
product offering, firms will undersupply product quality (including energy efficiency) relative to

4

In the case of complementary products, these two forces push in the same direction, leading firms to introduce too few products with too
little differentiation. With substitutes, the two forces push in opposite directions, in which case, the net effect on product variety (relative
to the social optimum) is ambiguous (Spence 1976, 234).

4 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

the social optimum if the marginal consumer values efficiency less than the average consumer.
Firms respond to marginal quality valuation, while the social optimum is achieved by setting
quality according to average quality valuation (Spence 1975, 419).5 However, in the case of multiproduct firms, theory does not provide clear guidance on quality distortion. Indeed, for any
given product, the anticipated effect is ambiguous: a firm could supply too much or too little
energy efficiency relative to the social optimum, due to demand interactions with the firm’s other
products.
Calibrations of a theoretical model of the automobile market suggest multi-product manufacturers
would consider these interactions when choosing fuel economy for each vehicle (Fischer 2010,
5–8), but manufacturers may over- or under-supply energy efficiency in different products in
response to heterogeneity in consumer valuation of fuel economy. This is reminiscent of quality
distortion arising in models of price discrimination: manufacturers provide too much fuel
economy in vehicle classes demanded by consumers who value fuel economy highly, and too
little fuel economy in vehicle classes demanded by consumers who value fuel economy less. This
allows manufacturers to extract surplus from consumers according to consumers’ tastes, while
reducing the likelihood that consumers defect to other vehicle classes. But theory does not offer
clear predictions about welfare impacts, and empirical analysis is lacking in the energy-efficiency
context.
Limited empirical research on automobiles has explored the responsiveness of suppliers to changes
in energy costs. Automobile manufacturers appear to respond to short-run fluctuations in fuel
prices by offering cash incentives (Langer and Miller 2012), but the responsiveness of product
offerings to long-run trends in energy prices is much less clear, partly because it is confounded by
simultaneous policy mandates for fuel economy.
Changes in market structure can also affect producer incentives, but anticipated effects on product
variety are ambiguous. In the case of firm mergers, the ambiguity is due to countervailing forces
of cost reduction, leading to lower prices; and reduced competition, leading to higher prices (S.
T. Berry and Waldfogel 2001). Changes in the demand side of the market can also affect product
quality and variety. In particular, variation in market size can alter incentives for suppliers, leading
to changes in the variety and quality of products available.6
Public policies may also interact with and influence energy-efficient product market offerings,
possibly in unanticipated ways. Recent empirical evidence from the appliance industry suggests

5

This is not limited to firms with market power. It holds for any profit-maximizing firm that is unable to perfectly price discriminate
(Spence 1975).

6

If increases in product quality require an increase in fixed costs, the highest quality offered will increase with market size, while the market
will remain concentrated (Shaked and Sutton 1987, 133–140).

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 5

that firms employ the Energy Star logo as a price discrimination tool, as some consumers have a
high willingness to pay for this certification. This allows firms to extract surplus from consumers,
and may have distributional impacts that were not widely anticipated (Houde 2014b). Another
example of unanticipated consequences is found in the response of automobile manufacturers to
the “notched” Gas Guzzler Tax, which distorts manufacturer incentives and is less efficient than a
smooth linear tax (Sallee and Slemrod 2012).7
There exists a tension between optimal innovation and product offerings, on the one hand,
and optimal adoption of energy-efficient products, on the other hand. Firms incur fixed costs
to generate energy-efficiency improvements in products, and firms may not invest if they do
not expect to recover these costs. However, theory suggests that products offering significant
reductions in energy consumption at low cost would be adopted quickly and widely, a process that
could be hampered by innovators charging above marginal cost to recoup fixed costs. Optimal
policy would seek to balance these two forces to encourage both innovation and adoption of
energy-efficient products (Kamien and Schwartz 1982, 30–31).
This tension, as with much of the preceding discussion, is generic; that is, the issues are not
specific to energy efficiency. In other domains, research and development subsidies and intellectual
property protections are the primary tools used to encourage innovation, while anti-trust
regulation is intended to ameliorate problems associated with market concentration. There is no
existing evidence to suggest that energy-efficiency markets exhibit particular market failures that
point to tools beyond these traditional innovation and antitrust policies.
The limitations of theoretical results and the small amount of empirical evidence in this realm are
striking. While empirical evidence from some sectors generally supports the theoretical findings,8
the relevance for energy efficiency is unclear. Hence, empirical analysis will be needed to assess
the role of these factors for energy-efficient product markets. In particular, empirical research
with structural models is needed to understand and predict impacts of energy efficiency policy,
particularly in industries that are highly concentrated and highly regulated.

7

This comparison of notched and smooth taxes hinges on the assumption of consumer rationality. Under alternative assumptions (see
below), the choice between notched and smooth policies becomes considerably less clear. For example, the benefits of certifications may
outweigh these supply distortions if consumers are inattentive to energy efficiency (Sallee 2013, 32).

8

For example, in the restaurant industry, increasing market size is associated with lower concentration, greater variety, and more quality
differentiation. In the newspaper industry, where improving quality requires higher fixed costs, larger markets remain concentrated and
average quality improves (S. T. Berry and Waldfogel 2010).

6 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

2.2 Are there too few new energy-efficient product offerings due to demand
spillovers?
Product offerings may be sub-optimal in number due to demand spillovers. A firm introducing a
new, relatively unknown product will sometimes incur large fixed costs. This is because product
innovations may exhibit an information asymmetry between consumers and producers. Hence,
consumers must be convinced to try a new product. Firms try to generate demand with advertising
and/or promotional pricing, the cost of which must be recouped through sales. The consequent
learning by consumers can spill over to other consumers, producing positive externalities that
benefit the innovating firm. Importantly, however, the firm’s competitors can also capture these
demand spillovers—without paying the costs to educate consumers. The net effect of these two
forces is ambiguous. If the latter effect dominates, firms will introduce too few new products.
Existing research provides little insight into the contributions of such demand spillovers to the
energy-efficiency gap. Hybrid vehicles are a rare example of an energy-efficient technology that has
been well studied and that may be associated with learning spillovers among consumers. Empirical
evidence that market penetration rates of hybrid vehicles affect future purchases is consistent
with this hypothesis. Furthermore, these learning spillovers may not be fully appropriated by
the original producer; higher penetration rates for the Toyota Prius lead to greater purchases of
hybrids of all makes (Heutel and Muehlegger 2014, 3).9
The impact of demand spillovers on product offerings is inherently difficult to study, because
researchers do not observe potentially innovative energy-efficient products that firms decide not
to introduce. In the absence of such data, researchers can study the impact of learning spillovers
across products that are introduced, which can serve as a guide for whether these spillovers appear
to be significant enough to prevent the introduction of candidate products. Such research could
follow the approach of research on the pharmaceutical industry (Crawford and Shum 2005;
Coscelli and Shum 2004; Berndt, Pindyck, and Azoulay 2003).10 The existence and magnitude
of spillovers across products appears to be correlated with the degree of substitutability of the
products (Janakiraman, Sismeiro, and Dutta 2009). This finding accords with theory and provides
a useful guide for evaluating the importance of learning spillovers among energy-efficient products.
Implementing government or utility programs that educate consumers about innovative energysaving technologies is one possible response to significant demand spillovers.

9

Of course, just as learning spillovers can increase demand for similar products, such spillovers can also dampen demand. Heutel and
Muehlegger (2014) find that higher market penetration by the Honda Insight led to fewer purchases of all hybrid models, consistent with
anecdotal evidence that the Insight was of lower quality.

10

Research in pharmaceuticals examines both competition between branded and generic drugs following patent expiration, and competition
among branded drugs. The latter is more relevant to energy-efficient technologies.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 7

2.3 Does adverse selection due to asymmetric information inhibit energyefficient product offerings?
In theory, asymmetric information could lead to adverse selection in the marketplace, which could
in turn lead to underinvestment in energy efficiency. Such underinvestment could occur if buyers
cannot perfectly observe the energy efficiency of products, and as a result are not willing to pay
for its true expected value. If sellers have private information they cannot credibly communicate,
some energy-efficient products may not be offered in the market (Akerlof 1970, 489–490). This
problem of asymmetric information is potentially more pronounced in the secondary market, as
consumers who invest in energy-efficient capital, such as home weatherization, may have difficulty
capitalizing on these investments when reselling. Asymmetric information is sometimes cited as a
justification for disclosure policies and standards—such as energy-efficiency testing and labels.11
Despite widespread acceptance of the theoretical argument for adverse selection due to information
asymmetries, there is little empirical evidence of this phenomenon in the context of energy
efficiency, particularly in the period since energy-efficiency product testing and labeling became
the norm for many energy-using appliances. Empirical research on the effects of asymmetric
information is more prevalent in contexts unrelated to energy efficiency. These studies provide only
limited guidance for two reasons. First, their results are mixed12 and second, the characteristics of
these markets are different from those of energy-efficiency markets.
By its very nature, this problem is difficult to study. Like the uninformed buyer, researchers are
often unable to observe perfectly the energy-efficiency characteristics of a product. Unobserved
heterogeneity among buyers and sellers, particularly in buyers’ demand functions, complicates
analysis. However, theory does provide some qualitative guidance for policy and research efforts.
Outcomes depend on disclosure technology; in markets where disclosure is low-cost and effective,
there may be less rationale for policy intervention.13

11

For example, the U.S. government cited asymmetric information as a justification for its recent medium- and heavy-duty vehicle fuel
economy standards, projecting that these standards will save industry money after accounting for both upfront costs and fuel savings (U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 2011, 57315–57325).

12

For example, evidence from insurance markets both supports (Cohen 2005; Finkelstein and Poterba 2004) and undermines (Chiappori
and Salanie 2000; Cardon and Hendel 2001) the hypothesis of asymmetric information. Testing with data from insurance markets is
difficult. See Chiappori, et al. (2006) and Finkelstein and Poterba (2006) for discussions of the tests used in empirical work.

13

See Jovanovic (1982) for an analysis of how disclosure costs affect welfare. Recent empirical evidence on the impact of disclosure costs
on equilibrium prices comes from online automobile sales (Lewis 2011). Several companies have recently faced sanctions by the U.S.
Department of Energy (DOE) for overstating the efficiency of their products, failing to meet minimum efficiency standards, or both.

8 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

2.4 Do product developers invest too little in energy efficiency due to
technology spillovers via research and development and learning-by-doing?
Spillovers in the energy-efficiency innovation process can contribute to the energy-efficiency
gap if they lead to underinvestment in the development of new energy-efficient innovations.
These spillovers are possible both in basic research and development (R&D) and in subsequent
commercialization.
R&D spillovers. In theory, firms will invest too little effort in research when the resulting
knowledge benefits not only them, but other firms as well. A firm does not reap the full rewards
of its investment when knowledge is nonappropriable. This effect is probably most pronounced
for early stages of research, because firms cannot capture the knowledge generated in the process
perfectly, whereas firms can reduce spillovers in later stages of research through intellectual
property protections (Nordhaus 2011, 667).
There is no direct empirical evidence of R&D spillovers associated with energy efficiency,14 but
there is substantial evidence of these spillovers in other industries, with empirical estimates of
such spillovers ranging from close to zero percent to 100 percent, with most estimates between 20
and 50 percent (Griliches 1992, S43; B. H. Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen 2010, 1070–1).
Many countries have policies to address generic R&D spillovers. Research grants are widely used
to encourage basic research, and tax incentives are used to encourage applied R&D. In addition,
intellectual property protections ameliorate the problem of nonappropriability for innovations at
the stage of commercialization.
Learning-by-doing spillovers. Learning-by-doing (LBD) refers to productivity improvements that
come with experience. The learning effect can be so strong that firms may be willing to operate at
a loss when manufacturing a new product to improve productivity and become more competitive
(Benkard 2004). But knowledge from such learning can spill over to other firms, creating a freerider problem. Firms may then underinvest or delay investment to capture knowledge from other
firms, rather than incur the cost of generating the knowledge themselves (Arrow 1962; Spence
1981).
Empirical evidence suggests LBD spillovers are present in many industries, with learning spilling
over even to firms that are separated by space and national borders (Lieberman 1984, 214; Irwin
and Klenow 1994, 1215–1219), although other research suggests that while learning spillovers

14

Although Popp (2002) uses patent classifications to identify various alternative-energy and energy-efficiency technologies and estimates
the elasticity of energy-patenting activity with respect to energy prices for these technologies, he does not investigate the degree of
spillovers.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 9

within a firm can be significant, learning spillovers across firms can be small (Thornton and
Thompson 2001, 1356–1363).
There is no direct empirical evidence of LBD in energy efficiency, and none about the extent of
any learning spillovers. In contrast to the case of R&D spillovers, it appears unlikely that LBD
spillovers are a significant contributor to the energy-efficiency gap. One possible route for research
would be to study the engineering pathways by which LBD spillovers occur, building on recent
efforts to understand LBD mechanisms (Levitt, List, and Syverson 2013) and utilizing plant-level
production data and dynamic structural models of firm production functions.

2.5 Do consumers have inadequate information regarding energy-efficient
products?
Lack of information could lead to private decisions to invest in energy-efficient technologies less
than would otherwise be the case,15 and such lack of information is one of the most commonlycited justifications for policy intervention in this realm (Palmer et al. 2013, 272; Sanstad,
Hanemann, and Auffhammer 2006, 6–9). Information provision has been documented to affect
consumer decisions. In recent field experiments, provision of information about personal energy
use with peer comparisons has resulted in immediate and, to some degree, persistent reductions
in energy use (Allcott 2011a; Costa and Kahn 2013; Ayres, Raseman, and Shih 2013; Allcott and
Rogers 2014).
However, few studies disentangle the effects of information provision from competing explanations
of consumer behavior. One recent study attempts to do this using a stated choice experiment
to understand the relative importance of various elements of information labels—including the
EnergyGuide, Energy Star, and European-Union (EU)-style labels—while controlling for other
relevant factors, such as discounting behavior (Newell and Siikamäki 2014). This research finds
that a lack of relevant information can lead to significant undervaluation of energy efficiency
and that providing simple information on the economic value of saving energy was the most
important element guiding more cost-effective energy-efficiency decisions.
Past evidence in the United States and recent evidence from India suggests that imperfect
information also exists among firms (as consumers of energy-efficiency technology), and that firms
may fail to undertake profitable investments because they are unaware of them (S. T. Anderson
and Newell 2004; Bloom et al. 2013). Anderson and Newell (2004) examine industrial energy
audits and find that while plants accept only half of recommended projects, most plants respond
15

Two alternative interpretations of existing evidence are that consumers are inattentive to, or have difficulty using, readily available
information, on the one hand, and that consumers use imperfect information, on the other hand. We focus here on the classic market
failure of imperfect information. We turn to inattention, bounded rationality, and heuristic decision-making in later sections.

10 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

to the costs and benefits presented in energy audits and, with the additional information, adopt
investments that meet hurdle rates consistent with standard investment criteria.
In theory and in practice, an informed third party can fill the information gap, as many
government and private labeling programs seek to do. Examples include EnergyGuide labels,
Energy Star logos, automobile fuel economy labels, and LEED certification.16 A number of studies
have analyzed the effect of such information policies. For example, Sallee (2013) highlights the
possible supply distortions caused by coarse energy-efficiency certifications, such as the binary
certification employed in the Energy Star program. But the benefits of coarse certifications may
outweigh supply distortions, given limits on consumer attention to detail about performance.
Houde (2014a) evaluated the welfare effects of the Energy Star certification program and found
that consumers rely heavily on the certification, indicating that the program does provide new
information to the market. However, he also found that some consumers over-rely on the binary
label, as opposed to considering actual energy savings. This induces suppliers to bunch at the
certification point and could crowd out efficiency investments (Houde 2014b).
In the case of residential energy consultations, few households seek the information, even when
it is subsidized, and even fewer act upon the information (Tonn and Berry 1986, 785; L. G.
Berry 1993, 54). However, hedonic analysis of two building certifications, LEED and Energy
Star, suggest that certifications provide information to the market, as certification status explains
some of the residual variation in rental and sales prices after conditioning on prominent property
characteristics (Eichholtz, Kok, and Quigley 2010, 2012). Residential certifications are associated
with higher sales prices in both the Netherlands and the United States (Brounen and Kok 2011;
Walls, Palmer, and Gerarden 2013). The U.S. government provides information on appliance
efficiency via Energy Star certifications, which some consumers rely on too heavily (Houde 2014a,
3), highlighting a tension between benefits from salient, simple certifications and more complex
information provision.
Experimental research on point-of-sale interventions for energy-consuming products has found
heterogeneity in consumer beliefs about possible energy-cost savings. Providing information
to consumers could, in theory, lead some consumers to increase energy use—or investment in
inefficient technology—in response to information, in a mean-reverting pattern. Carefullydesigned information provision may eliminate this effect (Schultz et al. 2007, 432).
Further research is needed to distinguish the effects of incomplete information from competing
explanations of the energy-efficiency gap, such as inattention and heuristic decision-making.
Randomized control trials, including both revealed and stated choice experiments, may be the most
promising method to isolate and test these mechanisms. Likewise, targeted, randomized research

16

LEED stands for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design, a building rating system designed by the U.S. Green Building
Council, a non-governmental organization. See: www.usgbc.org/leed.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 11

designs could provide practical guidance for existing and potential new policy interventions. In
particular, research on the effects of online information provision is merited, because consumers
increasingly obtain information about and purchase energy-consuming (and other) products
online.

3. are energy operating costs inefficiently priced
and/or understood?
Even if consumers make privately optimal decisions, there are a number of reasons why energysaving technology may diffuse more slowly than the socially optimal rate, as energy production
and consumption generate a number of negative externalities. In other words, even if the
energy paradox is not present, the energy-efficiency gap may nevertheless exist. For example,
the combustion of fossil fuels is associated with numerous environmental pollutants, including
greenhouse gases, sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, and particulate matter, and the environmental
and human health effects of these pollutants are not fully incorporated into the price of fossil
fuels (and electricity generation). Such unpriced externalities and/or utility regulation can, in
principle, lead to a divergence between the energy prices consumers face and the prices that would
guide efficient decisions.
As in the previously examined realm, the theoretical arguments in this area are robust. However,
unlike in the previous case, here the empirical evidence is considerable, and in some cases quite
convincing. In most cases, data are likely to be available for additional research, with the exception
of those sub-questions below (3.4 and 3.5) that refer to beliefs, which are challenging to recover
with a sufficient degree of reliability. Furthermore, in several cases, existing policies (e.g., gasoline
taxes, carbon pricing, electricity price structures) appear not to provide sufficient incentives for
energy efficiency from an economic perspective, suggesting that further research is warranted.
Indeed, we would ascribe relatively high priority to the pursuit of further research in this realm.

3.1 Are gasoline prices too low due to unpriced externalities?
Some unpriced transportation-related externalities are a direct function of gasoline consumption.
These include the effects of greenhouse gas emissions and oil dependency (National Research
Council 2010, 333). Available estimates place these external costs at about 30-40 cents per gallon
(Parry, Walls, and Harrington 2007, 384.). Local pollution, congestion, and accident externalities
can be approximated as mileage-related costs, and converted to per gallon costs; estimates for
these are as great as $2.40 per gallon (Parry, Walls, and Harrington 2007, 384; M. L. Anderson
and Auffhammer 2013). These externality estimates are more than six times larger than current
gasoline taxes in the United States.17
17

As of January 1, 2013, the federal excise tax on gasoline was 18.40 cents per gallon and the average state excise tax was 23.47 cents per
gallon (www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=10&t=10).

12 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Raising gasoline prices (whether through taxation or otherwise18) is not necessarily the optimal
policy response to all of these externalities. For example, the marginal damages created by
congestion are both location- and time-dependent and would optimally be priced accordingly.
Accident externalities may be best regulated by weight-specific mileage taxes, although empirical
evidence suggests that a simpler gasoline tax could approximate a weight-specific mileage tax (M.
L. Anderson and Auffhammer 2013).
Competing goals present another complication. Due to the rebound effect, improvements in
energy efficiency could lead to more vehicle miles traveled, resulting in larger external costs due
to congestion and accidents. Addressing congestion and accidents through gasoline taxes would
provide an incentive for energy-efficiency improvements to vehicles, but would fail to satisfy
economic efficiency due to interactions with other externalities.
On net, economists agree that the price of gasoline in the United States is inefficiently low, and
that this contributes to the divergence between observed and socially optimal adoption of energyefficient technology.

3.2 Are electricity prices too low due to unpriced externalities?
Electric power production is also associated with environmental externalities, which distort
electricity generation costs downward, driving a wedge between privately and socially optimal
rates of technology adoption. Quantitative estimates of the magnitude of these externalities are
limited, and most do not account for marginal emissions and damages being both location- and
time-specific (Muller and Mendelsohn 2009; Zivin, Kotchen, and Mansur 2012; Cullen 2013).
Coal and natural gas combustion for electric power production have received the most attention,
with estimates suggesting the (non-carbon) damages from coal-powered electricity cost society
about 3 to 4 cents per kilowatt-hour (kWh), and those from natural gas-powered electricity cost
society much less than 1 cent per kWh on average (National Research Council 2010, 149). Carbon
dioxide emissions from these sources approximately double these cost estimates, depending on
choices of the social cost of carbon and discount rate.19

18

In some countries, fuel prices may be too low due to subsidization. Global fuel subsidies comprised 0.7 percent of global Gross Domestic
Product in 2011 (IMF 2013).

19

Presentation of preliminary research results at the October 2013 workshop hosted by the Harvard Environmental Economics Program,
and subsequent communication. Other fuel sources (for example, nuclear and renewable energy) and stages of production (for example,
fuel extraction) produce externalities that are more difficult to quantify but also potentially important. Qualitative discussions of these
impacts exist, but there is little knowledge of the economic magnitudes of the externalities. See, for example, National Research Council
(2010, 64–153). Table 2-2 on page 70 summarizes the discussion.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 13

In general, the full incorporation of environmental externalities into the price of electricity would
likely raise electricity prices in most U.S. regions. However, many of these externalities are already
regulated and thereby indirectly—and sometimes directly—priced. But other market distortions—
such as electricity price regulation—make it difficult to judge overall whether electricity prices
are too low, and the answer seems certain to vary by region (and time of day). More research is
needed to quantify and monetize electricity generation externalities, including comprehensive
assessments of which externalities are currently unpriced or underpriced and which are effectively
addressed by existing policy.

3.3 Are retail electricity or natural gas prices too low (or high) due to
regulation?
Evidence is mixed regarding whether the regulation of electricity and natural gas prices partly
explains the energy-efficiency gap, due to regulated prices falling below marginal generation costs.
On the one hand, the presence of average-cost pricing and lack of time-varying pricing suggests
that prices are too low, but several features of electricity and gas price regulation work in the
opposite direction, toward prices that exceed marginal cost.
Important dynamics in electricity markets may cause prices to be too low, particularly during
peak load periods. The marginal cost of electricity generation varies over time and many existing
pricing schemes do not reflect this variation, leading to inefficient utilization decisions (Joskow
and Wolfram 2012, 381). Real-time electricity pricing could correct these incentive problems,
particularly if consumers have access to real-time feedback on consumption (Jessoe and Rapson
2014), which could yield large efficiency gains (Borenstein 2005, 93). But the impact of time-ofuse pricing and associated load shifting on investment in energy-efficient technology is ambiguous
(Gillingham, Newell, and Palmer 2009, 605).
On the other hand, many utilities use two-part tariffs to facilitate the recovery of system fixed
costs while preserving marginal incentives (Coase 1946, 173–174). These tariffs are not set
optimally. Typically, marginal (or usage) prices are set above marginal costs to recover fixed costs.
For example, U.S. retail natural gas customers face prices inclusive of fixed distribution costs that
are well above marginal cost, with one study estimating that these additional costs are comparable
to a tax of over $50 per ton of carbon dioxide (Davis and Muehlegger 2010). Other evidence
from the electricity sector supports the presence of pricing above marginal cost (Naughton 1986,
411).20
A second possible reason for inefficiently high prices of energy for regulated utilities comes from
the principal-agent problem that regulated utilities may not minimize capital costs on behalf
20

This issue is not restricted to regulated monopolies; utilities facing imperfect retail competition will also diverge from optimal two-part
tariffs (Puller and West 2013).

14 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

of consumers, and these costs cannot be perfectly observed by regulators. Under rate-of-return
regulation, utilities may overcapitalize in order to increase profits (Averch and Johnson 1962).
This has been confirmed empirically in the context of regulated electric utilities (Spann 1974,
50). Comparisons of electricity generators subject to different regulatory regimes following
deregulation in the United States also support this phenomenon (Fowlie 2010, 863; Cicala 2014,
2).
However, other research does not support the theory that utilities overinvest to increase profits
(Boyes 1976), and recasting this problem in a dynamic framework highlights the possibility
of regulatory hold-up (Gilbert and Newbery 1994). There is empirical evidence that, due to
regulatory hold-up, utilities underinvest in infrastructure that improves reliability (Lim and
Yurukoglu 2014); this could lead to inefficiently low prices.
Inattention, rational or otherwise, may also influence consumer decisions. Recent empirical
research provides evidence that retail electricity customers respond to average price rather than
marginal price (Ito 2014), and that feedback about electricity consumption influences the price
elasticity of demand (Jessoe and Rapson 2014). Because the optimal price regime will depend
on how consumers respond to prices, more empirical research could be useful. Finally, empirical
research directed at understanding how alternative pricing schemes affect investment in energy
efficiency would be valuable.

3.4 Are beliefs about current and future fuel prices and/or usage
systematically uninformed or biased downward?
Imperfect optimization on the part of consumers is another possible contributor to the energyefficiency gap, but biased beliefs about fuel prices do not seem to be a major factor.
Consumer beliefs about fuel prices. Downwardly biased beliefs about fuel prices would tend
to lead to underinvestment in energy-efficient technology. Qualitative interviews suggest people
may know current gasoline prices, but lack other essential inputs to valuing vehicle fuel economy
(Turrentine and Kurani 2007, 1220–1221). Quantitative survey evidence suggests that, on
average, consumers forecast future gasoline prices using current prices (Allcott 2011b, 102–103;
S. T. Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee 2013).21
Is the current price an unbiased predictor of future prices? It is crucial to compare ex ante consumer
beliefs with other possible ex ante beliefs, rather than using outcomes to judge the beliefs of
consumers ex post, because beliefs can turn out to be mistaken after the fact even when they are
21

To be precise, Allcott (2011b) compares survey respondents’ fuel-price forecasts to futures prices, not current prices. However, futures
prices at the time of the survey were almost identical to a scenario of constant real prices.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 15

unbiased in expectation. Empirical evidence finds this no-change forecast is a better predictor of
future prices than predictions derived from econometric models, professional survey forecasts,
and oil futures (Alquist and Kilian 2010, 540). Together, these two findings—consumers forecast
using current prices and current prices are more accurate than other conventional forecasting
techniques—do not support the argument that downwardly biased beliefs about fuel prices
contribute to the energy-efficiency gap.22
Consumer beliefs about fuel usage. There is little evidence on gasoline usage forecasts or the
contribution of inaccurate usage forecasts to the energy-efficiency gap. Evidence from other
settings may be instructive: consumer decisions about mobile phone and health club contracts
suggest biased beliefs about product usage (DellaVigna and Malmendier 2006; Grubb 2009).
In the context of automobile purchases, consumers may be less likely to misestimate future fuel
usage, due to the salience of gasoline expenditures and relative stability in driving patterns for a
given individual.
Future research to understand the impact of fuel-price beliefs on investments in energy-efficient
technology outside the transportation sector could be valuable. Likewise, studies of the beliefs
of firms, or of key decision-makers within firms, could further understanding of the energyefficiency gap. Little research has been done on consumers’ predictions of future usage. Without
eliciting or recovering these beliefs, assessing the optimality of consumer purchases requires strong
assumptions. A research design that combines elicited price and usage forecasts with choice data
could possibly recover preferences without bias from heterogeneity in beliefs among consumers.

3.5 Are beliefs about current and future electricity prices and/or usage
systematically uninformed or biased downward?
Consumer beliefs about electricity prices. Limited evidence suggests consumers may be
misinformed about current electricity prices, but there is no evidence of a systematic bias.
Consumers respond to average, rather than marginal, price (Ito 2014, 548–554), but appear to
reduce consumption in response to a reduction in price, in contrast to theoretical predictions
(Jessoe, Rapson, and Smith 2014). This could be a product of consumer inattentiveness, but
research is needed to distinguish this from competing explanations (Faruqui and Sergici 2011;
Ito, Ida, and Tanaka 2014). In contrast, other research has provided evidence that consumers
value changes in physical energy use (for example, kWh of electricity and therms of natural gas)
at close to their price (Newell and Siikamäki 2014).
22

Although average beliefs about prices may not be biased, consumer forecasts of future gasoline prices display substantial heterogeneity
(Allcott 2011b, 103; S. T. Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee 2013). Another survey elicited upper and lower bounds on future fuel prices,
with responses exhibiting significant uncertainty. The spread between the mean response for each bound was almost two dollars, or 45
percent of the midpoint between these means (Greene, Evans, and Hiestand 2013, 1542). These findings could explain underinvestment
by some consumers.

16 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Consumer beliefs about electricity usage. Experimental choice data suggest consumers are also
misinformed about electricity usage or about how daily activities translate into usage; consumers
provided with real-time usage feedback become significantly more price responsive than
consumers without such feedback (Jessoe and Rapson 2014).23 In consumer surveys, respondents
systematically overestimate the energy costs of low-usage goods (for example, computers) and
underestimate the energy costs of high-usage goods (for example, water heaters) (Attari et al.
2010).
Separately identifying beliefs and preferences is obviously challenging. Economic research in this
area typically makes assumptions—sometimes quite strong assumptions—about beliefs in order
to recover preferences. Future research could begin by eliciting beliefs from economic agents,
and then using these beliefs to recover preferences (Manski 2004, 1330). In some contexts,
this approach could enable the researcher to isolate multiple effects of information policies (for
example, isolate the effect of salience from the effect of information that alters beliefs).

3.6 Do analysts systematically overestimate energy savings from efficiency
investments?
Analysts’ predictions of energy savings from efficiency investments have tended to overstate the
magnitude of the energy-efficiency gap. We distinguish between ex ante engineering-economic
analyses,24 which rely primarily on physical models to predict energy savings, and ex post impact
evaluations, which typically rely on observed energy consumption to estimate net savings
associated with energy-efficiency investments. Hybrid models combine the technological detail of
engineering models with economic evaluations (Murphy and Jaccard 2011).
Ex post economic evaluations, using actual energy usage, are generally thought to be more credible
than ex ante engineering-economic analyses,25 and early comparisons provided evidence of a
23

In this experiment, the treatment and control groups received the same day-ahead notifications of price changes. This research design
isolates the effect of usage feedback and eliminates the potentially confounding effect of salience.

24

These are also called “bottom-up” or “technology-based” approaches. They typically utilize detailed information about the relative
efficiency of various types of energy-using equipment, existing deployment, and assumptions about usage patterns, in order to estimate
how energy usage, expenditures, and pollution would change in response to changes in the mix of capital goods. By making assumptions
about opportunities for substitution, switching costs, and infra-marginal behavioral responses, these studies have been used to predict the
effects of policies. For an early critique of these studies, see Joskow and Marron (1993). In a particularly influential engineering-economic
study, McKinsey & Company estimated a supply curve of carbon-emission reductions in the United States (Granade et al. 2009), and
concluded that a substantial amount of reductions could be achieved at negative cost by investing in greater energy efficiency. This result
generated considerable interest, and also substantial criticism, partly on the grounds that some costs of adoption were not treated in the
analysis.

25

However, ex ante studies offer something ex post approaches do not, namely predictions, which are critical for evaluating alternative
energy-efficiency investments on cost-effectiveness grounds, as well as for projecting energy savings associated with any given policy.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 17

seemingly systematic bias in ex ante predictions (Nadel and Keating 1991). Several explanations
for the divergence between engineering models and impact evaluations have been offered:
erroneous assumptions about usage; complex interactions omitted from engineering estimates (for
example, the rebound effect); quality control problems (for example, problems with equipment
installation); and adoption of energy savings measures by non-participants (which lowers net
savings attributable to utility programs).
A meta-analysis of 42 utility conservation programs in the residential, commercial, and industrial
sectors found that actual energy-savings estimates for residential retrofit programs ranged
from 15 to 117 percent of ex ante engineering-economic estimates (Nadel and Keating 1991,
2). Commercial retrofit programs exhibited energy savings ranging from 36 to 248 percent of
engineering predictions, while a majority of programs failed to meet savings benchmarks from
ex ante analysis (Nadel and Keating 1991, 6). These direct comparisons suggest that caution is
warranted when interpreting ex ante engineering-economic evidence for the energy-efficiency gap.
Nonetheless, they also found some cases in which ex ante analyses have underestimated energy
savings.
Home energy auditors use engineering-based tools to predict energy savings. These tools are
one potential source of systematically biased energy-savings estimates for reasons that include
user error (for example, incorrect inputs or inaccurate assumptions about post-audit thermostat
settings) and improper accounting for residents’ behavioral responses, even when the underlying
engineering models are correct.
In empirical research, two groups of participants in a utility-weatherization program in the 1980s
achieved 47 and 78 percent of predicted savings on average (Hirst 1986, 300),26 while realized
savings from another utility program ranged from 50 to 81 percent of predicted electricity savings,
and 14 to 42 percent of predicted natural gas savings (Sebold and Fox 1985, 83). In another
study, a tool used for weatherization home audits over-predicted savings by 186 percent, despite
accurate engineering calculations (Ternes and Gettings 2008). Likewise, weatherization projects
in New York State only achieved 57 to 69 percent of the savings predicted by the National Energy
Audit Tool, and studies from other states reach qualitatively similar conclusions (L. G. Berry and
Gettings 1998).
Analyses that significantly overestimate energy savings persist, despite substantial improvements
in ex ante engineering-economic methods over time. For example, ex post analysis of the “Cash
for Coolers” program in Mexico, which provided subsidies for the replacement of inefficient

26

Hirst (1986) reviews possible causes of differences between predicted and actual energy savings, including errors in audit methodology,
data collection and interpretation, installation of inappropriate retrofit measures, use of poor materials, low-quality installation work,
changes in occupant behavior, errors in electricity usage data, and errors in analysis of electricity-billing data.

18 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

household appliances, indicates refrigerator replacement achieved only one-quarter of annual
savings predicted by the World Bank. Replacement of air-conditioners led to increased electricity
consumption, in stark contrast to engineering predictions of energy savings (Davis, Fuchs, and
Gertler 2014). In a randomized utility experiment providing insulation and HVAC appliances
to certain households, ex ante engineering estimates overstated actual conservation by 13 percent
(Dubin, Miedema, and Chandran 1986).
Scrutiny of the rates of return predicted by ex ante engineering-economic analyses also provides
evidence of bias in energy-savings estimates. Econometric analysis of home energy-efficiency
investments by Metcalf and Hassett (1999, 527) suggests the median rate of return for insulation
improvements is 9.7 percent, consistent with reasonable discount rates, but far below the ex ante
estimates of Blasnik (1990). A combined engineering/econometric approach to estimating these
rates of return finds broadly similar results: Dubin and Henson (1988) estimate average rates of
return of 4.9 percent for ceiling insulation and 8.3 percent for wall insulation.27
There are significant opportunities for continued research in this area. First, more attention
is needed to ex post analysis in the transportation, commercial, and industrial sectors. The
preponderance of evidence brought to bear on this question of accuracy in ex ante energysavings predictions has come from the residential sector, probably because of the large number
of government and utility programs that provide existing engineering analysis and rich data for
ex post assessment. More ex post analyses of model predictions are needed to better judge whether
ex ante engineering-economic analyses continue to systematically overstate the savings associated
with energy-efficiency investments or whether these approaches have improved.28 There may have
been a selection bias whereby researchers have chosen to evaluate engineering-economic analyses
that have most exaggerated the savings potential of efficiency investments.

3.7 Do analysts insufficiently account for consumer heterogeneity?
For any energy-efficiency technology, the benefits and costs of adoption can vary substantially
across potential adopters (Fowlie, Greenstone, and Wolfram 2014; Metcalf and Hassett 1999, 526;
Alberini, Bareit, and Filippini 2014, 33–4; Newell and Siikamäki 2014). Even when engineering
27

Simulation-based studies, which use energy-market models to trace out energy-efficiency supply curves, improve on simpler ex ante
analyses. These models explicitly model complex adoption decisions, consumer heterogeneity, uncertainty, and feedback effects. As a
result, even if these models begin with the same technology assumptions as simpler engineering-economic models, the general equilibrium
effects of these interrelationships lead to different, typically lower, predicted levels of end-use energy efficiency. One study found that
incorporating these factors reduces the size of the energy-efficiency gap identified in the McKinsey & Company study (Granade et al.
2009) by three-quarters (Huntington 2011, 19).

28

Some such assessments have improved by accounting for “free riders” that would have adopted technologies even in the absence of certain
programs, and by incorporating the rebound effect (Dubin and Henson 1988, 133; Davis, Fuchs, and Gertler 2014; Gillingham and
Palmer 2014, 21; Sorrell, Dimitropoulos, and Sommerville 2009; Greening, Greene, and Difiglio 2000).

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 19

predictions correctly find that, on average, the benefits of adoption exceed the costs of adoption,
this will not be true for some potential adopters.
Differences in benefits and costs across agents generate variation in observed rates of adoption
(Griliches 1957). Similarly, heterogeneity across consumers may explain variation in the adoption
of energy-efficient technology. For example, (Hausman and Joskow 1982) pointed out that
heterogeneity in usage profiles, capital stock, or consumer preferences could result in realized
savings below average predicted savings. Failure to model heterogeneity correctly can introduce
bias in estimates of the size of the energy-efficiency gap.29
If the bias due to heterogeneity is systematic, analyses ignoring heterogeneity could overstate the
magnitude of the energy-efficiency gap. The sign of this bias is ambiguous, but can be identified.
Neglecting consumer heterogeneity appears to have produced empirical estimates that over-state
the extent to which vehicle purchasers undervalue fuel economy (Bento, Li, and Roth 2012, 45).
Ignoring heterogeneity can bias energy-savings estimates upward: systematic differences between
past and future adopters can drive a wedge between observed and potential returns for a given
investment. This wedge is likely positive in a context where consumers and firms have selected the
most profitable projects first, as prospective returns will likely be below historical average returns.
One potential area for future research involves using randomized experiments to better understand
the distribution of energy savings associated with a given investment by comparing the distribution
of energy outcomes for treated and control groups. This could help improve ex ante predictions for
future decision-making. Wider use of techniques from industrial organization (for example, the
random coefficient logit model) could improve predictions by explicitly modeling heterogeneity.

4. are product choices cost-minimizing in presentvalue terms?
The framework posited in part 1 of this paper is one of cost-minimizing energy-efficiency decisions,
and so it is natural to ask whether product choices are cost-minimizing in present value terms, or
whether various market failures and/or behavioral phenomena inhibit such cost-minimization.
Here the empirical evidence ranges from strong (split incentives/agency issues and inattention/
salience phenomena) to moderate (heuristic decision-making/bounded rationality, systematic
risk, and option value) to weak (learning-by-using, loss aversion, myopia, and capital market
failures). It is important to recognize, however, that here as elsewhere in our review of existing
research, we find that most previous work has focused on the residential sector, with much less
attention given to the commercial and industrial sectors—presumably at least partly because of
29

One study found this bias to be inconsequential in the case of efficient lighting (Koomey, Sanstad, and Shown 1996, 106).

20 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

data being unavailable. The availability of data for further research varies by topic, with split
incentives/agency issues and effects of myopia offering the most promising opportunities for
further investigation.
That said, given the wide application of building codes and energy-efficiency standards, split
incentives/agency problems in the residential, commercial, and industrial sectors may not be as
severe as one might expect in the absence of any interventions. Overall, some areas merit priority
for future research, such as empirical analysis of split incentives/agency issues in markets for
technologies that are not subject to efficiency standards (such as electric motors). And much more
work can be done in the behavioral realm (on issues such as inattention/salience, loss-aversion/
reference points, heuristic decision-making, and myopia), as well as on capital market failures and
systematic risk.

4.1 Do split incentives/agency issues due to asymmetric information inhibit
energy-efficient decisions?
Differences in interests between economic agents frequently arise linked with problems of agency
or split incentives. Prominent examples include landlord–tenant and builder–buyer problems,
in which capital investors may make decisions that are not optimal from the perspective of the
end user. Similarly, agency conflicts are possible within firms when investment and operating
decisions are divided among individuals or business units (Tietenberg 2009, 308). Research has
long cited these conflicts as potential explanations for the energy-efficiency gap (Blumstein et
al. 1980; Fisher and Rothkopf 1989; DeCanio 1993; Jaffe and Stavins 1994a; Jaffe and Stavins
1994b; Gillingham, Newell, and Palmer 2009; Tietenberg 2009; Gillingham and Palmer 2014).
Empirical evidence has confirmed the existence of the principal–agent problem, and comprehensive
accounting exercises have sought to estimate the potential importance of this market failure by
quantifying the amount of energy consumption subject to incentive conflicts (IEA 2007). For
example, 35 percent of U.S. residential energy use may be affected (Murtishaw and Sathaye
2006, 31–2). Other research has compared owner-occupied and rental properties to estimate
directly the impacts of split incentives. Most results are compelling: even after controlling for
household income and other household characteristics, renters are signiﬁcantly less likely to have
energy-efficient refrigerators, clothes washers, and dishwashers based on data from the Residential
Energy Consumption Survey (Davis 2012). Owner-occupied dwellings in California are 13 and
20 percent more likely to have exterior wall and ceiling insulation (Gillingham, Harding, and
Rapson 2012). In contrast, a hedonic regression analysis of survey data in Australia failed to find
evidence of split incentives in rental housing (Wood, Ong, and McMurray 2012).
Other evidence supports the hypothesis that information asymmetries exist in housing markets.
Data from the United States show that landlords include utilities in rental prices even when
DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 21

units are individually metered. This may be because landlords with energy-efficient units cannot
credibly communicate this information and instead include utilities as a signal of the units’
efficiency (Levinson and Niemann 2004, 51–57). Landlords may even use utility-included rental
contracts to attract renters or as a signal of other unobservable forms of quality unrelated to energy
efficiency. The empirical correlation between how well-maintained a unit is and the inclusion of
utilities in rent provides some support for this hypothesis (S. J. Choi and Kim 2012, 35–36).
More support for the hypothesis of asymmetric information comes from stated preferences.
Responding to a survey, New Zealand tenants stated that they would be willing to pay higher
rents in exchange for improved energy efficiency and, in many cases, respondents’ willingness
to pay appears to justify landlord investments in energy-efficiency improvements. Asymmetric
information could explain why landlords do not make such seemingly profitable efficiency
investments (Phillips 2012, 118–121). In contrast, recent research on commercial buildings finds
little evidence of asymmetric information between building owners and prospective buyers or
tenants (Papineau 2014, 23–24).
Although such studies provide evidence regarding the hypothesis of asymmetric information,
they do not provide direct estimates of the impact of information asymmetries on investments in
energy efficiency. While a market failure exists, the magnitude may be small because the energy
impacts of inefficient appliances and less insulation only amount to a few percent of total energy
consumption in rental units (Davis 2012; Gillingham, Harding, and Rapson 2012).
Alternative contract structures can contribute to another, less cited outcome: moral hazard. For
example, tenants who sign energy-inclusive rental agreements face zero marginal cost from energy
consumption and therefore may use too much energy relative to the social optimum. Indeed,
tenants appear to keep indoor temperatures higher during winter months and when their homes
are unoccupied, when utilities are included in their leases (Maruejols and Young 2011, 3667;
Levinson and Niemann 2004, 53). Similarly, tenants who pay for utilities are more likely to adjust
heating temperatures at night than tenants who face zero marginal cost (Gillingham, Harding,
and Rapson 2012). Such findings do not relate directly to investment in energy efficiency, except
to the degree that landlords respond strategically to such behavior. However, even if landlords
do respond strategically, they are more likely to invest in high-efficiency appliances or decouple
rental agreements and energy use than they are to underinvest in energy efficiency. Thus moral
hazard is unlikely to contribute to the energy-efficiency gap.
The best evidence available is concentrated in the residential sector, but agency problems due
to information asymmetries could also play a role in commercial and industrial sector energyefficiency decisions. Research confirms that firms are also susceptible to internal principal–agent
problems. Green Lights, a program that provides technical assistance to (voluntarily) participating
firms, enabled cost-saving lighting upgrades that these firms had not installed independently.

22 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Program experience suggests that firms failed to install these cost-effective measures before the
program due to internal cases of principal–agent conflict: capital rationing by managers and split
incentives across divisions (Howarth, Haddad, and Paton 2000). Likewise, case studies of the
electric motor market in Europe identified split incentives as a barrier to investments in energy
efficiency (de Almeida 1998; Ostertag 2003).
Despite the frequency with which the principal–agent problem is named as a contributor to the
energy-efficiency gap, there are few formal agency models adapted to this setting. Experimental
work is difficult in many settings, since researchers cannot randomly assign landlords and tenants
to properties. Therefore, creative empirical strategies (Myers 2013) and new data sources may be
needed.
The structure of the principal–agent problem may create opportunities for creative policy responses,
as well. Eliminating information asymmetries or innovation in the form of contracts could allow
private markets to overcome misaligned incentives. For example, Japan requires the vending
machine operator—rather than the owner of the property where the machine is installed—to pay
for the machine’s energy use (IEA 2007, 164). Nonetheless, vending machines are also subject to
minimum efficiency standards in Japan.

4.2 Do learning-by-using spillovers inhibit more energy-efficient decisions?
In many cases, consumers learn about the benefits of a given technology by adopting and
experiencing it. In some cases, other consumers benefit from this information without having
adopted the technology. A positive informational spillover could slow the rate of technology
adoption relative to the social optimum, as each consumer has an incentive to delay adoption in
order to learn from others. Put another way, the opportunity for individuals to substitute their
peers’ experiences for their own creates an incentive to free-ride (Foster and Rosenzweig 2010,
408). At least in theory, this phenomenon could contribute to the energy-efficiency gap.30
Empirical research in other domains emphasizes the prevalence of social learning and peer
effects (Case and Katz 1991; Ammermueller and Pischke 2009; Duflo and Saez 2002; Foster
and Rosenzweig 1995, 1205–6; Emerick 2014; Conley and Udry 2010, 37–38), but there is
limited evidence regarding how information spillovers affect energy-efficient technology, and—if
positive spillovers exist—whether consumers respond by free-riding. The bulk of the evidence on
information spillovers comes from the introduction of hybrid vehicles, drawing on both stated
preference (Mau et al. 2008) and revealed preference studies (Axsen, Mountain, and Jaccard

30

These spillovers are related to the effects of demand spillovers on innovation by firms, discussed above, in that they also affect product
offerings.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 23

2009, 237; Narayanan and Nair 2013, 72–72).31 In the residential sector, a study of thermal
insulation choices by homebuilders found no evidence of large knowledge externalities among
builders, suggesting builders do not learn from the adoption of these technologies by competitors
(Jaffe and Stavins 1995, S–60).32
Theoretical research from other fields highlights the potential importance of social learning and
peer effects (Manski 1993a), and underscores the potential for social learning to lead to inefficient
technology adoption decisions, even irrespective of free-ridership. Information spillovers in
the context of irreversible technology choice with network externalities can result in proven
technologies being chosen over other alternatives with higher expected value (J. P. Choi 1997).
Similarly, a model in which it is rational to adopt technology based on the adoption decisions
of others (for example, because the decisions of others may reflect information that agents lack)
predicts herd behavior in which agents make decisions that depart from the decision they would
make using only private information. This can lead to inefficient outcomes, as agents collectively
undermine the benefits of learning by taking cues from others rather than relying on private
information (Banerjee 1992, 798).
Previous research illustrates the challenge of credibly identifying spillovers using observational
data (Narayanan and Nair 2013; Manski 1993b). The challenge is to disentangle spillover effects
from unobservables (Foster and Rosenzweig 2010, 411). Even then, empirically testing for the
presence of learning spillovers does not determine that these spillovers contribute to the energyefficiency gap, through individuals free-riding and thus slowing the overall rate of technology
adoption. Further research would be needed to determine the effect of learning spillovers on the
adoption of energy-efficient technology, potentially through the use of experimental techniques
(Baird et al. 2014).

4.3 Does inattention to, and/or a lack salience of, energy use/operating costs
inhibit energy-efficient decisions?
Broadly speaking, there is considerable evidence that consumer inattention to non-salient costs
affects decisions. Evidence from experiments and observational data reveal that consumers are
inattentive to sales taxes (Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 2009), shipping charges (Hossain and
Morgan 2006), and out-of-pocket costs for health care (Abaluck and Gruber 2011). Conceptually,
inattention may contribute to the energy-efficiency gap to the degree that energy costs are not

31

Learning spillovers from hybrid technology are not always positive. Analysis of both the Toyota Prius and the Honda Insight suggests that
while higher market penetration by the Prius leads to increased adoption of all hybrids, higher market penetration by the Insight leads to
reduced adoption (Heutel and Muehlegger 2014, 3–4).

32

An alternative explanation acknowledged by Jaffe and Stavins (1995) is that builders have complete (or close to complete) information,
so there is no scope for learning from the adoption decisions of others.

24 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

salient for the investment decision. In some markets, this contribution could be substantial.
Almost half of surveyed vehicle buyers report making their decisions without considering fuel
costs (Allcott 2011b, 100). This is consistent with earlier research that found that consumers
largely ignored replacement ink prices when making printer purchase decisions (R. Hall 1997).
There are two fundamental ways to frame research on inattention. One is a reduced-form approach,
empirically estimating an attentiveness parameter without taking a stance on the underlying
structural model of inattention. This approach can produce credible estimates of the relative
importance of inattention in a given context, but it falls short of describing the mechanisms that
underlie inattention. The other is to develop a model of the decision process itself, making explicit
the underlying factors at play.
Intuition suggests that consumers will only allocate attention to an attribute if the cognitive
costs of doing so are less than the expected utility gains. Thus, the level of inattentiveness should
vary across individuals and decision environments. Modeling inattention to energy efficiency as
a result of costly information acquisition offers one way to explain decisions that are apparently
privately sub-optimal (Howarth and Andersson 1993; Sallee 2013).
There are two leading methods for testing for inattention to energy efficiency in empirical research.
First, the reduced form of attentiveness suggests comparing demand elasticities with respect to
prices and energy costs from market data. This is the empirical approach taken in many studies
of discrete choice, which assess the tradeoff consumers make between purchase price and future
energy operating costs (Hausman 1979; Dubin and McFadden 1984; Jaffe and Stavins 1995;
Goldberg 1998; S. T. Anderson and Newell 2004; Sallee, West, and Fan 2009; Busse, Knittel, and
Zettelmeyer 2013; Allcott and Wozny 2014).33 The primary shortcoming of this method is that
price and energy-cost elasticities can diverge for multiple reasons, including discounting behavior.
Experimental manipulations of salience provide an alternative means of studying inattention to
energy efficiency. Field experiments designed to study light bulb choice provide mixed evidence on
the impact of an intervention that targets both salience and information: an online intervention
increased average willingness to pay for compact fluorescent light bulbs (CFLs) by over two dollars,
while an in-store intervention had no statistically significant effect on CFL demand (Allcott and
Taubinsky 2013, 3–4). Stated choice experiments that vary the type of information available to
consumers, be it economic, physical energy, or environmental, can also help assess which of these
is most salient to consumers (Newell and Siikamäki 2014). Experimental studies are limited by
concerns about distinguishing inattention from incomplete information, demand effects, and
external validity. Complementary use of experimental and non-experimental techniques can
ameliorate the shortcomings of each approach (Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 2009).
33

We discuss these and other studies in more detail in a later section of this paper in the context of debates regarding consumer discount
rates.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 25

Economic theory and empirical research provide some guidance for policies to address inattention
to energy efficiency. Targeting inattentive consumers could enhance policy cost-effectiveness.
Information disclosure could target consumers with biased beliefs and those inattentive to future
energy costs. The success of information disclosure policies depends crucially on salience as
well as on other context-specific factors. In contrast to information disclosure, subsidies may be
poorly targeted for combating inattention if the consumers who know about them also tend to be
attentive to future energy costs.34 That said, there is an alternative argument for poorly targeted
taxes and subsidies if these interventions do raise salience or otherwise reduce inattention; such
interventions generate first-order welfare gains for inattentive consumers and only second-order
distortions for attentive consumers (O’Donoghue and Rabin 2006).
Policies can also lower the cost of attention, and even blunt policies could be justified if they lower
the cost of attention sufficiently (Sallee 2013, 32). Several recent studies investigate firm responses
to coarse policy designs and attempt to quantify the welfare impacts of these policies (Sallee and
Slemrod 2012; Houde 2014a; Houde 2014b).
Debates over price and information interventions to address inattention highlight a broader
question of instrument choice. A number of recent studies contribute evidence on the effect of
different policy instruments on welfare and energy-efficiency outcomes. Pigouvian taxes on fuels
are the natural response to the externalities associated with energy use. Yet there may also be a
case for product-market-price interventions if consumers are inattentive to energy costs (Allcott,
Mullainathan, and Taubinsky 2014). Minimum efficiency standards are another alternative used
by regulators; in some cases, such standards can lead to an effective ban on certain classes of
products (Allcott and Taubinsky 2013). In addition to regulatory mandates for disclosure and
product certification, information interventions by utilities, and in particular peer comparisons,
have been successful in reducing residential energy use and may be applicable elsewhere (Allcott
2011a; Ayres, Raseman, and Shih 2013; Allcott and Rogers 2014).
Experimental techniques, including belief elicitation, may offer some of the most promising
opportunities for future research. Beliefs cannot be observed, but researchers could elicit stated
beliefs along with stated preferences in field experiments that present consumers with actual
choices. In this way, researchers could validate stated preferences using revealed preferences.
Researchers can also directly test models of inattention, which offer testable predictions that are
unlikely to be confounded by alternative explanations (Sallee 2013).

34

The literature on retirement savings also speaks to this problem of targeting: for example, Chetty et al. (2014) conclude that automatic
retirement account contributions are more effective than subsidies in promoting retirement savings, because subsidies only affect the
savings of attentive workers.

26 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

4.4 Do loss-aversion or reference points inhibit more energy-efficient
decisions?
Research in psychology has highlighted the importance of loss aversion and reference points
in economic decisions. Empirical insights have been formalized in prospect theory and related
alternatives to expected utility theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Thaler 1985; Tversky
and Kahneman 1991; Kőszegi and Rabin 2006).35 Yet despite strong evidence in other decision
environments and general theoretical frameworks for analysis, very little is known about the
impacts of loss aversion and reference points on energy-efficiency investments.
The most relevant evidence comes from experimental research on energy use (Allcott 2011a;
Goldstein, Cialdini, and Griskevicius 2008), with responses partially attributable to changes in
reference points. Survey evidence on consumer demand for vehicle fuel economy is also consistent
with loss aversion (Greene, Evans, and Hiestand 2013).
Governments and businesses can influence reference points through careful choice of defaults
and goals. In three experiments, replacing incandescent light bulbs with CFLs as the default
significantly increased the proportion of subjects who chose CFLs (Dinner et al. 2011). Goals
can also serve as reference points under prospect theory (Heath, Larrick, and Wu 1999, 83–
94). If the importance of goal-based reference points holds in practice, encouraging consumers
to adjust personal goals could encourage investments in energy efficiency. In one experiment,
providing tailored information, goals, and personalized feedback led households to reduce energy
use on average, although the effect was not statistically distinguishable from the control group
(Abrahamse et al. 2007).
Consumers and firms considering energy efficiency improvements are almost certainly susceptible
to reference points and loss aversion, but empirical research is needed to quantify the importance
of these phenomena. Future work could synthesize previous experimental techniques to study how
different types of information displayed on energy labels influence reference points. Challenges to
implementing policy based on existing research include heterogeneity—that no one level of energy
efficiency is right for every consumer—and concerns over paternalism, which is a valid concern
if reference points can be manipulated. Research on policy interventions (such as energy labels)
could inform the design of uniform interventions that minimize the welfare cost of providing
blunt guidance. Carefully targeted interventions could shift reference points for some consumers
without creating incentives for other consumers to alter their behavior.
35

See also Tversky and Kahneman (1981) and (1992). More recent theoretical and experimental work in psychology also highlights the
importance of reference dependence. Query theory hypothesizes that consumers consider discrete arguments for or against a given
alternative, and that the number of considerations and the order in which they come to mind affects decision-making (Weber and
Johnson 2009, 63; Weber et al. 2007). This theory underscores the importance of defaults. As another example, Hardisty, Appelt, and
Weber (2013) study the combination of loss aversion and intertemporal decision-making. This research highlights the need to strive for a
comprehensive understanding of decision-making to explain the energy-efficiency gap.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 27

4.5 Does heuristic decision-making and/or bounded rationality inhibit more
energy-efficient decisions?
Cognitive limitations could conceivably contribute to the energy-efficiency gap by preventing
individuals (or possibly firms) from properly balancing present value benefits and costs when
investing in energy-using capital goods (Gillingham, Newell, and Palmer 2009, 608–610). This
could manifest itself in the use of heuristics or simple optimization errors. Many empirical studies
are consistent with these explanations (Sanstad and Howarth 1994, 1.178). However, it is difficult
to disentangle the role of heuristics and bounded rationality from competing explanations,
because consumers’ decision processes cannot be directly observed and because there is no unified
theory of decision-making subject to cognitive limitations from which to draw testable hypotheses
(Conlisk 1996).
That said, studies of vehicle fuel economy provide some support for the hypothesis of bounded
rationality. First, experimental evidence has revealed that consumers systematically misperceive
the information contained in fuel economy ratings, due to the inverse relationship between
gasoline consumption and miles per gallon (“the MPG illusion”) (Larrick and Soll 2008; Allcott
2013). Other research has shown that stated preferences for cars of various efficiencies depend
on the metric and scale of information provided on energy labels (Camilleri and Larrick 2014).
Translations of fuel economy into multiple perfectly correlated metrics (that is, gallons per mile,
estimated annual fuel cost, and greenhouse gas rating) alter stated preferences (Ungemach et al.
2013).
This research may provide guidance for regulatory changes that would encourage energy efficiency.
The findings suggest that tailoring the scale of energy labels based on the expected lifetime of a
given product or providing multiple translations of energy-efficiency metrics could help guide
decisions (Camilleri and Larrick 2014; Ungemach et al. 2013). To some extent, this is already
happening: the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency recently redesigned new vehicle labels to
include gallons per miles, multiple cost estimates, comparisons with other vehicles in the same
class, and environmental ratings (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2015).
There are numerous opportunities to study the effects of cognitive limitations on energy-efficiency
decisions. Most direct evidence is from laboratory studies of stated preferences. More research
on revealed preferences in real decision environments could complement these studies, but—as
noted above—the key research-design challenge, particularly in revealed preference studies, is
credibly distinguishing the effects of heuristic decision-making and bounded rationality from
other explanations of behavior.

28 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

4.6 Does myopia/short-sightedness inhibit more energy-efficient decisions?
A key issue surrounding the question of whether myopia contributes to the energy-efficiency gap
involves identifying the discount rates used by consumers and analyzing whether these discount
rates are consistent with maximizing present-value net benefits. There is a long history of observing
consumers’ choices of energy-consuming durable goods to examine the tradeoff between upfront
capital costs and operating costs. If consumers are seeking to minimize discounted lifecycle costs,
it becomes possible to estimate implicit discount rates.36
The seminal study of this kind was by Hausman (1979, 50). This study found average implicit
discount rates in excess of 20 percent. Many other researchers subsequently found implicit
discount rates much higher than market interest rates (Dubin and McFadden 1984, 354; Gately
1980).37 Such findings have been interpreted as evidence of myopia, the existence of other
behavioral issues or market failures, or alternatively as evidence of rational discounting subject
to liquidity constraints. Studies that identify a discount rate while assuming cost-minimizing
behavior cannot, however, distinguish myopia as an underlying cause of the energy paradox from
other possible causes (Newell and Siikamäki 2014). For example, high implicit discount rates for
home energy investments could also be rationalized by moral hazard: contractors may provide low
quality services, and consumers may use high hurdle rates to insulate themselves from this risk
(Giraudet and Houde 2014).38
Automobile purchases provide a good setting to study these questions because such purchases
are major decisions, about which consumers presumably think carefully, and because the cost
of gasoline has varied substantially over time (Helfand and Wolverton 2011). One study has
found that consumers are indifferent between $0.76 now and $1.00 of discounted future gasoline
expenditures, suggesting the possibility of myopia or undervaluation of fuel economy (Allcott and
Wozny 2014). On the other hand, other studies have found that market outcomes are consistent
with dynamically cost-minimizing behavior (Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer 2013; Sallee, West,
and Fan 2009). Evidence from gasoline and diesel car purchases in Europe in the early 1990s
suggests an implicit discount rate of about 11.5 percent, only slightly above automobile loan rates
at the time (Verboven 2002, 288). However, research has not always taken into account the fact

36

Of course, it is also possible that consumers are not minimizing aggregate costs because of errors regarding time horizons, their beliefs, or
due to inattention, in which case these studies will not reveal true consumer discount rates (Allcott and Wozny 2014, 4).

37

Train (1985) and Sanstad, Hanemann, and Auffhammer (2006) review other examples.

38

An alternative way to frame the consideration of myopia is with experimental research and alternative theories at the intersection of
psychology and economics. Research on intertemporal decision-making from other contexts provides robust evidence that individuals are
dynamically inconsistent (Loewenstein and Thaler 1989, 183–6), and delay costly up-front action even when they acknowledge that it is
in their long-run interest (Akerlof 1991, 3–8). Quasi-hyperbolic discounting provides a theoretical alternative to exponential discounting
to explain these empirical anomalies (Laibson 1997).

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 29

that automobile markets have been subject to fuel economy regulation for many years, which
tends to reduce the possibility for high implicit discount rates.
To assess the implications of these studies for the energy-efficiency gap, it is necessary to identify
a benchmark discount rate, which depends—among other things—on the cost of capital. One
structured choice experiment found that (conditional on information labeling) elicited discount
rates rationalized participant decision-making on average, but the use of a common discount
rate of five percent for all subjects tended to lead to a conclusion that consumers significantly
undervalued energy efficiency (Newell and Siikamäki 2014).
Direct research on intertemporal tradeoffs in energy-efficiency-investment decisions might
clarify the contribution of myopia to the energy-efficiency gap. For example, researchers could
manipulate intertemporal tradeoffs through information provision and pricing interventions, and
examine decision-making. Another promising approach may be to combine elicitation of time
preferences with choice data, and compare choices observed across multiple domains (Newell and
Siikamäki 2014).
Strategic responses by firms to consumer myopia present another area for potential research. If
firms believe consumers are myopic and therefore undervalue energy efficiency, product offerings
will not be optimal from a social perspective, even if firms hold incorrect beliefs about consumers.
Studies of the automotive industry posit several explanations for the apparently suboptimal level
of fuel economy manufacturers provide (Helfand and Wolverton 2011, 137–140). Government
policies and regulations also depend on assumptions about consumer myopia and on the discount
rate used in regulatory impact analysis.

4.7 Do capital market failures/liquidity constraints influence consumer
discount rates for energy efficiency investments?
Capital market failures could explain a divergence between estimated implicit discount rates and
typical market interest rates. Prospective investors facing capital constraints may be unable to
finance energy-efficiency investments, even if future returns would justify the up-front cost. This
could result in an estimated implicit discount rate that is above normal market rates. Information
asymmetries could prevent efficient lending even for collateralized investments; firms that possess
private information about future cost savings from a particular investment may be unable to
convince lenders of its financial potential if the savings are costly for the lender to evaluate.
In the future, theoretical and empirical findings from consumer finance research may shed light
on specific capital market failures that are most important for energy efficiency. The actual
distribution of market interest rates faced by consumers and firms through various lending
mechanisms is critical to identifying the appropriate benchmark market interest rate (or range
30 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

of rates). However, it may be difficult to empirically distinguish capital market failures leading
to high discount rates from a lack of underlying demand for energy-saving technology (Palmer,
Walls, and Gerarden 2012, 29–30).

4.8 Does systematic risk affect the appropriate discount rate for energyefficiency analysis?
The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) presents one way to frame debate about the “correct”
discount rate to use for energy-efficiency analysis (Fama and French 2004). The CAPM provides
a static optimization framework for determining the appropriate hurdle rate for an investment,
based on the risk-free rate of interest, expected returns from a diversified portfolio of assets, and
the normalized covariance between the investment’s returns and that of the diversified portfolio
(β). Optimal investment depends on the opportunity cost of capital, not simply the nominal cost
of capital.
Under the CAPM, a positive (negative) correlation between energy prices and the rest of the
economy would suggest hurdle rates for energy-efficiency investments that are higher (lower) than
the returns on a diversified portfolio. A negative relationship between energy prices and the greater
economy (β < 0) supports the use of low hurdle rates, because energy-efficient investments can
serve as a hedge. One study found such a negative correlation between the consumer price index
for fuels and the S&P 500 index (Metcalf 1994, 820–1). Likewise, more recent research argues
that applying the CAPM to an analysis of vehicle purchases would lower the discount rate due
to the low correlation between annual changes in gasoline prices and market returns (Allcott and
Wozny 2014, 16–7). For some end uses, the correlation between fuel prices and market returns is
artificially low due to regulation. This could also lead to a lower discount rate under the CAPM.
The CAPM may fail as an appropriate benchmark for discount rates for energy-efficiency
investment for two primary reasons. First, the model is not ideal for many energy-efficiency
investments because of the CAPM’s static nature, meaning that the investment choice set,
expected investment returns, and covariances among investments are treated as fixed over time.
In contrast, energy-efficiency investment opportunities, expected returns, and risk relationships
likely vary substantially with technological advance and other exogenous factors. Second, the
CAPM assumes that transaction costs are zero, that the investment can be resold on a secondary
market, and that investors already hold diversified portfolios when considering a new investment
(Sutherland 1991, 28). These assumptions may be tenable in certain contexts (for example, for
sizable businesses), but not in others (for example, for low-income households). Third, the model
has failed numerous empirical tests (Fama and French 2004, 30–7).
On the other hand, the CAPM’s simplicity generates useful intuitions and sharp, testable
predictions that enable researchers to assess its utility for energy-efficiency investments. One
possible approach would be to use observational data on similar investments utilizing different
DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 31

fuels. Prices for various fuels covary heterogeneously with the greater economy. As a result,
investment hurdle rates should vary across fuel types. Estimating and comparing these hurdle rates
could directly test the CAPM in this realm. However, it may be difficult to eliminate correlated
unobservables.

4.9 Can option value help explain the energy-efficiency gap?
Option value—the net benefit of delaying an investment even when the investment’s net present
value is positive—is a general feature of dynamic optimization problems with uncertainty,
irreversible investment, and timing flexibility (Dixit and Pindyck 1994). Consumers and firms
commonly face decision problems of this type when investing in energy-consuming durable goods
with little or no resale value.
This presents an alternative explanation of the energy-efficiency gap: the difference between
apparently optimal investment and observed investment may be due to the option value of waiting.
Failure to account for this option value could bias estimates of the energy-efficiency gap. In an
analysis of irreversible investment in residential energy-efficiency measures under conditions of
energy-price uncertainty, Hassett and Metcalf (1993) explained observed technology adoption
rates without any reference to market failures.39 Potential technological innovation, which would
reduce future adoption costs, can also yield option value for delaying energy-efficiency investments
(Jaffe and Stavins 1995; Ansar and Sparks 2009, 20).
Energy-price uncertainty is important in some industries. Direct computation, reduced form
estimation, and simulation have found large hurdle rates due to energy price volatility based
on observed investment decisions (Diederen, van Tongeren, and van der Veen 2003; Löfgren,
Millock, and Nauges 2008).40 Technological change is the other prominent explanation for
investment delay. Evidence from air conditioner purchases indicates that purchase timing depends
on expectations about future developments in product efficiency (Rapson 2014). Other relevant
sources of uncertainty include future product use, product efficiency, and product life (Greene
2011, 610).
The option value of waiting due to uncertainty regarding future energy prices or technological
change may explain part of the apparently sub-optimal investment in energy-efficient technologies,

39

Sanstad, Blumstein, and Stoft (1995) maintained that the option value analysis of Hassett and Metcalf (1993) suggested an implicit
discount rate much lower than actually observed, even when taking irreversibility into account.

40

In this context, the hurdle rate is the multiplier on the cost of capital that corresponds to the minimum acceptable rate of return for a
project to be undertaken. Diederen, van Tongeren, and van der Veen (2003) find hurdle rates of 1.76 for Dutch greenhouses based on
simulation, and Löfgren, Millock, and Nauges (2008) econometrically estimate hurdle rates of 3.4 to 3.6 for the Swedish energy and
heating sector.

32 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

but probably not a large part in many cases. The option value explanation hinges on four
assumptions: irreversibility, uncertainty, flexible timing, and lumpiness of investment (McDonald
and Siegel 1986, 725). In practice, one or more of these conditions can fail. Not all energy-efficient
investments are irreversible. There are active resale markets for many types of consumer goods and
producer capital. Uncertainty may be irrelevant, as in the case of firms that have long-term energy
procurement contracts in place, which provide price certainty. In other cases, uncertainty may be
relatively unimportant, as in the case of energy-consuming goods with relatively short lifetimes
(for example, light bulbs). Finally, the timing of investments in energy-consuming durables is not
always flexible (for example, replacement of a broken water heater).
One possible way to assess the relative importance of the option value of waiting due to energyprice uncertainty would be to survey consumers and firms directly. The evidence here is mixed.
Energy-price uncertainty ranked fourth out of 15 reported reasons firms did not undertake
energy-efficiency investments recommended by auditors in a survey of small- and medium-sized
businesses (Fleiter, Schleich, and Ravivanpong 2012, 868). On the other hand, a stated choice
experiment in the residential sector revealed a correlation between energy-price uncertainty and a
preference for the status quo over energy-efficiency improvements (Alberini, Banfi, and Ramseier
2013). This result is consistent with the basic prediction of the option value model, but does not
quantify its relative importance.

5. do other unobserved costs inhibit energyefficient decisions?
We now turn to the final term in the cost-minimization equation described in section 1 of this
paper, and ask whether other costs inhibit more energy-efficient decisions. We find that the
empirical evidence in this realm is generally sound, and that needed data for more research are
available. We would assign a relatively high priority to research in this area, particularly research
aimed at better understanding consumer demand (willingness to pay) for product attributes,
which can be useful for the design of better regulatory approaches.

5.1 Do analysts take sufficient account of product attributes?
Products of varying efficiencies differ from each other in ways that are often omitted by engineering
and econometric analysis, potentially contributing to the misidentification of an energy-efficiency
gap. Producers may generate efficiency improvements by trading off other product attributes
for enhanced energy efficiency. In that case, consumers will face opportunity costs of decreased
product quality, in addition to any price change, when considering energy-efficient products.
Ignoring these opportunity costs would bias estimates of consumer choice and welfare, and also
bias estimates of the magnitude of the energy-efficiency gap.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 33

The fundamental problem, in an econometric context, is omitted variable bias. Analyses can
be classified in terms of information sets: (1) attributes observed by both the analyst and the
consumer; (2) attributes observed by the consumer, but not by the analyst; (3) attributes observed
by the analyst, but not the consumer; and (4) attributes observed by neither the analyst nor the
consumer. Both engineering and econometric techniques can recover unbiased estimates in all
cases except the second.
Early engineering-economic studies compared capital investment and lifetime operating costs to
identify cost-effective investments or infer consumer discount rates, disregarding or only partially
correcting for non-energy attributes. The prominent McKinsey & Company study treated compact
fluorescent light bulbs as interchangeable with other forms of lighting (Granade et al. 2009, 52),
thus ignoring a potentially important source of (unobserved) opportunity costs.
In principle, econometric methods can improve on such engineering methods by including
product attributes in analyses of choice data. In practice, however, econometric analysis using
cross-sectional data has been limited by the impracticality of observing and accurately measuring
all product characteristics. These characteristics are typically subsumed into error terms. The
random-coefficients model improved on previous work by modeling unobserved product
attributes separately from individual-specific error terms. An early application found significant
heterogeneity in demand for automobile fuel economy, suggesting small negative willingness to
pay for fuel economy improvements in relatively inefficient vehicles (S. T. Berry, Levinsohn, and
Pakes 1995, 878). This reflects heterogeneity in the distribution of consumer preferences, rather
than systematic undervaluation of fuel economy.
Subsequent research incorporating micro data in the random coefficients estimation strategy
confirmed the importance of heterogeneity, but also found that consumers have a systematic
negative willingness to pay for fuel economy (Petrin 2002, 718). These results were driven in part
by inadequate control for confounding product attributes that are negatively correlated with fuel
economy (for example, weight and horsepower).
Panel data can, in principle, allow researchers to condition on unobserved product attributes that
are time-invariant, using differencing or fixed-effects models. Recent studies of this type provide
limited evidence for an energy-efficiency paradox: some find market equilibria consistent with
correct fuel economy valuation (Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer 2013; Sallee, West, and Fan
2009), while another study finds consumers undervalue fuel savings relative to purchase price
(Allcott and Wozny 2014).
One problem with panel data studies of automobile transactions is that these studies assume away
short-term responses by producers, such as unobservable changes to purchase terms established
during negotiation. Examining other settings could perhaps adjust for this problem; appliance

34 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

attributes, for example, are less susceptible to adjustment by producers in the short run. One
study of appliance purchases using transactions data and geographic variation in operating costs
(that is, electricity prices) found that consumers undervalue operating costs on average (Houde
2014a, 24–5).
Choice experiments offer another possible way to control for unobserved product characteristics.
One approach in a stated-preference context would be to ask subjects to treat all products they
consider as identical in non-energy attributes (Newell and Siikamäki 2014). This holds promise
for stated preference studies, but is obviously infeasible for revealed preference analysis. Analyses
that assess the correlation between energy and non-energy attributes for different products could
help identify where the bias from ignoring non-energy attributes is most likely to be present.

5.2 Do analysts take sufficient account of the costs of implementing energyefficient options?
Omitting any (opportunity) cost of adoption from a comparison of the benefits and costs associated
with a given energy-efficiency technology will contribute to the impression of an energy-efficiency
paradox. Such omitted costs can take many forms, including time spent researching investment
alternatives, unobserved implementation costs, and reallocation of resources within a firm. In
particular, costs that are less easily quantified are more likely to be omitted by analysts (Granade
et al. 2009, 25; Huntington 2011, 8). But these costs may serve as real barriers to investment—
not optimization errors or market failures—and should be included in an unbiased analysis of the
energy-efficiency gap.
Consumers face a set of adoption costs beyond the most obvious costs of a technology’s purchase
price and direct installation charges. For example, homeowners have attributed the decision not to
install or upgrade attic insulation to the hassle of clearing stored items from the attic space (Caird,
Roy, and Herring 2008, 156). A policy experiment in the United Kingdom found that lowering
such costs by offering attic cleaning would increase insulation investments (U.K. Department of
Energy and Climate Change 2013, 4–5). Another study estimated opportunity costs for adopting
thermal insulation to be more than twice the costs of materials and labor (Sharma 2011, 61).
In the commercial and industrial sectors, case studies and survey evidence provide the bulk of
the empirical evidence (Fleiter, Schleich, and Ravivanpong 2012, 864–7), with firms indicating
that production disruptions and inconvenience can preclude investment in energy efficiency
(Rohdin and Thollander 2006; Thollander and Ottosson 2008). Survey respondents also cite lack
of time as a barrier, highlighting the role of opportunity cost in simply considering investments
(Sorrell et al. 2004; Thollander, Danestig, and Rohdin 2007; Schleich 2009; Trianni and Cagno
2012). Furthermore, recipients of industrial energy audits who failed to undertake recommended
investments attributed their decisions to unmeasured costs and risks not considered in the audit
analysis (S. T. Anderson and Newell 2004, 30).

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 35

In principle, there is no reason analysts cannot incorporate these additional costs, but in practice
data and measurement challenges often inhibit their ability to do so. One route forward may be
to treat such costs as unobservables to be recovered through structural estimation techniques.
Experimental and quasi-experimental research designs offer another possible avenue for quantifying
these costs.

6. conclusion
Energy-efficient technologies offer promise for reducing the costs and environmental damages
associated with energy use, but these technologies appear not to be used by consumers and
businesses to the degree that would be justified, even on the basis of their private financial net
benefits. With this in mind, we have examined the “energy paradox,” the apparent reality that
some energy-efficiency technologies that would pay off for adopters are nevertheless not adopted,
as well as the broader phenomenon we characterize as the “energy-efficiency gap,” the apparent
reality that some energy-efficiency technologies that would be socially efficient are not adopted.
The contrast is between private and social optimality, which ultimately has important implications
for the role of various policies, as well as their expected net benefits.
We began by decomposing cost-minimizing energy-efficiency decisions into their fundamental
elements, which allowed us to identify four major questions, the answers to which are germane to
sorting out the causes (and reality or lack thereof ) of the paradox and gap. First, we asked whether
the energy efficiency and associated pricing of products on the market are economically efficient.
To answer this question, we examined the variety of energy-efficient products on the market,
their energy-efficiency levels, and their pricing. Although the theory is clear, empirical evidence
is—in general—quite limited. More data that could facilitate potential future empirical research
are becoming available, although firm-level data are much less plentiful than data on consumers.
We do not see this area as meriting high priority for future research, however, with the exception
of research that evaluates the effectiveness and efficiency of existing energy-efficiency information
policies and examines options for improving these policies.
Second, we asked whether energy operating costs are inefficiently priced and/or understood. Even
if consumers make privately optimal decisions, energy-saving technology may diffuse more slowly
than the socially optimal rate, because of negative externalities. So, even if the energy paradox is
not present, the energy-efficiency gap may be. As in the first realm, the theoretical arguments are
strong. Empirical evidence is considerable, and in many cases data are likely to be available for
additional research. Existing policies appear not to be sufficient from an economic perspective,
suggesting that further research is warranted. Indeed, we ascribe high priority to the pursuit of
research in this realm.
Third, we asked whether product choices are cost-minimizing in present-value terms, or whether
various market failures and/or behavioral phenomena inhibit such cost-minimization. We found

36 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

that the empirical evidence ranges from strong (split incentives/agency issues and inattention/
salience phenomena) to moderate (heuristic decision-making/bounded rationality, systematic
risk, and option value) to weak (learning-by-using, loss aversion, myopia, and capital market
failures). Importantly, here, as elsewhere in our review, the bulk of previous work has focused on
the residential sector and much less attention has been given to the commercial and industrial
sectors. Some areas merit priority for future research, such as empirical analysis of split incentives/
agency issues in areas where efficiency standards are not present, and much more work can be
done in the behavioral realm.
Fourth, we asked whether other unobserved costs may inhibit energy-efficient decisions. We
found that the empirical evidence is generally sound, and that data needed for more research are
available. We assign a relatively high priority to future research, particularly to aid understanding
of consumer demand for product attributes that are correlated with energy efficiency, thereby
informing policy and product development decisions.
Finally, we can ask what these findings have to say about our three categories of explanations for
the apparent underinvestment in energy-efficient technologies relative to the predictions of some
engineering and economic models: (1) market failures, (2) behavioral effects, and (3) modeling
flaws. Potential market-failure explanations include information problems, energy market failures,
capital market failures, and innovation market failures. Potential behavioral explanations include
inattentiveness and salience, myopia and short sightedness, bounded rationality and heuristic
decision-making, prospect theory and reference-point phenomena, and systematically biased
beliefs. Finally, potential modeling flaws include unobserved or understated costs of adoption;
ignored product attributes; heterogeneity in benefits and costs of adoption across potential
adopters; use of incorrect discount rates; and uncertainty, irreversibility, and option value.
It turns out that all three categories of explanations are theoretically sound and that limited
empirical evidence exists for every category as well, although the empirical research is by no means
consistently strong across all of the specific explanations, as we highlight above. The validity of
each of these explanations—and the degree to which each contributes to the energy-efficiency
gap—are relevant for crafting sensible policies, so we hope our review can help inform both future
research and policy. Given the many energy-efficiency policies and programs that are already in
place, we also place a high priority on research that evaluates the effectiveness, cost-effectiveness,
and overall economic efficiency of existing energy-efficiency policies, as well as options for their
improvement.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 37

Figure 1:
Alternative Notions of the Energy-Efficiency Gap

Increasing
Energy
Efficiency
Technologists’
Optimum
Theoretical
Social
Optimum

Eliminate “market
barriers” to energy
efficiency, such as
high discount rates
and inertia, ignore
heterogeneity

Eliminate
environmental
externalities and
market failures in
energy supply

Set aside corrective policies
that cannot be implemented
at acceptable cost

True
Social
Optimum

Economists’
Narrow Optimum

Eliminate market failures in
the market for energyefficient technologies

Baseline

38 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Net effect of corrective
policies that can pass a
benefit/cost test

Increasing Economic Efficiency

References
All references may be viewed and downloaded from an online bibliographic library available to
the public: www.zotero.org/groups/energy_efficiency_gap.
Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber. 2011. “Heterogeneity in Choice Inconsistencies among
the Elderly: Evidence from Prescription Drug Plan Choice.” American Economic Review
101 (3): 377–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.101.3.377.
Abrahamse, Wokje, Linda Steg, Charles Vlek, and Talib Rothengatter. 2007. “The Effect of
Tailored Information, Goal Setting, and Tailored Feedback on Household Energy Use,
Energy-Related Behaviors, and Behavioral Antecedents.” Journal of Environmental
Psychology 27 (4): 265–76. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2007.08.002.
Akerlof, George A. 1970. “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (3): 488–500. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2307/1879431.
———. 1991. “Procrastination and Obedience.” American Economic Review 81 (2): 1–19.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2006817.
Alberini, Anna, Silvia Banfi, and Celine Ramseier. 2013. “Energy Efficiency Investments in
the Home: Swiss Homeowners and Expectations about Future Energy Prices.” Energy
Journal 34 (1). http://dx.doi.org/10.5547/01956574.34.1.3.
Alberini, Anna, Markus Bareit, and Massimo Filippini. 2014. Does the Swiss Car Market
Reward Fuel Efficient Cars? Evidence from Hedonic Pricing Regressions, Matching and
a Regression Discontinuity Design. Working Paper 14/190. Economics Working Paper
Series. Zurich, Switzerland: Center of Economic Research at ETH Zurich. www.cer.ethz.
ch/research/WP-14-190.pdf.
Allcott, Hunt. 2011a. “Social Norms and Energy Conservation.” Journal of Public Economics
95 (9-10): 1082–95. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2011.03.003.
———. 2011b. “Consumers’ Perceptions and Misperceptions of Energy Costs.” American
Economic Review 101 (3): 98–104. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.101.3.98.
———. 2013. “The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and Calibrations from
the Automobile Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (3): 30–66.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/pol.5.3.30.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 39

Allcott, Hunt, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2014. “Energy Policy with
Externalities and Internalities.” Journal of Public Economics 112 (April): 72–88. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.01.004.
Allcott, Hunt, and Todd Rogers. 2014. “The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Behavioral
Interventions: Experimental Evidence from Energy Conservation.” American Economic
Review 104 (10): 3003–37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.10.3003.
Allcott, Hunt, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2013. The Lightbulb Paradox: Evidence from Two
Randomized Experiments. Working Paper 19713. National Bureau of Economic Research.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19713.
Allcott, Hunt, and Nathan Wozny. 2014. “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy
Paradox.” Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (5): 779–95. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/
REST_a_00419.
Alquist, Ron, and Lutz Kilian. 2010. “What Do We Learn from the Price of Crude Oil
Futures?” Journal of Applied Econometrics 25 (4): 539–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
jae.1159.
Ammermueller, Andreas, and Jörn‐Steffen Pischke. 2009. “Peer Effects in European Primary
Schools: Evidence from the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study.” Journal of
Labor Economics 27 (3): 315–48. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/603650.
Anderson, Michael L., and Maximilian Auffhammer. 2013. “Pounds That Kill: The External
Costs of Vehicle Weight.” The Review of Economic Studies 81 (2): 535–71. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/restud/rdt035.
Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee. 2013. “What Do Consumers Believe
about Future Gasoline Prices?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 66
(3): 383–403. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2013.07.002.
Anderson, Soren T., and Richard G. Newell. 2004. “Information Programs for Technology
Adoption: The Case of Energy-Efficiency Audits.” Resource and Energy Economics 26 (1):
27–50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2003.07.001.
Ansar, Jasmin, and Roger Sparks. 2009. “The Experience Curve, Option Value, and the
Energy Paradox.” Energy Policy 37 (3): 1012–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
enpol.2008.10.037.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1962. “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing.” Review of
Economic Studies 29 (3): 155–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2295952.

40 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Attari, Shahzeen Z., Michael L. DeKay, Cliff I. Davidson, and Wändi Bruine de Bruin. 2010.
“Public Perceptions of Energy Consumption and Savings.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 107 (37): 16054–59. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1001509107.
Averch, Harvey, and Leland L. Johnson. 1962. “Behavior of the Firm Under Regulatory
Constraint.” American Economic Review 52 (5): 1052–69. http://www.jstor.org/
stable/1812181.
Axsen, Jonn, Dean C. Mountain, and Mark Jaccard. 2009. “Combining Stated and Revealed
Choice Research to Simulate the Neighbor Effect: The Case of Hybrid-Electric
Vehicles.” Resource and Energy Economics 31 (3): 221–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
reseneeco.2009.02.001.
Ayres, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih. 2013. “Evidence from Two Large Field
Experiments That Peer Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy
Usage.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 29 (5): 992–1022. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/jleo/ews020.
Baird, Sarah, J. Aislinn Bohren, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler. 2014. Designing Experiments
to Measure Spillover Effects. Working Paper 14-006. Penn Institute for Economic
Research, University of Pennsylvania. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=2402749.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. 1992. “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
107 (3): 797–817. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2118364.
Benkard, C. Lanier. 2004. “A Dynamic Analysis of the Market for Wide-Bodied Commercial
Aircraft.” Review of Economic Studies 71 (3): 581–611. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1467-937X.2004.00297.x.
Bento, Antonio M., Shanjun Li, and Kevin Roth. 2012. “Is There an Energy Paradox in Fuel
Economy? A Note on the Role of Consumer Heterogeneity and Sorting Bias.” Economics
Letters 115 (1): 44–48. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2011.09.034.
Berndt, Ernst R., Robert S. Pindyck, and Pierre Azoulay. 2003. “Consumption Externalities
and Diffusion in Pharmaceutical Markets: Antiulcer Drugs.” The Journal of Industrial
Economics 51 (2): 243–70. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-6451.00200.
Berry, Linda G. 1993. “A Review of the Market Penetration of US Residential and Commercial
Demand-Side Management Programmes.” Energy Policy 21 (1): 53–67. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0301-4215(93)90208-W.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 41

Berry, Linda G., and Michael B. Gettings. 1998. “Realization Rates of the National Energy
Audit.” In Thermal Performance of the Exterior Envelopes of Buildings VII Conference,
7–11. http://www.ornl.gov/sci/buildings/2012/1998%20B7%20papers/058_Berry.pdf.
Berry, Steven T., James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market
Equilibrium.” Econometrica 63 (4): 841–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2171802.
Berry, Steven T., and Joel Waldfogel. 2001. “Do Mergers Increase Product Variety? Evidence
from Radio Broadcasting.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3): 1009–25. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1162/00335530152466296.
———. 2010. “Product Quality and Market Size.” Journal of Industrial Economics 58 (1): 1–31.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6451.2010.00404.x.
Blasnik, Michael. 1990. “Attic Insulation Performance, Air Leakage, and Ventilation: Measured
Results in Flat Roof Rowhouses.” In ACEEE 1990 Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in
Buildings, 9.13–19.22. Pacific Grove, CA. www.proctoreng.com/dnld/92040B.pdf.
Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. 2013.
“Does Management Matter? Evidence from India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
128 (1): 1–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjs044.
Blumstein, Carl, Betsy Krieg, Lee Schipper, and Carl York. 1980. “Overcoming Social and
Institutional Barriers to Energy Conservation.” Energy 5 (4): 355–71. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0360-5442(80)90036-5.
Borenstein, Severin. 2005. “The Long-Run Efficiency of Real-Time Electricity Pricing.” Energy
Journal 26 (3). http://dx.doi.org/10.5547/ISSN0195-6574-EJ-Vol26-No3-5.
Boyes, William J. 1976. “An Empirical Examination of the Averch-Johnson Effect.” Economic
Inquiry 14 (1): 25–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7295.1976.tb00374.x.
Brounen, Dirk, and Nils Kok. 2011. “On the Economics of Energy Labels in the Housing
Market.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 62 (2): 166–79. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2010.11.006.
Busse, Meghan R, Christopher R Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. “Are Consumers
Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic Review 103
(1): 220–56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.1.220.

42 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Caird, Sally, Robin Roy, and Horace Herring. 2008. “Improving the Energy Performance of
UK Households: Results from Surveys of Consumer Adoption and Use of Low- and
Zero-Carbon Technologies.” Energy Efficiency 1 (2): 149–66. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s12053-008-9013-y.
Camilleri, Adrian R., and Richard P. Larrick. 2014. “Metric and Scale Design as Choice
Architecture Tools.” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 33 (1): 108–25. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1509/jppm.12.151.
Cardon, James H., and Igal Hendel. 2001. “Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance:
Evidence from the National Medical Expenditure Survey.” RAND Journal of Economics
32 (3): 408–27. www.jstor.org/stable/2696362.
Case, Anne C., and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family
and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths. Working Paper 3705. National Bureau of
Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w3705.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Søren Leth-Petersen, Torben Heien Nielsen, and Tore Olsen.
2014. “Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowdout in Retirement Savings Accounts:
Evidence from Denmark.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3): 1141–1219. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju013.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
Evidence.” American Economic Review 99 (4): 1145–77. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/
aer.99.4.1145.
Chiappori, Pierre‐Andre, Bruno Jullien, Bernard Salanié, and François Salanié. 2006.
“Asymmetric Information in Insurance: General Testable Implications.” RAND Journal of
Economics 37 (4): 783–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-2171.2006.tb00057.x.
Chiappori, Pierre‐Andre, and Bernard Salanie. 2000. “Testing for Asymmetric Information
in Insurance Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 108 (1): 56–78. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/262111.
Choi, Jay Pil. 1997. “Herd Behavior, the ‘Penguin Effect,’ and the Suppression of Informational
Diffusion: An Analysis of Informational Externalities and Payoff Interdependency.”
RAND Journal of Economics 28 (3): 407–25. www.jstor.org/stable/2556022.
Choi, Seok Joon, and Sangsin Kim. 2012. “Why Do Landlords Include Utilities in Rent?
Evidence from the 2000 Housing Discrimination Study (HDS) and the 2002 American
Housing Survey (AHS).” Journal of Housing Economics 21 (1): 28–40. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhe.2012.02.001.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 43

Cicala, Steve. 2014. When Does Regulation Distort Costs? Lessons from Fuel Procurement in U.S.
Electricity Generation. Working Paper 20109. National Bureau of Economic Research.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20109.
Coase, R. H. 1946. “The Marginal Cost Controversy.” Economica 13 (51): 169–82. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2307/2549764.
Cohen, Alma. 2005. “Asymmetric Information and Learning: Evidence from the Automobile
Insurance Market.” Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (2): 197–207. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1162/0034653053970294.
Conley, Timothy G., and Christopher R. Udry. 2010. “Learning about a New Technology:
Pineapple in Ghana.” American Economic Review 100 (1): 35–69. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1257/aer.100.1.35.
Conlisk, John. 1996. “Why Bounded Rationality?” Journal of Economic Literature 34 (2): 669–
700. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2729218.
Coscelli, Andrea, and Matthew Shum. 2004. “An Empirical Model of Learning and Patient
Spillovers in New Drug Entry.” Journal of Econometrics 122 (2): 213–46. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2003.09.002.
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2013. “Energy Conservation ‘nudges’ and
Environmentalist Ideology: Evidence from a Randomized Residential Electricity Field
Experiment.” Journal of the European Economic Association 11 (3): 680–702. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/jeea.12011.
Crawford, Gregory S., and Matthew Shum. 2005. “Uncertainty and Learning in Pharmaceutical
Demand.” Econometrica 73 (4): 1137–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.14680262.2005.00612.x.
Cullen, Joseph. 2013. “Measuring the Environmental Benefits of Wind-Generated Electricity.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (4): 107–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/
pol.5.4.107.
Davis, Lucas W. 2012. “Evaluating the Slow Adoption of Energy Efficient Investments:
Are Renters Less Likely to Have Energy Efficient Appliances?” In The Design and
Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy, edited by Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram.
University of Chicago Press. www.nber.org/chapters/c12130.pdf.

44 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Davis, Lucas W., Alan Fuchs, and Paul Gertler. 2014. “Cash for Coolers: Evaluating a LargeScale Appliance Replacement Program in Mexico.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 6 (4): 207–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/pol.6.4.207.
Davis, Lucas W., and Erich Muehlegger. 2010. “Do Americans Consume Too Little Natural
Gas? An Empirical Test of Marginal Cost Pricing.” RAND Journal of Economics 41 (4):
791–810. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-2171.2010.00121.x.
De Almeida, Edmar Luiz Fagundes. 1998. “Energy Efficiency and the Limits of Market Forces:
The Example of the Electric Motor Market in France.” Energy Policy 26 (8): 643–53.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0301-4215(98)00023-8.
DeCanio, Stephen J. 1993. “Barriers within Firms to Energy-Efficient Investments.” Energy
Policy 21 (9): 906–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0301-4215(93)90178-I.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2006. “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.” American
Economic Review 96 (3): 694–719. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.96.3.694.
Diederen, Paul, Frank van Tongeren, and Hennie van der Veen. 2003. “Returns on Investments
in Energy-Saving Technologies Under Energy Price Uncertainty in Dutch Greenhouse
Horticulture.” Environmental and Resource Economics 24 (4): 379–94. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1023/A:1023617318184.
Dinner, Isaac, Eric J. Johnson, Daniel G. Goldstein, and Kaiya Liu. 2011. “Partitioning Default
Effects: Why People Choose Not to Choose.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied
17 (4): 332–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0024354.
Dixit, Avinash K., and Robert S. Pindyck. 1994. Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton
University Press.
Dubin, Jeffrey A., and Steven E. Henson. 1988. “An Engineering/Econometric Analysis of
Seasonal Energy Demand and Conservation in the Pacific Northwest.” Journal of Business
& Economic Statistics 6 (1): 121–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1391425.
Dubin, Jeffrey A., and Daniel L. McFadden. 1984. “An Econometric Analysis of Residential
Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption.” Econometrica 52 (2): 345–62. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2307/1911493.
Dubin, Jeffrey A., Allen K. Miedema, and Ram V. Chandran. 1986. “Price Effects of EnergyEfficient Technologies: A Study of Residential Demand for Heating and Cooling.”
RAND Journal of Economics 17 (3): 310–25. www.jstor.org/stable/2555713.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 45

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. 2002. “Participation and Investment Decisions in a
Retirement Plan: The Influence of Colleagues’ Choices.” Journal of Public Economics 85
(1): 121–48. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0047-2727(01)00098-6.
Eichholtz, Piet, Nils Kok, and John Quigley. 2010. “Doing Well by Doing Good? Green Office
Buildings.” American Economic Review 100 (5): 2494–2511. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/
aer.100.5.2492.
———. 2012. “The Economics of Green Building.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (1):
50–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00291.
Emerick, Kyle. 2014. “The Efficiency of Trading in Social Networks: Experimental Measures
from India.” UC Berkeley. www.ocf.berkeley.edu/~kemerick/Emerick_Networks.pdf.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 2004. “The Capital Asset Pricing Model: Theory
and Evidence.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18 (3): 25–46. http://www.jstor.org/
stable/3216805.
Faruqui, Ahmad, and Sanem Sergici. 2011. “Dynamic Pricing of Electricity in the MidAtlantic Region: Econometric Results from the Baltimore Gas and Electric Company
Experiment.” Journal of Regulatory Economics 40 (1): 82–109. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11149-011-9152-5.
Finkelstein, Amy, and James Poterba. 2004. “Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets:
Policyholder Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market.” Journal of Political Economy 112
(1): 183–208. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/379936.
———. 2006. Testing for Asymmetric Information Using “Unused Observables” in Insurance
Markets: Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market. Working Paper 12112. National Bureau
of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w12112.
Fischer, Carolyn. 2010. Imperfect Competition, Consumer Behavior, and the Provision of
Fuel Efficiency in Light-Duty Vehicles. Discussion Paper 10-60. Washington, D.C.:
Resources For the Future. www.rff.org/Publications/Pages/PublicationDetails.
aspx?PublicationID=21431.
Fisher, Anthony C., and Michael H. Rothkopf. 1989. “Market Failure and Energy Policy: A
Rationale for Selective Conservation.” Energy Policy 17 (4): 397–406. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0301-4215(89)90010-4.

46 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Fleiter, Tobias, Joachim Schleich, and Ployplearn Ravivanpong. 2012. “Adoption of EnergyEfficiency Measures in SMEs—An Empirical Analysis Based on Energy Audit Data
from Germany.” Energy Policy 51 (December): 863–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
enpol.2012.09.041.
Foster, Andrew D., and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 1995. “Learning by Doing and Learning from
Others: Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture.” Journal of Political
Economy 103 (6): 1176–1209. www.jstor.org/stable/2138708.
———. 2010. “Microeconomics of Technology Adoption.” Annual Review of Economics 2 (1):
395–424. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.economics.102308.124433.
Fowlie, Meredith. 2010. “Emissions Trading, Electricity Restructuring, and Investment in
Pollution Abatement.” American Economic Review 100 (3): 837–69. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1257/aer.100.3.837.
Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstone, and Catherine Wolfram. 2014. “An Experimental
Evaluation of the Weatherization Assistance Program.” In preparation.
Gately, Dermot. 1980. “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of EnergyUsing Durables: Comment.” Bell Journal of Economics 11 (1): 373–74. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2307/3003422.
Gilbert, Richard J., and David M. Newbery. 1994. “The Dynamic Efficiency of Regulatory
Constitutions.” RAND Journal of Economics 25 (4): 538–54. www.jstor.org/
stable/2555974.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Matthew Harding, and David Rapson. 2012. “Split Incentives in
Residential Energy Consumption.” Energy Journal 33 (2): 37–62. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5547/01956574.33.2.3.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard G. Newell, and Karen L. Palmer. 2009. “Energy Efficiency
Economics and Policy.” Annual Review of Resource Economics 1 (June): 597–620. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.resource.102308.124234.
Gillingham, Kenneth, and Karen L. Palmer. 2014. “Bridging the Energy Efficiency Gap: Policy
Insights from Economic Theory and Empirical Evidence.” Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 8 (1): 18–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/reep/ret021.
Giraudet, Louis-Gaëtan, and Sébastien Houde. 2014. Double Moral Hazard and the Energy
Efficiency Gap. Working Paper 9. Berkeley, California: Evidence for Action on Energy
Efficiency (E2e). http://e2e.haas.berkeley.edu/pdf/workingpapers/WP009.pdf.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 47

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou. 1998. “The Effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency
Standards in the US.” Journal of Industrial Economics 46 (1): 1–33. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/1467-6451.00059.
Goldstein, Noah J., Robert B. Cialdini, and Vladas Griskevicius. 2008. “A Room with a
Viewpoint: Using Social Norms to Motivate Environmental Conservation in Hotels.”
Journal of Consumer Research 35 (3): 472–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/586910.
Granade, Hannah Choi, John Creyts, Anton Derkach, Philip Farese, Scott Nyquist, and Ken
Ostrowski. 2009. Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the U.S. Economy. McKinsey & Company.
www.mckinsey.com/client_service/electric_power_and_natural_gas/latest_thinking/
unlocking_energy_efficiency_in_the_us_economy.
Greene, David L. 2011. “Uncertainty, Loss Aversion, and Markets for Energy Efficiency.” Energy
Economics 33 (4): 608–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2010.08.009.
Greene, David L., David H. Evans, and John Hiestand. 2013. “Survey Evidence on the
Willingness of U.S. Consumers to Pay for Automotive Fuel Economy.” Energy Policy 61
(October): 1539–50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.05.050.
Greening, Lorna A., David L. Greene, and Carmen Difiglio. 2000. “Energy Efficiency and
Consumption - the Rebound Effect - a Survey.” Energy Policy 28 (6-7): 389–401. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0301-4215(00)00021-5.
Griliches, Zvi. 1957. “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological
Change.” Econometrica 25 (4): 501–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1905380.
———. 1992. “The Search for R&D Spillovers.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94
(Supplement: Proceedings of a Symposium on Productivity Concepts and Measurement
Problems: Welfare, Quality and Productivity in the Service Industries): S29–47. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2307/3440244.
Grubb, Michael D. 2009. “Selling to Overconfident Consumers.” American Economic Review 99
(5): 1770–1807. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.5.1770.
Hall, Bronwyn H, Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen. 2010. “Measuring the Returns to
R & D.” In Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, edited by Bronwyn H. Hall and
Nathan Rosenberg, 2:1033–82. Amsterdam and Boston: Elsevier B.V. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0169-7218(10)02008-3.

48 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Hall, Bronwyn H., and Nathan Rosenberg, eds. 2010. Handbook of the Economics of
Innovation. Amsterdam and Boston: Elsevier. www.sciencedirect.com/science/
handbooks/22108807/2/supp/C.
Hall, Robert. 1997. The Inkjet Aftermarket: An Economic Analysis. Stanford University. http://
www.stanford.edu/~rehall/Inkjet%20Aftermarket%201997.pdf.
Hardisty, David J., Kirstin C. Appelt, and Elke U. Weber. 2013. “Good or Bad, We Want It
Now: Fixed-Cost Present Bias for Gains and Losses Explains Magnitude Asymmetries
in Intertemporal Choice.” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 26 (4): 348–61. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/bdm.1771.
Hassett, Kevin A., and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 1993. “Energy Conservation Investment: Do
Consumers Discount the Future Correctly?” Energy Policy 21 (6): 710–16. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0301-4215(93)90294-P.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1979. “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization
of Energy-Using Durables.” Bell Journal of Economics 10 (1): 33. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2307/3003318.
Hausman, Jerry A., and Paul L. Joskow. 1982. “Evaluating the Costs and Benefits of Appliance
Efficiency Standards.” American Economic Review 72 (2): 220–25. www.jstor.org/
stable/1802332.
Heath, Chip, Richard P. Larrick, and George Wu. 1999. “Goals as Reference Points.” Cognitive
Psychology 38 (1): 79–109. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/cogp.1998.0708.
Helfand, Gloria, and Ann Wolverton. 2011. “Evaluating the Consumer Response to Fuel
Economy: A Review of the Literature.” International Review of Environmental and
Resource Economics 5 (2): 103–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/101.00000040.
Heutel, Garth, and Erich Muehlegger. 2014. “Consumer Learning and Hybrid Vehicle
Adoption.” Environmental and Resource Economics, August. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10640-014-9819-3.
Hirst, Eric. 1986. “Actual Energy Savings after Retrofit: Electrically Heated Homes in
the Pacific Northwest.” Energy 11 (3): 299–308. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/03605442(86)90088-5.
Hossain, Tanjim, and John Morgan. 2006. “...Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue (Non)
Equivalence in Field Experiments on eBay.” Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy 5 (2).
http://dx.doi.org/10.2202/1538-0637.1429.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 49

Houde, Sébastien. 2014a. How Consumers Respond to Environmental Certification and the Value
of Energy Information. Working Paper 20019. National Bureau of Economic Research.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20019.
———. 2014b. Bunching with the Stars: How Firms Respond to Environmental Certification.
Working Paper. University of Maryland. http://terpconnect.umd.edu/~shoude/
EnergyStarFirmsHoude_May2014.pdf.
Howarth, Richard B., and Bo Andersson. 1993. “Market Barriers to Energy Efficiency.” Energy
Economics 15 (4): 262–72. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0140-9883(93)90016-K.
Howarth, Richard B., Brent M. Haddad, and Bruce Paton. 2000. “The Economics of Energy
Efficiency: Insights from Voluntary Participation Programs.” Energy Policy 28 (6-7):
477–86. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0301-4215(00)00026-4.
Huntington, Hillard G. 2011. “The Policy Implications of Energy-Efficiency Cost Curves.”
Energy Journal 32 (Special Issue: Strategies for Mitigating Climate Change Through
Energy Efficiency: A Multi-Model Perspective): 7–21. http://dx.doi.org/10.5547/
ISSN0195-6574-EJ-Vol32-NoSI-2.
IEA. 2007. Mind the Gap: Quantifying Principal-Agent Problems in Energy Efficiency. Paris:
International Energy Agency. www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/
mind_the_gap.pdf.
IMF. 2013. Energy Subsidy Reform: Lessons and Implications. Washington, D.C.: International
Monetary Fund. www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/012813.pdf.
Irwin, Douglas A., and Peter J. Klenow. 1994. “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the
Semiconductor Industry.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (6): 1200–1227. www.jstor.
org/stable/2138784.
Ito, Koichiro. 2014. “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from
Nonlinear Electricity Pricing.” American Economic Review 104 (2): 537–63. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.2.537.
Ito, Koichiro, Takanori Ida, and Makoto Tanaka. 2014. “The Persistence of Moral Suasion and
Monetary Incentives: Experimental Evidence from Energy Demand.” http://people.
bu.edu/ito/Ito_Ida_Tanaka_Moral_Money.pdf.
Jaffe, Adam B., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins. 2002. “Environmental Policy and
Technological Change.” Environmental and Resource Economics 22 (1-2): 41–70. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1015519401088.

50 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

———. 2005. “A Tale of Two Market Failures: Technology and Environmental
Policy.” Ecological Economics 54 (2-3): 164–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolecon.2004.12.027.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Robert N. Stavins. 1994a. “The Energy Paradox and the Diffusion of
Conservation Technology.” Resource and Energy Economics 16 (2): 91–122. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0928-7655(94)90001-9.
———. 1994b. “The Energy-Efficiency Gap: What Does It Mean?” Energy Policy 22 (10):
804–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0301-4215(94)90138-4.
———. 1995. “Dynamic Incentives of Environmental Regulations: The Effects of Alternative
Policy Instruments on Technology Diffusion.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 29 (3): 43–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jeem.1995.1060.
Janakiraman, Ramkumar, Catarina Sismeiro, and Shantanu Dutta. 2009. “Perception Spillovers
Across Competing Brands: A Disaggregate Model of How and When.” Journal of
Marketing Research 46 (4): 467–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.46.4.467.
Jessoe, Katrina, and David Rapson. 2014. “Knowledge Is (Less) Power: Experimental Evidence
from Residential Energy Use.” American Economic Review 104 (4): 1417–38. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.4.1417.
Jessoe, Katrina, David Rapson, and Jeremy Blair Smith. 2014. “Towards Understanding the
Role of Price in Residential Electricity Choices: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.”
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 107 (Part A): 191–208. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jebo.2014.03.009.
Joskow, Paul L., and Donald B. Marron. 1993. “What Does Utility-Subsidized Energy
Efficiency Really Cost?” Science 260 (5106): 281–370. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.260.5106.281.
Joskow, Paul L., and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2012. “Dynamic Pricing of Electricity.” American
Economic Review 102 (3): 381–85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.3.381.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1982. “Truthful Disclosure of Information.” Bell Journal of Economics 13 (1):
36–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3003428.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
Risk.” Econometrica 47 (2): 263–91. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1914185.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 51

Kamien, Morton I., and Nancy L. Schwartz. 1982. Market Structure and Innovation. Cambridge
University Press.
Koomey, Jonathan G., Alan H. Sanstad, and Leslie J. Shown. 1996. “Energy-Efficient Lighting:
Market Data, Market Imperfections, and Policy Success.” Contemporary Economic Policy
14 (3): 98–111. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7287.1996.tb00627.x.
Kőszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin. 2006. “A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (4): 1133–65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
qje/121.4.1133.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112 (2): 443–77. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/003355397555253.
Langer, Ashley, and Nathan H. Miller. 2012. “Automakers’ Short-Run Responses to Changing
Gasoline Prices.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (4): 1198–1211. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1162/REST_a_00297.
Larrick, Richard P., and Jack B. Soll. 2008. “The MPG Illusion.” Science 320 (5883): 1593–94.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1154983.
Levinson, Arik, and Scott Niemann. 2004. “Energy Use by Apartment Tenants When
Landlords Pay for Utilities.” Resource and Energy Economics 26 (1): 51–75. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0928-7655(03)00047-2.
Levitt, Steven D., John A. List, and Chad Syverson. 2013. “Toward an Understanding of
Learning by Doing: Evidence from an Automobile Assembly Plant.” Journal of Political
Economy 121 (4): 643–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/671137.
Lewis, Gregory. 2011. “Asymmetric Information, Adverse Selection and Online Disclosure:
The Case of eBay Motors.” American Economic Review 101 (4): 1535–46. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1257/aer.101.4.1535.
Lieberman, Marvin B. 1984. “The Learning Curve and Pricing in the Chemical Processing
Industries.” RAND Journal of Economics 15 (2): 213–28. www.jstor.org/stable/2555676.
Lim, Claire, and Ali Yurukoglu. 2014. “Dynamic Natural Monopoly Regulation: Time
Inconsistency, Asymmetric Information, and Political Environments.” http://web.
stanford.edu/~ayurukog/main_infrastructure.pdf.
Loewenstein, George, and Richard H Thaler. 1989. “Anomalies: Intertemporal Choice.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 3 (4): 181–93. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/jep.3.4.181.

52 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Löfgren, Åsa, Katrin Millock, and Céline Nauges. 2008. “The Effect of Uncertainty on Pollution
Abatement Investments: Measuring Hurdle Rates for Swedish Industry.” Resource and
Energy Economics 30 (4): 475–91. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2008.09.002.
Manski, Charles F. 1993a. “Dynamic Choice in Social Settings: Learning from the Experiences
of Others.” Journal of Econometrics 58 (1–2): 121–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/03044076(93)90115-L.
———. 1993b. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem.” The
Review of Economic Studies 60 (3): 531–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2298123.
———. 2004. “Measuring Expectations.” Econometrica 72 (5): 1329–76. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1468-0262.2004.00537.x.
Maruejols, Lucie, and Denise Young. 2011. “Split Incentives and Energy Efficiency in Canadian
Multi-Family Dwellings.” Energy Policy 39 (6): 3655–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
enpol.2011.03.072.
Mau, Paulus, Jimena Eyzaguirre, Mark Jaccard, Colleen Collins-Dodd, and Kenneth
Tiedemann. 2008. “The ‘Neighbor Effect’: Simulating Dynamics in Consumer
Preferences for New Vehicle Technologies.” Ecological Economics 68 (1–2): 504–16.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2008.05.007.
McDonald, Robert, and Daniel Siegel. 1986. “The Value of Waiting to Invest.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 101 (4): 707–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1884175.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 1994. “Economics and Rational Conservation Policy.” Energy Policy 22 (10):
819–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0301-4215(94)90140-6.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., and Kevin A. Hassett. 1999. “Measuring the Energy Savings from Home
Improvement Investments: Evidence from Monthly Billing Data.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 81 (3): 516–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/003465399558274.
Muller, Nicholas Z., and Robert Mendelsohn. 2009. “Efficient Pollution Regulation:
Getting the Prices Right.” American Economic Review 99 (5): 1714–39. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1257/aer.99.5.1714.
Murphy, Rose, and Mark Jaccard. 2011. “Energy Efficiency and the Cost of GHG Abatement:
A Comparison of Bottom-up and Hybrid Models for the US.” Energy Policy 39 (11):
7146–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.08.033.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 53

Murtishaw, Scott, and Jayant Sathaye. 2006. Quantifying the Effect of the Principal-Agent
Problem on US Residential Energy Use. LBNL-59773. Berkeley, California: Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory. http://escholarship.org/uc/item/6f14t11t#page-1.
Myers, Erica. 2013. Asymmetric Information in Residential Rental Markets: Implications for the
Energy Efficiency Gap. Working Paper 246. Energy Institute at Haas, UC Berkeley.
http://ei.haas.berkeley.edu/pdf/working_papers/WP246.pdf.
Nadel, Steven, and Kenneth Keating. 1991. Engineering Estimates vs. Impact Evaluation Results:
How Do They Compare and Why? Research Report U915. Washington, D.C.: American
Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. www.aceee.org/research-report/u915.
Narayanan, Sridhar, and Harikesh S. Nair. 2013. “Estimating Causal Installed-Base Effects: A
Bias-Correction Approach.” Journal of Marketing Research 50 (1): 70–94. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1509/jmr.11.0183.
National Research Council. 2010. Hidden Costs of Energy: Unpriced Consequences of Energy
Production and Use. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. www.nap.edu/
catalog.php?record_id=12794.
Naughton, Michael C. 1986. “The Efficiency and Equity Consequences of Two-Part Tariffs in
Electricity Pricing.” Review of Economics and Statistics 68 (3): 406–14. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2307/1926017.
Newell, Richard G., Adam B. Jaffe, and Robert N. Stavins. 1999. “The Induced Innovation
Hypothesis and Energy-Saving Technological Change.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 114 (3): 941–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/003355399556188.
Newell, Richard G., and Juha Siikamäki. 2014. “Nudging Energy Efficiency Behavior: The
Role of Information Labels.” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
Economists 1 (4): 555–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/679281.
Nordhaus, William. 2011. “Designing a Friendly Space for Technological Change to Slow
Global Warming.” Energy Economics 33 (4): 665–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
eneco.2010.08.005.
O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 2006. “Optimal Sin Taxes.” Journal of Public Economics
90 (10–11): 1825–49. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2006.03.001.
Ostertag, Katrin. 2003. No-Regret Potentials in Energy Conservation: An Analysis of Their
Relevance, Size and Determinants. Series of the Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and
Innovation Research 15. Heidelberg, Germany: Physica-Verlag.

54 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Palmer, Karen L., Margaret Walls, and Todd Gerarden. 2012. Borrowing to Save Energy: An
Assessment of Energy-Efficiency Financing Programs. Washington, D.C.: Resources for the
Future. http://www.rff.org/RFF/Documents/RFF-Rpt-Palmeretal%20EEFinancing.pdf.
Palmer, Karen L., Margaret Walls, Hal Gordon, and Todd Gerarden. 2013. “Assessing the
Energy-Efficiency Information Gap: Results from a Survey of Home Energy Auditors.”
Energy Efficiency 6 (2): 271–92. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12053-012-9178-2.
Papineau, Maya. 2014. Energy Codes and the Landlord-Tenant Problem. Working Paper. Carleton
University. https://drive.google.com/viewerng/r?a=v&pid=sites&srcid=ZGVmYXVsdGR
vbWFpbnxtYXlhcGFwaW5lYXV8Z3g6NGM4Y2I2ODVjNGUwNzlmMQ.
Parry, Ian W. H, Margaret Walls, and Winston Harrington. 2007. “Automobile Externalities
and Policies.” Journal of Economic Literature 45 (2): 373–99. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/
jel.45.2.373.
Petrin, Amil. 2002. “Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan.”
Journal of Political Economy 110 (4): 705–29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/340779.
Phillips, Yvonne. 2012. “Landlords versus Tenants: Information Asymmetry and Mismatched
Preferences for Home Energy Efficiency.” Energy Policy 45 (June): 112–21. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.01.067.
Popp, David. 2002. “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices.” American Economic Review 92 (1):
160–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/000282802760015658.
Popp, David, Richard G. Newell, and Adam B. Jaffe. 2010. “Energy, the Environment, and
Technological Change.” In Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, edited by Bronwyn
H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg, 2:873–937. Amsterdam and Boston: Elsevier. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-7218(10)02005-8.
Puller, Steven L., and Jeremy West. 2013. “Efficient Retail Pricing in Electricity and Natural
Gas Markets.” American Economic Review 103 (3): 350–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/
aer.103.3.350.
Rapson, David. 2014. “Durable Goods and Long-Run Electricity Demand: Evidence from Air
Conditioner Purchase Behavior.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
68 (1): 141–60. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2014.04.003.
Rohdin, P., and P. Thollander. 2006. “Barriers to and Driving Forces for Energy Efficiency in
the Non-Energy Intensive Manufacturing Industry in Sweden.” Energy 31 (12): 1836–
44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2005.10.010.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 55

Sallee, James M. 2013. Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency. Working Paper 19545.
National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w19545.
Sallee, James M., and Joel Slemrod. 2012. “Car Notches: Strategic Automaker Responses to
Fuel Economy Policy.” Journal of Public Economics 96 (11–12): 981–99. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2012.06.005.
Sallee, James M., Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan. 2009. “Consumer Valuation of Fuel Economy: A
Microdata Approach.” Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Taxation, June, 254–59.
Sanstad, Alan H., Carl Blumstein, and Steven E. Stoft. 1995. “How High Are Option Values
in Energy-Efficiency Investments?” Energy Policy 23 (9): 739–43. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0301-4215(95)00065-Q.
Sanstad, Alan H., W. Michael Hanemann, and Maximilian Auffhammer. 2006. “End-Use
Energy Efficiency in a ‘post- Carbon’ California Economy.” In Managing Greenhouse
Gas Emissions in California, edited by W. Michael Hanemann and Alexander E. Farrell.
Berkeley, CA: The California Climate Change Center at UC Berkeley.
Sanstad, Alan H., and Richard B. Howarth. 1994. “Consumer Rationality and Energy
Efficiency.” In Proceedings of the ACEEE, 1.175–1.183. https://www.aceee.org/files/
proceedings/1994/data/papers/SS94_Panel1_Paper21.pdf.
Schleich, Joachim. 2009. “Barriers to Energy Efficiency: A Comparison across the German
Commercial and Services Sector.” Ecological Economics 68 (7): 2150–59. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2009.02.008.
Schultz, P. Wesley, Jessica M. Nolan, Robert B. Cialdini, Noah J. Goldstein, and Vladas
Griskevicius. 2007. “The Constructive, Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of
Social Norms.” Psychological Science 18 (5): 429–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.14679280.2007.01917.x.
Sebold, Frederick, and Eric Fox. 1985. “Realized Savings from Residential Conservation
Activity.” The Energy Journal 6 (2): 73–88. http://dx.doi.org/10.5547/ISSN0195-6574EJ-Vol6-No2-6.
Shaked, Avner, and John Sutton. 1987. “Product Differentiation and Industrial Structure.”
Journal of Industrial Economics 36 (2): 131–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2098408.
Shama, Avraham. 1983. “Energy Conservation in US Buildings: Solving the High Potential/low
Adoption Paradox from a Behavioural Perspective.” Energy Policy 11 (2): 148–67. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0301-4215(83)90027-7.

56 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Sharma, Dhruv N. 2011. “Economic Efficiency and Distributional Impacts of Policies for
Increasing U.S. Residential Insulation.” Ph.D., Stanford University. http://search.
proquest.com/docview/907105902/abstract?accountid=11311.
Sorrell, Steve, John Dimitropoulos, and Matt Sommerville. 2009. “Empirical Estimates of
the Direct Rebound Effect: A Review.” Energy Policy 37 (4): 1356–71. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.enpol.2008.11.026.
Sorrell, Steve, Eoin O’Malley, Joachim Schleich, and Sue Scott. 2004. The Economics of Energy
Efficiency: Barriers to Cost-Effective Investment. Chapter 5, “Standing on a Burning
Platform: Barriers to Energy Efficiency in the UK Brewing Industry,” 349. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Spann, Robert M. 1974. “Rate of Return Regulation and Efficiency in Production: An
Empirical Test of the Averch-Johnson Thesis.” Bell Journal of Economics and Management
Science 5 (1): 38–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3003091.
Spence, A. Michael. 1975. “Monopoly, Quality, and Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics 6
(2): 417–29. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3003237.
———. 1976. “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition.” The Review of
Economic Studies 43 (2): 217–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2297319.
———. 1981. “The Learning Curve and Competition.” Bell Journal of Economics 12 (1): 49–70.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3003508.
Sutherland, Ronald J. 1991. “Market Barriers to Energy-Efficiency Investments.” Energy Journal
12 (3): 15–34. www.jstor.org/stable/41322426.
Ternes, Mark P., and Michael B. Gettings. 2008. Analyses to Verify and Improve the Accuracy
of the Manufactured Home Energy Audit (MHEA). Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL). http://weatherization.ornl.gov/pdfs/ORNL_CON-506.pdf.
Thaler, Richard. 1985. “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice.” Marketing Science 4 (3):
199–214. www.jstor.org/stable/183904.
Thollander, Patrik, Maria Danestig, and Patrik Rohdin. 2007. “Energy Policies for
Increased Industrial Energy Efficiency: Evaluation of a Local Energy Programme for
Manufacturing SMEs.” Energy Policy 35 (11): 5774–83. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
enpol.2007.06.013.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 57

Thollander, Patrik, and Mikael Ottosson. 2008. “An Energy Efficient Swedish Pulp and Paper
Industry – Exploring Barriers to and Driving Forces for Cost-Effective Energy Efficiency
Investments.” Energy Efficiency 1 (1): 21–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12053-0079001-7.
Thornton, Rebecca Achee, and Peter Thompson. 2001. “Learning from Experience and Learning
from Others: An Exploration of Learning and Spillovers in Wartime Shipbuilding.”
American Economic Review 91 (5): 1350–68. www.jstor.org/stable/2677929.
Tietenberg, Tom. 2009. “Reflections– Energy Efficiency Policy: Pipe Dream or Pipeline to the
Future.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3 (2): 304–20. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/reep/rep004.
Tonn, Bruce, and Linda G. Berry. 1986. “Determinants of Participation in Home Energy Audit/
loan Programs: Discrete Choice Model Results.” Energy 11 (8): 785–95. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0360-5442(86)90017-4.
Train, Kenneth. 1985. “Discount Rates in Consumers’ Energy-Related Decisions: A Review
of the Literature.” Energy 10 (12): 1243–53. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/03605442(85)90135-5.
Trianni, A., and E. Cagno. 2012. “Dealing with Barriers to Energy Efficiency and SMEs:
Some Empirical Evidences.” Energy 37 (1): 494–504. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2011.11.005.
Turrentine, Thomas S., and Kenneth S. Kurani. 2007. “Car Buyers and Fuel Economy?” Energy
Policy 35 (2): 1213–23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2006.03.005.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1981. “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of
Choice.” Science 211 (4481): 453–58. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.7455683.
———. 1991. “Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference-Dependent Model.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 106 (4): 1039–61. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2937956.
———. 1992. “Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of Uncertainty.”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5 (4): 297–323. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00122574.
U.K. Department of Energy and Climate Change. 2013. Removing the Hassle Factor Associated
with Loft Insulation: Results of a Behavioural Trial. London. https://www.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/236858/DECC_loft_
clearance_trial_report_final.pdf.

58 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

Ungemach, C, Adrian R. Camilleri, E.J. Johnson, Richard P. Larrick, and Elke U. Weber. 2013.
Translated Attributes as a Choice Architecture Tool: Trick and Treat. Summary of Working
Paper. http://adriancamilleri.net/wp-content/uploads/Camilleri-et-al.-2013.-JPPMextended-abstract.pdf?770196.
U.S. Department of Energy. 1991. National Energy Strategy: Powerful Ideas for America. 1st ed.
Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Energy.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2015. “Learn About the New Label.” www.
fueleconomy.gov/feg/label.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration. 2011. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards and Fuel Efficiency
Standards for Medium- and Heavy-Duty Engines and Vehicles; Final Rule.” Federal
Register 76 (179). http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2011-09-15/pdf/2011-20740.pdf.
Verboven, Frank. 2002. “Quality-Based Price Discrimination and Tax Incidence: Evidence from
Gasoline and Diesel Cars.” RAND Journal of Economics 33 (2): 275–97. www.jstor.org/
stable/3087434.
Walls, Margaret, Karen L. Palmer, and Todd Gerarden. 2013. Is Energy Efficiency
Capitalized into Home Prices? Evidence from Three US Cities. Discussion Paper 13-18.
Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future. http://www.rff.org/Publications/Pages/
PublicationDetails.aspx?PublicationID=22230.
Weber, Elke U., E. J. Johnson, K. F. Milch, H. Chang, J. C. Brodscholl, and D. G.
Goldstein. 2007. “Asymmetric Discounting in Intertemporal Choice: A Query-Theory
Account.” Psychological Science 18 (6): 516–23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.14679280.2007.01932.x.
Weber, Elke U., and Eric J. Johnson. 2009. “Mindful Judgment and Decision Making.”
Annual Review of Psychology 60: 53–85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
psych.60.110707.163633.
Wood, Gavin, Rachel Ong, and Clinton McMurray. 2012. “Housing Tenure, Energy
Consumption and the Split-Incentive Issue in Australia.” International Journal of Housing
Policy 12 (4): 439–69. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14616718.2012.730218.
Zivin, Joshua Graff, Matthew Kotchen, and Erin T. Mansur. 2012. Spatial and Temporal
Heterogeneity of Marginal Emissions: Implications for Electric Cars and Other ElectricityShifting Policies. Working Paper 18462. National Bureau of Economic Research. http://
www.nber.org/papers/w18462.

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 59

Start

End

Mins.

Evaluating the Energy Efficiency Gap: A Research Workshop Conducted by:
Duke University Energy Initiative & Harvard Environmental Economics Program
Supported by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
AGENDA
Speaker(s)

Topic; questions from "framework for
understanding"

Question 2

DAY 1 (Thursday, October 24, 2013)
9:00 AM

9:45 AM

45 Newell; Stavins Self introductions; framing presentations

1. Are product market offerings and
pricing economically efficient?
9:45 AM

10:00 AM

15 Busse

1.a) Are there too few EE alternatives, is
1.b) Are there too few new
their EE too low, or are they priced too high EE offerings due to
due to market power?
consumer taste spillovers?

10:00 AM

10:10 AM

10 Levinson

10:10 AM

10:30 AM

20

1.c) Do asymmetric information and/or
lemons problems inhibit EE?
Response & discussion

10:30 AM

10:45 AM

15

Break

10:45 AM

11:00 AM

15 Gillingham

1.d) Are current prices of EE products too
high due to technology spillovers (R&D and
LBD)?

11:00 AM

11:30 AM

30

Response & open discussion

2. Are energy operating costs inefficiently
priced and/or understood?
11:30 AM

11:40 AM

10 Anderson

2.a) Are gasoline prices too low due to
unpriced externalities?

11:40 AM

11:50 AM

10 Palmer

2.b) Are electricity prices too low due to
unpriced externalities?

11:50 AM

12:05 PM

15

Response & discussion

12:05 PM

12:50 PM

45

Lunch

12:50 PM

1:00 PM

10 Wolfram

2.c) Are electricity prices too low due to
regulation?

1:00 PM

1:15 PM

15

Response & discussion

1:15 PM

1:25 PM

10 Sallee

2.d) Are beliefs about current and future
fuel prices and/or usage systematically
uninformed or biased downward?

60 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

1.e) Is there inadequate
consumer information on
available EE product
offerings?

End

Mins.

Start

Speaker(s)

Topic; questions from "framework for
understanding"

Question 2

DAY 1 (cont.)
1:25 PM

1:35 PM

10 Rapson

2.e) Are beliefs about current and future
electricity prices and/or usage
systematically uninformed or biased
downward?

1:35 PM

1:50 PM

15

Response & discussion

1:50 PM

2:05 PM

15 Fowlie

2.f) Do EE analysts systematically
overestimate energy savings from EE?

2:05 PM

2:45 PM

40

Response & open discussion

2:45 PM

3:00 PM

15

Break

2.g) Do EE analysts take
insufficient account of
heterogeneity in EE savings,
resulting in overstating the
average benefits of EE?

4. Do other costs inhibit more energyefficient decisions?
3:00 PM

3:15 PM

15 Houde

4.a) Do EE analysts take sufficient account of 4.b) Do EE analysts take
product attributes that are inferior for EE
sufficient account of other
products?
costs of implementing EE
options?

3:15 PM

3:45 PM

30

Response & open discussion

3. Are product choices cost-minimizing in
present-value terms?
3:45 PM

3:55 PM

10 Davis

3.a) Do split incentives/agency issues inhibit
more energy-efficient decisions?

3:55 PM

4:05 PM

10 Aufhammer

3.b) Does learning-by-using inhibit more
energy-efficient decisions?

4:05 PM

4:20 PM

15

Response & discussion

4:20 PM

4:30 PM

10 Pindyck

3.h) Do EE analysts use discount rates that
are on average too low, given heterogeneity
in discount rates across consumers?

4:30 PM

5:00 PM

30

Response & discussion

6:30 PM

9:00 PM

Reception and dinner; Le Meridien Hotel

DUKE UNIVERSITY ENERGY INITIATIVE • HARVARD ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS PROGRAM » 61

End

Mins.

Start

Speaker(s)

Topic; questions from "framework for
understanding"

Question 2

DAY 2 (Friday, October 25, 2013)
8:30 AM

8:45 AM

15 Newell; Stavins Intro remarks; summary of previous day

3. Are product choices cost-minimizing in
present-value terms? (cont.)
8:45 AM

9:00 AM

15 Metcalf

3.i) To what extent can option value (due to
uncertainty or technological change) affect
EE decisions? Is this taken into account by EE
analysts?

9:00 AM

9:15 AM

15

Response & discussion

9:15 AM

9:45 AM

30 Allcott;
Larrick

3.c) Does inattention to and/or a lack
salience of energy use/operating costs
inhibit more energy-efficient decisions?

9:45 AM

9:55 AM

10 Allcott;
Larrick

3.e) Does heuristic decision making and/or
bounded rationality inhibit more energyefficient decisions?

9:55 AM

10:15 AM

20

Response & discussion

10:15 AM

10:30 AM

15

Break

10:30 AM

11:00 AM

30 Knittel (3.f-g);
Weber (3.f)

3.f) Does myopia/short-sightedness inhibit
more energy-efficient decisions?

11:00 AM

12:00 PM

60

Response & final discussion

62 « ASSESSING THE ENERGY-EFFICIENCY GAP

3.j) To what extent can
systematic risk affect
energy-efficient decisions?
Is this taken into account by
energy-efficient analysts?

3.d) Do issues with lossaversion or reference points
inhibit more energyefficient decisions?

3.g) To what degree do
capital market
failures/liquidity constraints
influence consumer
discount rates?

