                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            CLIMATE SENSITIVITY UNCERTAINTY:
                                WHEN IS GOOD NEWS BAD?

                                           Mark C. Freeman
                                            Gernot Wagner
                                         Richard J. Zeckhauser

                                         Working Paper 20900
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20900


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2015




We thank Katherine Rittenhouse for excellent research assistance and Michael Aziz, Howard Kunreuther,
Chuck Mason, Ilissa Ocko, Michael Oppenheimer, Daniel Schrag, Katheline Schubert, Thomas Sterner,
Martin Weitzman, Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins, and seminar participants at Duke, Harvard, the University
of Gothenburg, the University of Minnesota, the 2014 American Economic Association meetings,
and the 2014 World Congress of Environmental and Resource Economists for comments and discussions.
All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛˛˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mark C. Freeman, Gernot Wagner, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Climate Sensitivity Uncertainty: When is Good News Bad?
Mark C. Freeman, Gernot Wagner, and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 20900
January 2015
JEL No. D81,Q54

                                              ABSTRACT

Climate change is real and dangerous. Exactly how bad it will get, however, is uncertain. Uncertainty
is particularly relevant for estimates of one of the key parameters: equilibrium climate sensitivity—how
eventual temperatures will react as atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations double. Despite significant
advances in climate science and increased confidence in the accuracy of the range itself, the “likely”
range has been 1.5-4.5°C for over three decades. In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) narrowed it to 2-4.5°C, only to reverse its decision in 2013, reinstating the prior range.
In addition, the 2013 IPCC report removed prior mention of 3°C as the “best estimate.”

We interpret the implications of the 2013 IPCC decision to lower the bottom of the range and excise
a best estimate. Intuitively, it might seem that a lower bottom would be good news. Here we ask: When
might apparently good news about climate sensitivity in fact be bad news? The lowered bottom value
also implies higher uncertainty about the temperature increase, a definite bad. Under reasonable assumptions,
both the lowering of the lower bound and the removal of the “best estimate” may well be bad news.


Mark C. Freeman                                       Richard J. Zeckhauser
School of Business and Economics                      John F. Kennedy School of Government
Loughborough University                               Harvard University
Leiceistershire, UK LE11 3TU                          79 John F. Kennedy Street
m.c.freeman@lboro.ac.uk                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                      and NBER
Gernot Wagner                                         richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu
Environmental Defense Fund
257 Park Avenue South
New York, NY 10010
gwagner@edf.org
    1. Introduction

What if a study utilizing a new insight on equilibrium climate sensitivity—how
temperatures react over time as carbon dioxide concentrations double—produced
results significantly below what most climate models and scientists now assume? The
natural response would be to celebrate, and to conclude that the value of stringent
climate policy had diminished.

That celebration would be premature. Countervailing the good news would be the
recognition that current climate science, while sound on the big picture, did not
understand a fundamental climate uncertainty as well as had been thought. If there is
one certainty, it is that the new data will not reveal all. Temperature increases predicted
by equilibrium climate sensitivity, after all, play out over decades and centuries. Thus,
the substantial change in estimates would point to even more and deeper uncertainties
than previously recognized.

To put the same matter in statistical terms, our mean estimate on climate sensitivity
might have shifted down, but our estimate of its standard deviation would have
increased. Deeper uncertainty should magnify concerns, since marginal damages from
rising temperatures increase rapidly. Quite possibly the magnified concerns from
variability would outweigh any reassurance from a lowered estimate on the mean.
Pindyck (2013), Weitzman (2009), Wagner and Weitzman (2015), and especially
Lewandowsky et al. (2014a,b) and Pindyck (2014) discuss this tradeoff between mean
and standard deviation (or variance).1

We focus here on climate sensitivity for the simple reason that it’s the most iconic of
climate metrics. It is also among the best-studied. Yet science has not been able to
narrow its range in over three decades: double carbon dioxide concentrations and,
consensus climate science tells us, expect long-run temperatures to rise by between 1.5
and 4.5°C. That range has stood ever since Jule Charney chaired a National Academy of
Sciences Ad Hoc Study Group on Carbon Dioxide and Climate in the late 1970s
(Charney et al., 1979). In 1990, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
picked up Charney’s range for equilibrium climate sensitivity.2 That verdict held for a
further fifteen-plus years of increasingly intense scrutiny and increased recognition of
its validity until 2007, when the IPCC decided to cut off the bottom of the range, which
became 2°C. Apparent bad news: the lowest estimates for climate sensitivity seemed to
be ever more out of reach.

In 2013, the IPCC took two steps with respect to the climate sensitivity parameter. First,
it widened the range once again, keeping the top value of 4.5°C but moving the lower
bound of the “likely” range back down to 1.5°C. That step points to deep-seated
uncertainties inherent in climate science and, thus, policy: thirty-five years of amazing
advances in most every aspect of climate science apparently have not tightened the

1 Note that this focus is different from uncertainty due to high-impact, low-probability events, often
   referred to as ‘tail risks’ or ‘fat tails’. See, e.g., Weitzman (2009) and Wagner and Weitzman (2015). Tail
   risks magnify concerns, though they are not the focus of our analysis.
2 See Wagner and Weitzman (2015) for more on the history and the IPCC’s detailed definitions.


                                                                                                            2
range for the eventual realization of this fundamental parameter. Indeed, they have
taught us to be more cautious in defining it.

Second, the IPCC (2013) also removed its statement of a “best estimate” for climate
sensitivity. No interpretation was given to this move in the report, and we don’t venture
to second-guess the IPCC’s decision. We simply attempt to interpret the implication of
removing the value itself by suggesting that any assumed climate sensitivity distribution
may now have reduced ‘peakedness’ as a result. 3 Many others have attempted to
calibrate distribution functions around the IPCC’s (2007) climate sensitivity
pronouncements.4 The 2013 step of removing the “most likely” value might indicate that
the chance of hitting close to the peak of any prior probability distribution has
decreased. Once again, this additional level of uncertainty is apparent bad news:
following Pindyck’s (2012, 2013) calibration, decreased peakedness, other factors equal,
implies greater Willingness to Pay (WTP) out of current consumption to avoid climate
damages in the future.

In our subsequent analysis, we ask two sets of questions:

1. When is good news bad? Specifically, under what conditions does a lowering of the
   lower bound of the “likely” climate sensitivity range lead to increased WTP to avoid
   global warming?5

2. What should we make of the IPCC’s removal of its prior “best estimate”? How do we
   interpret knowing about the climate sensitivity range but not where within that
   range we might end up? And how does this affect our WTP to avoid global warming?

We focus on the effect of increasing the uncertainty on WTP, while leaving the mean
unchanged or lowering it, in section 2. Section 3 interprets the second set of questions
around ‘peakedness’, or a lack thereof. Section 4 concludes. An extensive set of
appendices presents proofs for our results, and looks for special cases with distinctive
properties.


    2. When is good news bad? The mean-variance tradeoff

A decrease in the mean climate sensitivity, ceteris paribus, is undoubtedly good news
for the planet. We could expect eventual global average temperatures to rise less than
previously feared. However, when that decrease in mean is due to a widening of the
uncertainty range—for example, if it is due to a lowering of the lower bound—the news
may not overall be good. In fact, that is what we find may be the case here.

3 We interpret peakedness using kurtosis, holding the mean and standard deviation fixed. As an alternate
   approach, we also look at the distribution changing both its kurtosis and standard deviation to keep the
   IPCC’s “likely” interval constant.
4 See, for example, Pindyck (2012, 2013), Weitzman (2009, 2010), and Wagner and Weitzman (2015).
5 We define WTP here following Pindyck (2012, 2013), in the sense of how much it is optimal for society to

   pay to avoid certain degrees of average global warming in order to maximize total societal well-being—
   rather than in the behavioral-economic sense of the term.

                                                                                                         3
We first develop the general economic framework that underlies our analysis in
subsection 2.1. Subsequently, we consider the impact of a Mean Preserving Spread
(MPS) on the distribution of future temperatures in subsection 2.2. We demonstrate
that the description of climate sensitivity in Assessment Report 5 (IPCC, 2013) could be
seen as an MPS of the description in Assessment Report 4 (IPCC, 2007). In such a
scenario, and assuming that temperature changes and economic growth are
independent, then for any convex damage function and any risk averse utility function,
this will lead to an increased WTP. This is despite the fact that the IPCC’s 2013 position
on climate sensitivity might superficially be viewed as ‘good’ news.

In subsection 2.3, we turn to increases in the standard deviation of the distribution of
climate sensitivity. Every MPS falls into this category when the increase in variance is
mean-preserving, but the converse is not true. Therefore, subsection 2.3 contains a
strictly broader category of increased risk than subsection 2.2. We demonstrate that
WTP can increase even when expected climate sensitivity decreases under a broad range
of conditions.

In subsection 2.4, we briefly turn our attention to the situation where there is increased
uncertainty over economic growth rather than climate sensitivity.

      2.1      The framework

Let denote current per-capita consumption levels and ∗ be what Weitzman (2010,
pp. 58–59) describes as “potential consumption in the complete absence of climate
change because it is defined to be what consumption would be without any global
warming” at some future time t (his emphasis). Then realized consumption, at time
                                                                             ∗
in the presence of climate change damage is given by             1             , where    ∈
 0,1 and           0 is a multiplicative climate change damage function. We use , which
represents the difference between global average temperatures at time and pre-
industrial levels, as our proxy for climate change. It might, though, just as easily be
interpreted as the rise in sea level, extreme weather events, or any other relevant
climatic metric. When interpreting our results in terms of climate sensitivity, is equal
to climate sensitivity due to a doubling of the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.

We consider the preferences of a rational social planner in a general economic setting.
   , represents the planner’s time-separable utility function with per-capita
consumption and time as its elements.6 The amount of consumption, , that the planner
would be prepared to sacrifice today in order to prevent all future climate change
damage at time is:

6   Though we talk about a social planner acting on behalf of all individuals, the formulation could be
    equally well conducted in per-capita terms for a representative individual within society. This analysis
    excludes the ‘real option’ of waiting to act in the future; see, for example, Gollier (2012a, Chapter 13). As
    the value of real options increase with volatility, the analysis would become significantly more complex
    if we incorporated the ability to ‘wait and see’ into the model. It also ignores issues associated with the
    limitations of using expected utility theory in the presence of ambiguity (rather than risk), as recently
    discussed by Millner, Dietz and Heal (2013).

                                                                                                               4
                                                               ∗
              (1)               ,0              ,0                 ,           ,   .

The left-hand side of equation (1) represents the immediate gain in utility from not
spending on mitigation today, while the right-hand side is the expected gain in future
utility from mitigating climate change and, thus, consuming ∗ rather than . For given
 ∗                                                                  ∗
   and , we will define the value function to be          1           , .

Assume that the planner’s utility function takes standard constant relative risk aversion
form. No restrictions are placed on the parameter values and , which respectively
represent the pure rate of time preference and the coefficient of relative risk aversion,
except that the latter must be non-negative (    0):

                                                            1 / 1            1
              (2)                    ,                                         .
                                                       ln                    1

By substituting (2) into (1), it follows that if , the per-period logarithmic growth rate in
consumption in the absence of climate change damage, is defined through the
                           ∗
relationship                 / , then:


                                     1           1                     1                 1
              (3)                                                                            ,
                    ln                                ln 1                               1

We focus on / . The value of preventative action now is directly measured by the
proportion of consumption that we would willingly spend today to eliminate future
climate change, all posited to be human induced.7 As the ratio increases, the implied
value of policy to avoid climate change becomes stronger. This ratio is closely related to
Pindyck’s (2012, 2013) WTP metric, who considers what fraction of consumption society
would pay to limit damage to some pre-determined level. For this analysis, for
expositional ease, we set that pre-determined level equal to zero climate change. The
qualitative results are the same for other values.

In general, the WTP will depend on both the change in temperature and economic
growth. However, for the special case where utility is logarithmic, income and
substitution effects offset each other, making / independent of in (3).

We will denote by the probability density function that the social planner assigns to
prior to the arrival of news. This density function is then amended to if the news can
be interpreted as an MPS, or if the news increases variance in a way that may or may
not preserve the mean.



7   If there is also natural variation in climate due to nature, this could be captured by introducing an
     additional random factor into the analysis.

                                                                                                       5
    2.2     IPCC’s lowering of the lower bound as a Mean Preserving Spread

New information leads the social planner to update the probability density function for
  from to . Let and be random variables drawn from and respectively. Then
we say that is an MPS of if and only if we can express                     for a random
variable   , where       |     0 for all (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1970). 8


An MPS results in the variance of being greater than that of , with the means of the
two distributions being the same. It can also be interpreted as follows: is an MPS of
if and only if second-order stochastically dominates and the two distributions have
the same mean. It should be noted, though, that not every mean-preserving increase in
variance can be interpreted as an MPS. (See subsection 2.3.)

We now present our main result and an immediate corollary:

Result 1. Assume and are independent. Then any MPS will increase the social
planner’s WTP to avoid climate change if and only if is concave with respect to .

Proof. See appendix A1.

Corollary 1. Any weakly risk-averse utility function and any weakly convex damage
function, with at least one of these two conditions being strong, provides sufficient
conditions for       to be concave with respect to , and hence for any MPS to increase
the social planner’s WTP if and are independent

Proof. See appendix A1.

This is a sufficient condition for any monotonic increasing and non-convex utility
function. If we restrict attention to specific utility functions, an analytic condition on the
damage function that is weaker than convexity but is both necessary and sufficient can
often be identified. We illustrate with the constant relative risk aversion form described
in subsection 2.1.9

Corollary 2. Assume that and are independent. Any MPS in the distribution of
possible future temperatures will lead a social planner who has constant relative risk
aversion utility to have a higher WTP to avoid future climate change if and only if:

            (4)




8 An MPS can be interpreted as follows: At each possible temperature outcome, introduces a new
  random gamble,          . The distribution of    can vary with , but the mean must be zero in all cases.
  Notice that this potentially includes the introduction of trivial gambles (        0 with probability = 1)
  for some, but not all, values of , a property we will use going forward.
9 Equation (A5) in the appendix provides the less analytically tractable necessary and sufficient conditions

  for other utility functions.

                                                                                                          6
In the case when  = 1 this result extends to the situation when                           and      are not
independent.

Proof. See appendix A1.

The proof of Corollary 2 follows from the fact that equation (4) is the necessary and
sufficient condition for     to be concave for any constant relative risk aversion utility
function. The concave curvature of         comes from the (weakly) concave shape of the
constant relative risk aversion utility function, which more than compensates for the
maximum permissible concavity of the damage function given condition (4). Given
concavity for      , from Corollary 1, greater uncertainty (an MPS) implies greater WTP
to avoid climate change.

We can apply Result 1 directly to the IPCC’s altered descriptions of climate sensitivity. In
Assessment Report 4, IPCC (2007) stated that there is a 66% chance that climate
sensitivity lies between 2 and 4.5°C, that the most likely outcome is about 3°C, that the
probability of it being below 1.5°C is below 10%, and that outcomes substantially higher
than 4.5 degrees cannot be excluded.

For expositional ease, we illustrate our argument using a discrete distribution, , for
climate sensitivity. The possible outcomes are temperature increases of {1.40, 1.75, 3.00,
4.75, 6.25} °C, with associated probabilities of {7%, 10%, 66%, 13%, 4%}.10

Five years later, Assessment Report 5 changed the assessment of climate sensitivity
primarily by lowering the lower bound from 2°C to 1.5°C, expanding the 66% likely
range to 1.5 to 4.5°C (IPCC, 2013). Moreover, the IPCC assessed the probability of
climate sensitivity less than 1°C at less than 5% (“extremely unlikely”) and the
probability that it is greater than 6°C at less than 10% (“very unlikely”). For expositional
ease, we can once again capture this assessment with a discrete distribution, , with six
possible outcomes: temperature changes can equal {0.90, 1.40, 1.75, 3.3214, 4.75, 6.25}
degrees, with associated probabilities {4%, 13%, 10%, 56%, 13%, 4%}.

Figure 1 plots the cumulative density functions of these two distributions.




10   Contrast our discrete interpretation with that of, e.g., Weitzman (2009) or Wagner and Weitzman
     (2015), who use a continuous, log-normal calibration. We simply resort to a discrete function for ease of
     exposition.

                                                                                                            7
Figure 1—Cumulative distribution functions for climate sensitivity under IPCC Assessment
         Reports 4 (AR4) and 5 (AR5). The distributions are represented by functions
         and , respectively.


Notice that has increased the mass in the left-hand tail. The offsetting rightward
distribution of mass, so as to preserve the mean, is in the center of the distribution.
There is no increase in mass in the right-hand tail.

This example is ready made for Result 1. Define           0 with probability = 1 for all
values of    except     3 °C. Then set 3          2.1 , 1.6, 0.3214 with associated
probabilities {6.06%, 9.09%, 84.85%}. 11 Firstly,       |      0 for all in this case.
That’s the “mean preserving” part. Second, when we add this       onto , emerges. In
other words, is an MPS of .

Recall how    is a representation of Assessment Report 4 and is a representation of
Assessment Report 5’s description of climate sensitivity. Result 1 then tells us that the
IPCC’s 2013 step to lower the lower bound in a mean-preserving way—what superficially
might have appeared to be ‘good’ news for the planet—was indeed bad news. Positing

11   One might think of the z gamble as scientists discovering additional uncertainties attached to the
     previous scenario leading to a 3°C temperature increase. There could also have been an MPS that added
     no density in either tail, and indeed was all concentrated on one or the other side of the median.

                                                                                                        8
independence of and , this holds true as long as        is concave, which in turn holds
true for any convex damage function and any weakly risk averse utility function.


       2.3     Increase in the variance of the distribution

What if rather than an MPS, we interpreted the IPCC’s step of lowering the lower bound
as an increase in the standard deviation? Assume that the original distribution
changed to , where          . At this point we place no other restrictions on the two
means ( and ) nor on the specific distribution of     or .

The situation now becomes more complex. Knowing the properties of the mean and
standard deviation of the distribution of future temperatures is generally insufficient to
determine the social planner’s WTP. We return to this point in detail below and in the
technical appendices.

       2.3.1 Logarithmic utility

Though our initial analysis was in terms of an MPS, WTP can increase even when the
expected value of climate sensitivity diminishes by a significant amount. An elegant
illustration emerges if we assume a logarithmic utility and a negative quadratic
exponential damage function of the type employed by Weitzman (2009) and Pindyck
(2012, 2013), among others. Given these functional forms, even if IPCC (2013) reduced
the expected value of climate sensitivity by a significant amount (>0.05°C) when
compared to IPCC (2007), the WTP could still have increased.

Result 2. Assume that the social planner has logarithmic utility and the damage
function is defined as       1     .12 Then moving from to increases the social
planner’s WTP if and only if              .

Proof. In the case of logarithmic utility, subsituting the damage function into the value
function gives        ln 1                           . This is a quadratic function with
expectation determined solely by the mean and variance. Specifically,
       , and from equation (3):

               (5)                                                              .

Hence, is monotonically increasing in                                 . Therefore the social planner’s
WTP is greater under than if and only if                                      . QED.

Crucially, under the conditions of Result 2, any mean-preserving increase in variance

12   The damage function is convex if and only if            2  . It also satisfy the inequality of equation (4)
     for all when        1, which includes log utility. For      1, the inequality is met if and only if
        2 1          . Therefore complete convexity in the damage function is not required either for Result 2
     (except in the case of risk neutrality) or Result 3 below.

                                                                                                              9
will increase WTP. For logarithmic utility and exponential quadratic damage functions
this is a stronger finding than Result 1 since not all mean-preserving increases in
variance are also an MPS.

Focusing on the mean climate sensitivity alone then could once again lead us astray.
Consider the implications of Result 2 in the context of the discrete distribution functions
for climate sensitivity given in the previous subsection. Keeping all other values the
same, we can reduce the most likely value of from 3.3214°C to 3.25°C to produce .
The density function represents an unambiguous improvement over . The mean of
is less than : 3.08°C compared to 3.12°C. Yet, as                            0.125 > 0, we
would still prefer to confront rather than . The WTP has gone up, even though the
new distribution has a lower mean value of climate sensitivity, more mass in the left-
hand tail, and the same amount of mass in the right-hand tail. That is because outcomes
got worse in the middle. What at first glance might have appeared to be ‘good’ news is,
in fact, ‘bad’ news.13

     2.3.2 Non-logarithmic utility

For non-logarithmic utility—values of      1—the impact on the social planner’s WTP of
moving from to is more complex. This is because no natural damage function
combines with non-logarithmic utility to give a quadratic value function. We are,
therefore, no longer in the comfortable world of mean-variance decision-making, where
Result 2 holds. However, we conjecture that if both (i) and belong to the same
major traditional families of distributions and (ii) T and g t are independent, then a
mean-preserving increase in variance will generally increase the social planner’s WTP.14

While it is beyond the scope of this paper to prove this conjecture for all possible
families of distributions, all possible damage functions, and all potential values of , we
can illustrate it for a particularly relevant case. Restrict both and to be drawn from
a generalized gamma distribution where the second shape parameter is set to be 2 ;
     :      , 2, :

                                                                   /
            (6)                                                        ,

with ,      0 and     0.15 Figure 2 illustrates the probability density function (6) for four
different choices of parameter values. All assume that μ 3°C but vary in the value of


13 This result holds if we change the most likely value of to any value higher than 3.2155°C, while leaving
   all other values unchanged, when       3.06°C.
14 If   is drawn from a family of probability density functions whose members differ by location and scale
   only (“Two cumulative distribution functions 1 ∙ and 2 ∙ are said to differ only by location
   parameters and if 1               2          with      0’’; Meyer 1987, p. 422), which includes normal
   and uniform distributions, then Result 2 will generalize to non-logarithmic utility functions. See Meyer
   (1987).
15 This distribution is also known as a generalized normal distribution (Khodabina and Ahmadabadib,

   2010). Pindyck (2012, 2013), by contrast, relies on a displaced gamma distribution for his calibration.

                                                                                                        10
σ.16




Figure 2—The probability density function of future temperature changes, which are
         assumed to be generalized gamma distributed with second shape parameter
         equal to 2:   :     , , . The values of and are chosen so that the mean of ,
              ° and the standard deviation of , ∈ . ° , . ° , . ° , ° .


In this parameterization, the probability density function,     , of the square of future
temperature is given by a gamma distribution                Γ ,     , where the second
parameter is the scale parameter. This distribution has a well-known moment
generating function.

Result 3. If         1        ,      :     , 2, ,      1and   and                    are independent,
then any mean-preserving increase in variance raises the WTP.

Proof. We provide the full proof of Result 3 in appendix A3. The analytical derivation
relies on the assumption that, for values of that are likely to be relevant for describing
potential future climate change damage, Γ         0.5 ⁄Γ        is well approximated by
        for some positive constant . The appendix also describes a series of empirical


16   If we center climate change damage around      3°C of warming, with a standard deviation of   1.5° ,
     then this gives parameter values of   1.0876 and      3.2162.

                                                                                                      11
tests of this result which do not rely on this approximation. Under a wide range of
plausible parameter values, in no case is Result 3 found to be violated.

Result 3 also implies that Result 2 extends to non-logarithmic utility for most plausible
functional forms and parameter values. (See the technical appendix for
counterexamples.) Figure 3 illustrates the empirical magnitude of this result. Let
denote the value of if        with certainty. Figure 3 presents values for / and /
under the conditions of Result 3 and when              0 for different choices of (Panel
A), (Panel B), and (Panel C).   17




                                          Panel A: Risk aversion




17   The baseline parameter values used in these figures are:   3° ,   1.5° ,   3 (Panel B also
     includes    0.5) and   0.006585.

                                                                                            12
                           Panel B: Standard deviation of temperature




                                 Panel C: Temperature damages

Figure 3— This figure illustrates the amount that a rational social planner would spend as a
          proportion of current consumption to prevent climate change both in the
          presence, , and absence, , of future temperature uncertainty. Panels A, B and
          C respectively vary the coefficient of relative risk aversion, , the standard
          deviation of future temperature, , and the extent of the damages caused by
          climate change .




                                                                                         13
Even when the social planner is risk-neutral (     0), the predominantly convex damage
function results in       . As increases, / rises: the more risk averse the planner is,
the more the social planner is willing to pay today to tackle climate change when future
temperature is uncertain. This particular illustration assumes            0 , although it
extends to some (not all) situations when that is not the case (see the technical
appendices). Moreover, as temperature uncertainty increases, so does / , consistent
with Result 3. Finally, and as expected, the more that temperature change converts into
actual damages (through ), the higher is the WTP, and the greater is the difference
between and .

In the technical appendices, we provide two sets of counter-examples to the general
principle that WTP increases with a mean-preserving increase in the variance of the
distribution that describes climate sensitivity. These are:

(i)     When       and    are highly different probability density functions. For non-
        logarithmic utility, the value function will often result in a dislike of kurtosis as
        well as variance. It is therefore possible to construct examples with high variance
        (but low kurtosis) that give the social planner a lower WTP than under an alternate
        distribution with lower variance (but higher kurtosis). See Technical Appendix
        TA1.

(ii)    When the coefficient of relative risk aversion is high, and and are strongly
        positively correlated. In this case, the most severe tempertature damages occur
        when economic growth has been strong and society is richest. Because of the high
        coefficient of relative risk aversion, these states are discounted heavily. Therefore,
        the most severe temperature damages, which come when growth has been
        extremely positive, do not have a high present value. See Technical Appendix TA2.

While these counter-examples are of academic interest, their relevance for real world
policy making is uncertain. For example, it seems unlikely that news about climate
sensitivity would significantly reduce kurtosis while simultaneously raising the variance
of our prevailing climate sensitivity distribution. The correlation between temperature
changes and economic growth could easily go in either direction. Under one possible
evolution, dramatic scientific and engineering advances in green technologies
simultaenously facilitate significant economic growth and much less temperature
change. In this case, the correlation between        and is negative. In a much less
beneficial scenario, policy makers pursue economic growth through existing ‘dirty’
technologies, resulting in     and being positively correlated. Given these divergent
views, our base case illustrates for situations where and are uncorrelated.


       2.4   Economic growth

So far we have focused on how changes in the distribution of climate sensitivity would
affect WTP. Under a wide range of conditions, both an MPS and a potentially mean-
reducing increase in variance increases WTP.


                                                                                           14
We could imagine a similar analysis with respect to uncertainty regarding economic
growth. For example:

Result 4. Assume that and are independent and that          1. Then for any damage
function      ∈ 0,1 and for any probability density function describing future
temperature uncertainty, WTP increases following an MPS in the distribution of future
consumption growth. For logarithmic utility (    1), WTP to avoid climate change is
independent of the properties of even without independence from .

Proof. See appendix A4.

This result draws parallels with the well-known finding around a declining social
discount rate given uncertain future growth.18


     3. Removal of “best estimate” as decreased peakedness

The previous section focused on how the increase in uncertainty that is associated with
the IPCC’s decision to widen the “likely” range of climate sensitivity in its Assessment
Report 5 may well have increased the WTP. In this section, we turn to the other
important recent change in the way it reports estimates of this parameter. The IPCC’s
2007 report included a “best estimate” for climate sensitivity of 3°C. No longer. In its
2013 report the IPCC abandoned its statement identifying a “best estimate.”19

We interpret the resulting change as one that seems to be best captured by a look at the
distribution’s decreased ‘peakedness’. To isolate the implications, we shift our analysis
of climate sensitivity to a normal distribution while keeping mean and standard
deviation constant. In particular, we use a probability-density function considered by
Zeckhauser and Thompson (1970):

            (7)              ; , ,         2 Γ 1      1/

with      0 and      0, where defines the distribution’s kurtosis: the higher is , the
lower is its kurtosis, and vice versa. Trimming the peak in effect decreases the kurtosis
of the distribution. Figure 4 shows the effects: the higher is , the lower is the
distribution’s peakedness.20


18 See, for example, Arrow et al. (2013, 2014) and Cropper et al. (2014).
19 There is a mention of a “mean” climate sensitivity parameter of 3.2°C in Chapter 12 of the full IPCC
   report. However, in a break from IPCC (2007), neither the Summary for Policy Makers nor the chapter
   summaries themselves include a statement of the “best estimate” (IPCC 2013, and Wagner and
   Weitzman, 2015).
20 Importantly, Zeckhauser and Thompson’s (1970)       is not equal to kurtosis. It is rather a parameter that
   directly affects kurtosis (what we call peakedness throughout the text), even though it operates in the
   opposite direction. For a normal distribution,     2, while kurtosis = 3. increases with a decrease in
   peakedness. The kurtosis of a uniform distribution equals 1.8, while     ∞.

                                                                                                           15
Figure 4—Climate sensitivity distribution, calibrating a standard normal distribution to the IPCC’s
“likely” range of 1.5 to 4.5°C.



The assumed distribution is symmetric, and is not cut off at zero. These properties make
it far from perfect to describe climate sensitivity. In fact, they tilt our results toward
conservatism in the sense that we are clearly underestimating the true uncertainties
involved, in particular on the upper tail of what might more accurately be captured by a
skewed distribution.

Result 5. Removing the “best estimate” for climate sensitivity, a step we interpret as
decreasing peakedness of the distribution, increases WTP.

Proof. We rely on Pindyck’s (2012, 2013) model to analyze the implications of varying
kurtosis, plugging in the Zeckhauser-Thompson distribution from (7) in lieu of
Pindyck’s displaced gamma distribution. The lower is peakedness (the higher is ), the
higher is the WTP to avoid damages from climate change, in particular for a constant
1.5-4.5°C “likely” range (Figure 5).




                                                                                                16
Figure 5—Willingness to Pay (WTP) to avoid climate damages at various levels of peakedness
(inversely related to ).



“Constant ” in Figure 5 shows the results of varying , while keeping everything else
constant. That shows the cleanest possible trade-off of various levels of peakedness.
However, it also changes the probabilities of climate sensitivity between 1.5 and 4.5°C.
In particular, increasing without other adjustments increases the likelihood of being
between 1.5 and 4.5°C, cutting off tails (on both ends) even further.

By adjusting the standard deviation, , in addition to , we keep the IPCC’s “likely”
probability constant. The difference is small but important in itself. A constant “likely”
probability guarantees that WTP is a strictly increasing function for reasonable values of
 . Any amount of increased uncertainty within the 66% likely range—a decrease in
peakedness—leads to an increased WTP to avoid climate damages.

Importantly, this result plays out entirely within the “likely” climate sensitivity range.
Higher (lower peakedness) implies less density in the tails, which typically drive the
results.21 Hence, here WTP increases with decreased peakedness despite decreased mass
in the upper tail, not because of it. That decreased density in the upper tail is also the



21   Weitzman (2009), Wagner and Weitzman (2015).

                                                                                       17
reason why the WTP-line for constant standard deviation tilts downward slightly with
above 3, and why the WTP for a constant 66% “likely” line tapers off.22

Given that, it is important to add a warning: Figure 5 highlights the importance of
relative differences across WTP levels with different levels of peakedness; the absolute
WTP levels are largely irrelevant, as the uncertainty of climate sensitivity here does not
play out in the all-important (fat) upper tail of the distribution. It only operates solely
within the 1.5 to 4.5°C IPCC “likely” range.


     4. Conclusion

Climate sensitivity—the eventual temperature outcome based on a doubling of carbon
dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere—is a key parameter to determine long-run
global average temperature outcomes and, thus, the costs of failing to take significant
steps to mitigate future climate change. Doubling of carbon dioxide concentrations in
the atmosphere is not a hypothetical. Concentrations are already up over 40 percent
from preindustrial levels of around 280 parts per million (ppm) to around 400 ppm. At
the current rate, pre-industrial levels will double well before the end of the century.

The title question is not a hypothetical either. While carbon dioxide emissions have
picked up this past decade, leading to the relentless upward trend in concentrations in
the atmosphere, global average surface warming has fallen short of past projections.23
Perhaps an even more fundamental reconsideration is the newly discovered importance
of black carbon. Put together, these new facts have led IPCC (2013) to reconsider the full
implications for long-term equilibrium warming and have led it to widen the “likely”
range, once again, to 1.5 to 4.5°C. In addition, the IPCC removed its prior “best
estimate” of 3°C.

Unambiguous conclusions are hard to reach in this arena where uncertainties are large.
Bearing this caution in mind, our analysis strongly suggests that, ceteris paribus, the
IPCC’s recent widening of the “likely” range of temperature change by reducing its
bottom value may well increase appropriately calibrated WTP to avoid such change in
the future. The same holds for the removal of the “best estimate.” Given the increasing
marginal costs of global warming, greater uncertainty raises the return for taking action
to curb greenhouse emissions—and the IPCC’s steps reflect greater uncertainty.




22 If we did not have the result of diminished peakedness in the updated IPCC report, we might think that
        2 , implying a higher peak but much more density in the tails as compared with a normal
   distribution. Whether this would be better or worse than the normal case would depend on both the
   form of the damage and utility functions.
23 Economist (2013). See Nuccitelli & Mann (2013) for a factual rejoinder. Cowtan and Way (2013) show

   how global average surface warming since 1997 might have been underestimated by half. Economist
   (2014) provides a summary.

                                                                                                      18
Appendix

A1. Proof of Result 1 and Corollaries 1 and 2


Let        be a random variable describing before the introduction of an MPS and
          be a random variable describing after the introduction of an MPS with           |
0 for all . Let and respectively denote the amount the planner is willing to pay before and
after the introduction of the MPS. Then, by rearranging equation (1) in the body of the text:

 (A1)                               ,0                     ,0                                                .

Since the utility function is monotonic increasing,         if and only if the right hand
side of the previous offset equation is negative. By the law of iterated expectations, the
right hand side can be rewritten as:

                                                                                ∗
 (A2)                               ∗
                                        ,                                           ,             .

If          is concave, then by Jensen’s inequality:

                                                   ∗                                                  | ∗,
 (A3)               ∗
                        ,                              ,                    ∗
                                                                                ,                                    .

From the conditions of the MPS,           │                                  0 for all . The independence of
                                                                        ∗
temperature and growth will also ensure that                                will have no conditioning information
for . Then         | ∗,     0 and

                                                                            ∗
 (A4)                                                                           ,

This establishes that the right-hand side of equation (A1) is negative, completing the
proof of Result 1.


To establish Corollary 1, notice that:

                            ∗                                   ∗                       ∗                        ∗
     A5                         ′           ′′ 1                    ,                       ′ 1                      ,   .

As     ∙   0,     ∙   0 and        0 (with potentially one of the second derivatives
equalling zero), then the concavity of       is assured. Setting the right hand side of
equation (A5) to be less than zero is the general necessary and sufficient condition for
WTP to increase with an MPS for any utility function.

Turn now to Corollary 2. In the case of a constant relative risk aversion utility, when
           and                    , equation (A5) becomes:



                                                                                                                             19
                                           ∗
 (A6)                       1                                               1       .

The term outside the square bracket is strictly positive. Therefore, the term inside this
bracket must be negative to make the value function concave. This is equivalent to:

 (A7)                                                  1               ,

and Corollary 2 follows directly. Notice that, for logarithmic utility, the independence of
  and is not required as does not feature in pricing equation (3) in the body of the
text when     1.


A2. Proof of Result 2

(Given in the main text.)


A3. Proof of Result 3

We prove this result analytically under the approximation that Γ    0.5 ⁄Γ
       for some positive constant . We then further check this result numerically
without invoking this approximation.

Analytical Proof. In the case when             :           , 2,       and       1       , define
        e        for   1

 (A8)                                                  1          1         ,

where the second equality comes from the moment generating function of the gamma
distribution        Γ , ). When       :    , 2, , future temperature has a mean, ,
and variance, , given by:

                                                   .
 (A9)

and

(A10)                                                       ,

respectively. To proceed from here algebraically is not straightforward because the term
for is analytically intractable. We therefore invoke the approximation of Tricomi and
Erdélyi (1951), who show that, for large :




                                                                                             20
                                          .
 (A11)                                         √               | |       .24
                                                       √

Ignoring the error term, this means that:

                                               .
(A12)                                                                .

To simplify further, limit this to the first two terms and use the approximation:

                                                   .
(A13)

where, from the previous offset equation, we would expect                          to be slightly less than
0.25.

We estimate the value of empirically by running a linear regression of Γ                0.5 /
Γ      against over the interval ∈ 0.01,5 . The constant from this regression is
     0.1759 and the gradient is 0.9817, which is close to 1. The fit of the linear regression
is good, with an adjusted        99.96%. The accuracy of the approximation (A13) for
     0.1759 is shown in Figure A1.




Figure A1— This shows the accuracy of the approximation                        .   /              for
constant           .    .


This linear representation performs well for values of                0.4. At           0.4, Γ 0.4      0.5 /
Γ 0.4     0.232, while the approximate value       0.4               0.224.

24   If    0.5, the accuracy of this approximation can also be considered using a double-bound given in
     Mortici (2010, Equation 4).

                                                                                                          21
Using this linear approximation within equation (A9) and rearranging:

(A14)                                                     1 ,

and


(A15)                                                 .

Based on      3 and       1.5 respectively, this approximation gives estimates of
    0.879 and   3.577, which are precisely consistent with a      , 2, distribution
with mean of 2.93 and standard deviation of 1.64 . Again, it is clear that the
approximation works well. By substituting these expressions for and into equation
(A8):

(A16)                                     1       1

under the regularity condition that 1         1                 0.

For notational convenience, let           1       / ,                   , and           . Then we can
show that:

(A17)        EW T      X σ X     1    σ       Z                      ln σ X     1     σ X   1   σ   ,
         σ                                        σ         σ

which has the same sign as:

(A18)                                             ln 1                          1 .

Now define        , where is an indicator variable that is equal to +1 if    1 and -1 if
    1. The next step is to prove that is strictly positive: First we can show that is
positive when     1      for some very small value of irrespective of the sign of . The
partial derivative is positive when      1 and negative when       1. This implies that,
as    gets further away from 1 in either direction,       become more positive. Hence,                  0.

Let      1     for some very small value of (either positive or negative). Then, to high
accuracy, ln 1                 . From the previous offset equation, it follows that has
the same sign as                                 / when is close to 1. As → 0, so
              → . Therefore, because of the presence of the indicator variable, for small
  of either sign, is positive.




                                                                                                        22
How does the sign of the partial derivative change as    moves further away from 1?

(A19)                            ln           1                   ln            1

has the same sign as the indicator variable if and only if:

(A20)                                     1       exp         .

Under the baseline calibration of     0.1759,     0.006585,       3, and       1.5, this
places a restriction that    2.37. Therefore the partial derivative is positive for all
risk-averse decision makers.

This has established that, as variance increases, all else unchanged,         increases
(decreases) for     1(     1 . Substituting the damage function into equation (3) in the
body of the text, for non-logarithmic utility and independent temperature change and
growth,

(A21)                                 1                  1

Increasing uncertainty in temperature therefore increases (decreases) the right hand
side of equation (A21) for    1(     1 . It is easily established that the left hand side of
this equation is monotonic increasing (decreasing) in for        1(      1 . QED.

In order to check that this result is not entirely dependent on the approximation in
equation (A15), we run a range of empirical estimates of                 for ∈ 0.5 , 6 ,
  ∈ 0.1 , 0.6     ∈ 0.002, 0.01 , and ∈ 0,7 . At the lower bound of , climate change
damage at 4 is 3.1% of potential GDP. At the upper bound, it is 14.8%. For each value
of and , we find consistent values of and . We then exclude calibrations where
1 1/ 0.01          9 since the left hand side of this expression is the upper bound for
when takes its maximum value of 0.01 (see equation (A8)). We then select a range of
values for and in order to calculate               . In total, we construct 1,341,270 values
of this expectation. Then, for fixed , , and , we examine whether               increases or
decreases as    rises. In no case is Result 3 violated.


A4. Proof of Result 4

From equation (3) in the body of the text, does not enter the pricing equation for
    1. For non-logarithmic utility, from equation (A21), enters the pricing equation
through the term exp 1                when      1 and temperature and growth are
independent. As exponential functions are convex, the proof of Result 4 is analogous to
that of Result 1.



                                                                                         23
We present two further technical appendices to demonstrate that a mean-preserving
increase in the variance of future temperatures does not always raise the social planner’s
WTP when utility is non-logarithmic.


Technical Appendix TA1

Result A1. If           1 exp           ,     1 and  and are independent, then a
mean-preserving increase in the variance of does not necessarily imply that we should
take stronger action now to prevent climate change.

Proof.     This is proved by counter-example. Assume that            0 and   0 with
certainty. Consider the following two discrete distributions for , denoted by , .
Both have three possible outcome for , expressed in degrees Celsius:


Outcome                    0.720°      3.935°       8.000° 2.461°          6.586°     8.000°
Probability                33.07%      63.79%       3.15% 88.31%           7.65%      4.04%
                                      3°                                  3°
                                      1.75°                               1.5°
Skewness                               0.1°                                2.5°
Excess Kurtosis                        0.1°                                4.5°

Both of these distributions are ‘fat-tailed’ in the sense of Lewandowsky et al. (2014a,
Section 3.1) as “values of climate sensitivity far above the central location of the
distribution are more likely than values far below”. Here, both probability density
functions allow for outcomes 5°C above the mean, but prohibit temperatures more than
2.28° below the mean. The distributions are also fat-tailed in the sense that each has
positive excess kurtosis.25

Let     0.006585, so that all possible outcomes lie on the convex part of the damage
function. Let the value of associated with these temperature distributions be given by
  , . If the strength of the appropriate mitigative response is positively associated with
greater uncertainty (as measured by the standard deviation of ), then                     .
However, this is not necessarily always the case, as the following table shows:

                            /                      /
     =0                   0.07378                0.06741
     =0.5                 0.07503                0.06933
     =1.00001             0.07636                0.07140
     =4                   0.08645                0.08805

First, for       1.0001 , which is almost identical to logarithmic utility,                 as
expected. It is also easily verified that these values are equal to those given by Result 2 in

25   The distributions are, though, not fat-tailed in the sense of Weitzman (2009), where this term is used to
     characterize probability density functions with non-finite moment generating functions.

                                                                                                          24
the body of the paper (to within an approximation error reflecting the fact that      1).
For low values of , it continues to be the case that higher uncertainty strengthens the
argument to mitigate now, as measured by . But, for         4, the situation is reversed,
with the higher value of being associated with the distribution with the lower standard
deviation. This counterexample completes the proof.

The word “necessarily” is crucial in Result A1. As is clear from the first two rows of the
last table, and is discussed in more detail in the body of the paper, it is generally the case
that when and are independent and                1, increasing the standard deviation of
will increase . Yet, as shown here, it is straightforward to construct counter-examples
to this rule. To understand the intuition behind this result, notice that from equation
(3) in the body of the paper when      0 and         0 with certainty:

(TA1)                                               exp          1

The expectation of the exponential of a random variable is determined by all of its
moments and not just the first two.26 For example, if we take a second order Taylor’s
series expansion of the left hand side of the previous offset equation around 1, and a
second order power series expansion of the exponential function on the right hand side,
for   0 , it follows that p /y 0 is approximately given by:

(TA2)                                1    2                            1            1

For fixed mean and variance, increasing (decreasing)          raises the value of /
when      1(     1). The effect of the fourth non-central moment of and higher order
terms (when the power expansion is taken beyond the second term), can dominate the
impact of , which can lead to instances where is higher for distributions with lower
standard deviation.


Technical Appendix TA2

For     1, the discussion in the main body of the paper is based on the assumption that
   and are independent. Relaxing this assumption necessitates a numerical approach.
As before, let          1 exp           with      0.006585 ,      :      , 2,    with
1.0876 ,      3.2162 , and        0 . Further, assume that per-period logarithmic
consumption growth is normally distributed with constant mean, , and variance, ,
and zero autocorrelation. Then     ~      ,    . We set      1.9% and         3.0%, which
are broadly consistent with long-run historical real per-capita annual consumption
growth in the US.

26   There is a link here with portfolio theory and skewness/kurtosis preference in financial economics. An
     investor is a mean-variance decision maker if and only if she has quadratic utility. Equation (TA1) has
     parallels with exponential utility, where preferences are determined by moments higher than the
     second.

                                                                                                         25
We then run 25,000 simulations where        and are drawn from their respective
distributions and with correlation between them of . The value of is calculated
numerically via equation (3) in the main body of the paper. This is then compared to
three certainty equivalent values. These respectively correspond to the case when (i)
temperature is non-stochastic and equals with certainty but consumption growth
remains uncertain ( ), (ii) consumption growth is non-stochastic and equals with
certainty but temperature change remains uncertain ( ), and (iii) all uncertainty is
removed from both and ( ). From equation (3) in the main body of the paper we
can derive:

(TA3)
                                                                       ⁄
           1   1   exp    1         1 exp     1        0.5 1                      1
                                                           ⁄
           1   1   1          1       1 exp       1                               2
                                                       ⁄
           1   1   exp    1         1 exp     1                                   3

Figure TA1 shows the results: Panels A and B show the case when       50 years,       5
(Panel A) and   0.5 (Panel B) for ∈ 1, 1 .




Panel A:




                                                                                  26
Panel B:     .




Panel C:     , varying

Figure TA1— This figure illustrates the amount that a rational social planner would spend
as a proportion of current consumption to prevent climate change, . This is when there is
uncertainty concerning both future temperature levels and potential consumption growth
and shown for a range of different correlations between these two variables. Other lines
reflect the equivalent amounts when (i) temperature change is known but consumption is
stochastic ( ), (ii) consumption is known and temperature is stochastic ( ), and (iii)
they are both non-stochastic ( ). Panel A (B) are respectively for        (    . ). Panel C
reflects the case for three different values of when    .

The most important comparison here is between and       , reflecting the presence and
absence of temperature uncertainty when consumption growth is stochastic. Consistent
with Result 3 in the body of the text, when  0,        in Panels A and B. However,
for high and strongly positive correlation (greater than approximately 0.4), then


                                                                                        27
       , meaning that higher temperature uncertainty does not necessarily lead to a
stronger economic rationale for acting now.

We can draw a number of further observations. Consistent with Result 4 in the body of
the paper,          when      0, and           for all . When and are independent,
stochastic consumption growth justifies a stronger climate response than known
consumption growth with the same mean for a given distribution of . Again, though,
for highly positive and        5, situations arise where        . This is also true when
    0.5 and the correlation is more than mildly negative. In addition, and in contrast to
Panel A in Figure 3 of the body of the paper, stronger risk aversion is now associated
with a weaker justification for taking substantive action now. The reason is that
captures not only the desire to smooth consumption across states at any given time but
also reflects the social planner’s desire to smooth consumption across time. In contrast
to the examples in the previous section, where          0 with certainty, consumption is
now very likely to grow over the long term implying that future generations will be
wealthier than our own. With higher , this reduces the incentive to spend money now
to help with their problems.27

Panel C of TA1 shows the effects of varying on / in the case when                  5. For
negative and slightly positive values of , greater uncertainty leads to higher values of ,
increasing WTP. That is not the case for strongly positive values of .28


Bibliography

Arrow, K., M. Cropper, C. Gollier, B. Groom, G. Heal, R. Newell, W. Nordhaus, Robert S.
   Pindyck, William A. Pizer, Paul R. Portney, Thomas Sterner, Richard S. J. Tol, and Martin L.
   Weitzman. 2013.“Determining Benefits and Costs for Future Generations.” Science 341, no.
   6144: 349-350.
Arrow, Kenneth J., Maureen L. Cropper, Christian Gollier, Ben Groom, Geoffrey M. Heal,
   Richard G. Newell, William D. Nordhaus, Robert S. Pindyck, William A. Pizer, Paul R.
   Portney, Thomas Sterner, Richard S. J. Tol, and Martin L. Weitzman. 2014. “Should
   Governments Use a Declining Discount Rate in Project Analysis?” Rev Environ Econ Policy
   8: 145-163.
Charney, Jule G., Akio Arakawa, D. James Baker, Bert Bolin, Robert E. Dickinson, Richard M.
   Goody, Cecil E. Leith, Henry M. Stommel, and Carl I. Wunsch. 1979. "Carbon dioxide and
   climate: a scientific assessment." National Academy of Sciences.
Cowtan, Kevin, and Robert G. Way. 2013. "Coverage bias in the HadCRUT4 temperature series
   and its impact on recent temperature trends." Quarterly Journal of the Royal
   Meteorological Society.
Cropper ML, Freeman MC, Groom B, Pizer WA. 2014. “Declining discount rates.” American
   Economic Review 104:538–543.

27 The use of an Epstein-Zin-Weil utility function would enable social planners to separate their desire to
   smooth consumption across time from their desire to smooth consumption across states at any given
   point in time. See Jensen and Traeger (2014) as well as Daniel, Litterman, and Wagner (2015).
28 This result is reminiscent of that in Gollier (2012b), who shows that the term structure of discount rates

   is highly dependent on the ‘climate beta’ of the cash flow, which reflects the correlation between growth
   and damages.

                                                                                                         28
Daniel, Kent, Robert B. Litterman and Gernot Wagner. 2015. “Applying Asset Pricing Theory to
    Calibrate the Price of Climate Risk,” Mimeo.
The Economist. 2013. ”Climate science: a sensitive matter.” March 30th.
The Economist. 2014. “Global Warming: Who Pressed the Pause Button.” March 8th.
Gollier Christian.2012a. Pricing the planet’s future: The economics of discounting in an
    uncertain world. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Gollier Christian. 2012b. “Evaluation of long-dated investments under uncertain growth trend,
    volatility and catastrophes.” CESifo Working Paper: Industrial Organisation, No. 4052.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2007. Fourth Assessment Report, Working
    Group I.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2013. Fifth Assessment Report, Working
    Group I.
Jensen S, Traeger CP. 2014. “Optimal climate change mitigation under long-term growth
    uncertainty: Stochastic integrated assessment and analytic findings.” European Econonomic
    Review 69 104–125.
Khodabina M, Ahmadabadib A. 2010. “Some properties of generalized gamma distribution.”
    Mathematical Sciences 4:9–28.
Lewandowsky S, Risbey JS, Smithson M, Newell BR. 2014a. “Scientific uncertainty and climate
    change: Part I. Uncertainty and unabated emissions.” Climatic Change, doi:
    10.1007/s10584-014-1082-7.
Lewandowsky S, Risbey JS, Smithson M, Newell BR. 2014b. “Scientific uncertainty and climate
    change: Part II. Uncertainty and mitigation.” Climatic Change, doi: 10.1007/s10584-014-
    1083-6.
Meyer, J. 1987. “Two-moment decision models and expected utility maximization.” American
    Economic Review 77: 421-430.
Millner A, Dietz S, Heal G. 2013. “Scientific ambiguity and climate policy.” Environmental and
    Resource Economics 55: 21–46.
Mortici C. 2010. “New approximation formulas for evaluating the ratio of gamma functions.”
    Mathematical and Computational Modelling 52:425–433.
Nuccitelli, Dana and Michael E. Mann. 2013. “ How The Economist got it wrong.”Australian
    Broadcasting Corporation Environment, 12 April.
Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 1992. “Circular No. A-94 Revised,” October 29.
Pindyck, Robert S. 2012. “Uncertain outcomes and climate change policy.” Journal of
    Environmental Economics and Management 63, no. 3: 289-303.
Pindyck, Robert S. 2013. “The Climate Policy Dilemma.” Review of Environmental Economics
    and Policy vol. 7(2):219-237.
Pindyck, Robert S. 2014. “Risk and return in the design of environmental policy.” Journal of the
    Association of Environmental and Resource Economists.
Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Increasing risk: I. A definition." Journal of
    Economic theory 2, no. 3 (1970): 225-243.
Tricomi FG, Erdélyi A. 1951. “The asymptotic expansion of a ratio of gamma functions.” Pacific
    Journal of Mathematics 1: 133–142.
Wagner, Gernot and Martin L. Weitzman. 2015. Climate Shock: the Economic Consequences of
    a Hotter Planet. Princeton University Press.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2009. “On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic
    Climate Change.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1): 1–19.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2010. "What Is The "Damages Function" For Global Warming—And What
    Difference Might It Make?." Climate Change Economics 1, no. 01: 57-69.
Zeckhauser, Richard, and Mark Thompson. 1970. "Linear regression with non-normal error
    terms." The Review of Economics and Statistics 52, no. 3: 280-286.



                                                                                             29
