                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND OUTPUT GROWTH IN DEVELOPING ASIA AND LATIN AMERICA:
                      A COMPARATIVE SECTORAL ANALYSIS

                                               Joshua Aizenman
                                                Yothin Jinjarak
                                                Donghyun Park

                                             Working Paper 20917
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w20917


                           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          January 2015




     Useful comments by Marcus Noland, Shang-Jin Wei, and other participants at a workshop at Asian
     Development Bank in Manila, Philippines, on 4 November 2014 seminar are gratefully acknowledged.
     The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
     National Bureau of Economic Research.

     At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
     Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20917.ack

     NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
     reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
     NBER publications.

     © 2015 by Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, and Donghyun Park. All rights reserved. Short sections
     of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
     credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Development and Output Growth in Developing Asia and Latin America: A Comparative
Sectoral Analysis
Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, and Donghyun Park
NBER Working Paper No. 20917
January 2015
JEL No. G20,G30,O40,O47,O57

                                            ABSTRACT

We use data from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC) database to perform preliminary
empirical analysis of the interplay between quality and quantity of finance in accounting for the output
growth of ten sectors. We review the existing literature and some salient open questions pertaining
to the relationship between financial depth and output growth. Our analysis looks at the finance-growth
nexus in 41 economies, including 11 East Asian and 9 Latin American economies for a comparison
between two regions which are at similar income levels. We document large differences between the
two regions in terms of the impact of financial depth on sectoral growth, and validate the negative
impact of financial deepening on output growth in several sectors. Our results suggest that the impact
of financial development on growth may be non-linear – i.e. it may promote growth only up to a point.


Joshua Aizenman                                    Donghyun Park
Economics and SIR                                  Economics and Research Department
USC                                                Asian Development Bank
University Park                                    Manila, Philippines
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043                         dpark@adb.org
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

Yothin Jinjarak
School of Economics and Finance
Victoria University of Wellington
PO Box 600
23 Lambton Quay, Wellington
New Zealand 6140
yothin.jinjarak@vuw.ac.nz
1 Introduction

      A lingering challenge in applied economics is measuring and controlling the quality

of services – e.g. health care, education, and finance. Since services are measured at

cost, their GDP share is correlated with per capita GDP. But short of controlling for the

quality of services, it is not clear if the growing share of services in the GDP adds to

welfare. To illustrate, in in 2012, the GDP share of medical services was 17.9% in the US,

10.9% in Canada, 11.7% in France 11.7%, and 9.4% in the UK. Yet there is no evidence

that the US health services deliver on average better quality of outcome. To the contrary,

for most conventional measures of average quality of health, life expectancy at birth and

the like, the US lags many other OECD countries by wide margins [OECD (2013)]. 1

Similar observations apply to education and other services. Even after adjusting for PPP,

the links between expenditure on services and the quality of these services in the OECD

countries remain tenuous at best.

      For financial services, the global financial crisis (GFC) underlines the relevance of

such concerns. GFC paralyzed global financial systems and almost brought the world

economy to its knees. According to conventional wisdom, financial depth contributes to

the growth of the real sector, but the evidence remains mixed at best. The GFC put to the

fore the possibility that the relationship between financial depth and output growth may

be non-linear and unstable overtime. That is, the development of the financial sector may

benefit the real sector, but only up to a point. Beyond that point, further financial

development may have no effect or even a negative effect on growth. For example, the


1The share data taken from the World Bank,
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.TOTL.ZS (accessed September 10, 2104).

                                            2
GFC was preceded by a wave of financial innovation which produced many complex high-

tech financial products but entailed little obvious benefit for growth. Excessive financial

innovation that overwhelms the regulatory capacity of regulatory authorities can culminate

in financial crisis which sets back growth for some time.

       Concerns about too much finance are more relevant for advanced economies that

already have mature, sophisticated financial sectors with a good mix of banks and capital

markets than for developing economies with backward financial sectors. Diminishing

marginal returns to financial development are more likely at higher levels of financial

development. However, there are fundamental measurement issues that affect both

advanced and developing economies. The crux of the problem is that the standard

measures of financial development are quantitative measures such as the ratio of private

credit to GDP. Quantitative measures are highly imperfect measures of financial

development, which refers to the quality of the financial system, or its ability to allocate

resources to the most productive uses. For example, it is conceivable that even as the

financial system expands in size, its capacity to channel resources efficiently stagnates

or even recedes. Perhaps no country epitomizes such risks better than today’s China.

       East Asian countries generally have large financial sectors relative to their income

levels. Yet they remain well inside the global finance frontier, as evident in their recycling

of much of their abundant savings through the financial markets of the advanced

economies. Even within the context of East Asia, China has an exceptionally large

financial sector, yet few would mistake the large size as evidence of financial

development. To the contrary, there are widespread concerns that an unsustainable

expansion of credit – i.e. unsustainable expansion of financial sector – is jeopardizing



                                              3
financial stability and eroding the quality of investments. A specific major concern is that

state-owned banks may be channeling credit to state-owned firms at the expense of credit

to the dynamic private sector. Latin America and East Asia are at similar income levels

but one key difference is the relative abundance of savings in the latter. As such, a

comparative analysis of the finance-growth nexus in the two regions is worthwhile.

       This paper marks a preliminary attempt to explore some of the above issues by

delving into the relationship between financial depth and sectoral output growth. The

sectoral data encompass 10 sectors - agriculture, mining, manufacturing, construction,

public utilities, retail and wholesale trade, transport and communication, finance and

business services, other market services, and government services. Our analysis covers

41 economies, including 11 East Asian and 9 Latin American economies which we

compare.2 We use data from international financial institutions for measures of financial

depth, financial spreads, and several proxies for quality and availability of finance. While

the financial data are far from satisfactory, our paper provides preliminary insights about

the key issues at hand and raises some questions that need further investigation. We

review the literature, describe the data and empirical framework, report and discuss the

preliminary results, and conclude with some final observations.




2 It gives sectoral detail to the historical macro data in Maddison (2003) from 1950 onwards. The
data for Asia and Latin-America are based on Marcel P. Timmer and Gaaitzen J. de Vries (2007),
'A Cross-Country Database For Sectoral Employment And Productivity In Asia And Latin America,
1950-2005', GGDC Research memorandum GD-98, Groningen Growth and Development Centre,
August 2007. Data for Europe and the US is based on an update of Bart van Ark (1996), Sectoral
Growth Accounting and Structural Change in Post-War Europe, in B. van Ark and N.F.R. Crafts,
eds., Quantitative Aspects of Post-War European Economic Growth, CEPR/Cambridge University
Press, pp. 84-164See http://www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/data/10-sector-database.


                                               4
2 Literature Review

       The importance of the quality of financial intermediation has been well recognized

in the literature, though identifying its effect remains a work in progress [see Levine (2005)

for a comprehensive review]. Boyd and Smith (1992) show that the quality of financial

intermediation has first order effects on capital flows and economic growth. In a model

with adverse selection and costly state verification in which both debt contracts and credit

rationing are observed, capital may flow from capital scarce countries to capital abundant

countries if the capital abundant countries have financial intermediaries that are

sufficiently more effective at exerting corporate control than the capital scarce countries.

This insightful paper provides a nice interpretation to the Lucas paradox (1992) of capital

flowing uphill, a topic that gained even more attention in the context of the global

imbalances in the 2000s [see Laura et al. (2003), Ju and Wei (2011) and the references

therein]. Thus, even though the physical marginal product of capital is higher in capital

scarce countries, investors recognize that their expected returns depend on the

monitoring quality of financial intermediaries.

       Follow-up papers showed that the quality of financial intermediation is impacted by

factors beyond the cost of monitoring. Boyd, Levine and Smith (2001) showed that the

quality of financial intermediation is hampered by inflation. For economies with inflation

rates exceeding 15 percent, there is a discrete drop in financial sector performance. La

Porta et al. (2000) highlighted the role of a well-functioning legal system in facilitating

efficient financial intermediaries – greater protection of creditors’ rights and more efficient

courts enable more efficient intermediation. The degree of competition and market

contestability also matter. The relaxation of states’ regulations on interstate branching in

                                              5
the US during the 1970 provided ‘a natural experiment’ used to uncover the gains of

quantity versus quality of finance. Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) found that branch reform

boosted bank lending quality and accelerated real per capita growth rates. The channels

at work were mostly the quality, and not the quantity of finance. Dehejia and Lleras-Muney

(2003) finds that branch reform accelerated economic growth by improving the quality of

bank loans and the efficiency of capital allocation, with little evidence that branch reform

boosted quantity of lending.

       The importance of financial dependence heterogeneity across sectors has been

highlighted by the pioneering study of Rajan and Zingales (1998). Since lower costs of

external finance facilitate firm growth and new firm formation, industries that are heavier

users of external finance should benefit disproportionately from financial development.

Their study validated this conjecture, finding that financial development has a bigger

effect on the growth of industries which are more dependent on external finance, both

through the expansion of existing firms and through the formation of new firms. Extending

Rajan and Zingales (1998), Claessens and Laeven (2003) find evidence that better

property rights promotes higher growth through improved asset allocation. Quantitatively,

this growth effect is as large as that of improved access to financing due to financial

development.

       The GFC renewed attention on the interplay between the quantity and quality of

finance. Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012) studies how financial development affects growth

at both the country and industry level. Based on a sample of developed and emerging

economies, they find the level of financial development is good only up to a point, after

which it becomes a drag on growth. For private sector credit extended by banks, the



                                             6
turning point is close to 90% of GDP. For advanced economies, they show that a fast-

growing financial sector can be detrimental to aggregate productivity growth. Looking at

industry-level data, they find that financial sector growth disproportionately harms

industries that are either financially dependent or R&D-intensive. Arcand, Berkes, and

Panizza (2012) report similar findings. Finance starts having a negative effect on output

growth when credit to the private sector reaches 100% of GDP. Intriguingly, these results

are not driven by output volatility, banking crises, low institutional quality, or by differences

in bank regulation and supervision. Instead, they appear to be in line with Rousseau and

Wachtel (2011)’s "vanishing effect" – i.e. credit has no statistically significant impact on

GDP growth over the 1965-2004 period. Looking at the more recent data, Philippon and

Reshef (2013) concluded that at the very high end of financial development, rapidly

diminishing social returns may have set in.

       Aizenman, Pinto and Sushko (2013) examine how financial cycles affect the

broader economy through their impact on real economic sectors during 1960–2005.

Periods of accelerated growth of the financial sector are more likely to be followed by

abrupt financial contractions than are periods of slower financial sector growth. While the

majority of real sectors are adversely affected by financial contractions, they are not

helped by expansions. Though these studies do not identify the mechanisms associated

with the “vanishing effect” of finance, they are consistent with Minsky (1974)’s hypothesis

over time that financial deepening may eventually divert financial resources from

financing real activities into speculative and ultimately destabilizing risky and bubbly yield-

seeking financial investments. Rajan (2005)’s seminal paper outlined the ways in which




                                               7
deregulation and distorted incentives induce financial managers to overlook tail risks,

causing financial deepening to culminate in larger financial crises.

       The recent empirical literature validated the key role of credit cycles. Schularick

and Taylor (2009) presents long-run historical data showing that financial instability was

often the result of "credit booms gone wrong". Their analysis lends support to the Minsky-

Kindleberger view of financial crises (Eichengreen and Mitchener, 2003). The credit

system seems all too capable of creating its very own shocks, judging by how well past

credit growth predicts future financial crises. The dynamic role of credit overhang is

further validated by Òscar, Schularick, and Taylor (2011). Analyzing over 200 recessions

in 14 advanced countries between 1870 and 2008, they find that financial crisis

recessions are more costly than normal recessions in terms of lost output. For both types

of recessions, credit-intensive expansions tend to be followed by deeper recessions and

slower recoveries. Credit growth also affects the behavior of other key macroeconomic

variables such as investment, lending, interest rates, and inflation.

       Taking stock of the literature, one may conjecture that credit boom and bust cycles

associated with financial deepening would disproportionately affect activities and sectors

that rely on stable external finance and are subject to larger sunk costs. The tenuous link

between financial depth and growth may reflect a host of factors, including the damaging

and uneven effects of credit cycles, as well the rent seeking associated with distorted

incentives in the financial sector, where excessive risk taking and financial innovation may

precipitate instability that penalizes credit dependent sectors. This is all the more likely if

the greater short and medium run profits associated with financial innovations divert credit

from the real economy to further deepening of speculative financial intermediation.



                                              8
3 Data

       Data are derived from several sources subject to data availability. Sectoral Value-

Added per Worker, which is used to calculate Sectoral Output Growth (%) for 1996-2011,

are from Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC) 10-Sector Database.

Controls for quality of financial intermediation are available at various years and more

recently. Bank Private Credit to GDP (%) and Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%) for

1996-2011 are from Global Financial Development Database (2013 version); Getting

Credit Index and Resolving Insolvency Index for 2005-2011 are from Doing Business

Database; Depositors with Commercial Bank per 1,000 Adults and SME Loans from

Commercial Banks (% GDP) for 2005-2011 are from Financial Access Survey Database.

       Figure 1 plots average value-added per worker for 1996-2011. Across the ten

sectors the level of value-added per worker in East Asia and Pacific is higher than the

level in Latin America & the Caribbean. The differences can be quite large, ranging from

1.1 times in public utilities sector, 2.3 times in manufacturing sector, all the way to 2.6

times in financial and business services sector. In the following we examine to what

extent these differences could be attributable to quality of financial intermediation

between the two regions.

       Table 1 provides the 2005-2011 average quality of financial intermediation for all

the 280 countries for which data are available. Figure 2 then summarizes regional

differences in the quality of financial intermediation. Note that only countries in East Asia

and Pacific, Latin America & the Caribbean, and a few other areas have sectoral output

data from GGDC, while measures of quality of financial intermediation are missing



                                             9
altogether for some countries. Data are available for sectoral output growth, financial

depth (bank private credit to GDP), and financial efficiency (lending-deposit interest

spread) for 1996-2004, and for all other measures of the quality of finance for 2005-2013.

As a result, we perform descriptive data analysis for 2005-2011 and more formal empirical

analysis for 1996-2011 on selected variables subject to data availability.

         Table 2 reports the correlation among financial variables in East Asia and Pacific

vis-à-vis Latin America & the Caribbean. The level of financial depth as measured by bank

private credit to GDP is correlated with the level of de facto financial efficiency as

measured by lending-deposit interest spread in both regions, though with the opposite

signs. This spread reflects the complex interaction of many factors, including the

competitiveness of the banking industry, the riskiness of banks’ portfolio, macro policies

[higher inflation and higher reserve ratios are positively associated with the spreads], the

efficiency of the judicial system, and the protection of creditors’ rights. The data further

indicates that lending-deposit interest spread is negatively correlated with resolving

insolvency index. In East Asia, bank private credit to GDP is also positively correlated

with getting credit index, resolving insolvency index, and SME loans from commercial

banks as percentage of GDP. In Latin America, the number of depositors with commercial

banks per 1,000 adults is positively correlated with financial depth but negatively with

financial efficiency.

4 Empirical Framework and Results

         To estimate the association between sectoral output growth and quality of financial

intermediation, the benchmark regression is specified as the following:



   (1)        Sectoral Output Growth =

                                             10
             α + λ(Lagged Sectoral Output Growth) + β(Bank Private Credit / GDP) +
             γ(Lending-Deposit Interest Spread) + ε


using annual data from 1996-2011 for East Asia and Pacific, and Latin America & the

Caribbean.

       Table 3 report estimation results based on OLS regressions, done over the whole

sample of 41 economies, and sub-samples of 11 East Asian economies and 9 Latin

American economies. Overall, the estimation explains about half of variation in the

sectoral output growth data. Coefficient estimates on lagged sectoral output growth are

negative and statistically significant, suggesting mean reversion in the output growth

across sectors.

       In the whole sample and both sub-samples, it is found that bank private credit to

GDP (financial depth) is negatively associated with the growth of construction sector.

Bank private credit growth is also negatively associated with the growth of manufacturing

sector in East Asia, whereas it is positively associated with the growth of finance,

insurance, and real estate sector in Latin America.

       For the East Asian economies, it is found that lending-deposit interest spread

(financial efficiency) is positively associated with the growth of finance, insurance, and

real estate sector. The growth of construction sector is negatively associated with lending-

deposit interest spread in East Asia, whereas it has a positive association in Latin

America. The growth of wholesale and retail trade sector is positively associated with

financial efficiency in East Asia, whereas the association is negative in Latin America.

The results seem to suggest garden variety associations between finance and sectoral

growth.


                                            11
         While the baseline results suggest that higher bank private credit to GDP tends to

reduce sectoral growth of construction and manufacturing, the results also suggest the

need to experiment with non-linear specification of bank private credit to GDP, and also

to possibly control for lagged bank private credit to GDP, to verify whether higher bank

private credit to GDP reduces construction and manufacturing. As the recent literature

suggests, there is a possibility that bank private credit has a positive effect on GDP growth

up to a point, but too much of it would lead road to a financial crisis or declining

productivity, possibly due to lower quality of debt, and thus harm growth.

         Table 4 provides an alternative specification using the following equation:


   (2)            Sectoral Output Growth =
               α + λ(Lagged Sectoral Output Growth) + β1(Lagged Bank Private Credit /
               GDP) + β2(Bank Private Credit / GDP) + β3(Bank Private Credit / GDP)2 +
               γ(Lending-Deposit Interest Spread) + ε


         The additional estimation results do not suggest non-linear effects of bank private

credit on output growth across all sectors. The coefficient estimates of the non-linear term

– i.e. square of bank private credit to GDP – on sectoral growth are not statistically

significant for manufacturing and finance in East Asia and Latin America. The coefficients

on bank private credit to GDP, both lagged and current, are mostly insignificant,

suggesting that the estimation of the financial depth-sectoral growth link is not robust. On

the other hand, the association between interest spread and sectoral growth are

consistent with the baseline specification.




                                              12
5 Some Further Empirical Analysis

       The preliminary results reported above should be taken with a grain of salt – more

data and work is needed to control better for the quality of credit, and other macro controls

reflecting the stage of the business and the credit cycles. Yet our results are consistent

with the conjectures outlined in the literature review. Financial deepening may lead to

uneven growth patterns, where sectors more dependent on stable external finance and

with limited collateral may be adversely affected by financial deepening associated with

credit reallocations and instability of credit conditions.

       Our empirical analysis uses data on sectoral composition of the economy with

controls for the quality of financial intermediation. The quality of financial intermediation

is impacted by prices [i.e. financial intermediation spreads] and quantities [e.g. financial

depth, SMEs’ ease of getting credit]. Financial spreads are, in turn, affected by access to

credit, and quality of institutions [e.g. rights of creditors and efficacy of the judicial system],

and the risk level of loans.

       Figure 3 provides the economic significance of the controls. The economic

significance of bank private credit to GDP for East Asia is a product of its coefficient

estimates (including lagged, current, and squared terms) for East Asia from the

regression in Table 4 multiplied by its standard deviation for East Asia. The calculation

for Latin America and for lending-deposit interest spread is done similarly.

       Intriguingly, for several sectors the control variables for our proxy of de facto quality

of financial intermediation tend to have levels of economic significance that are larger in

Latin America and the Caribbean than they are in East Asia and Pacific. The economic

significance tends to be larger for non-tradable sectors, i.e. public utilities, wholesale and



                                                13
retail trade, community and social services, and finance, insurance, and real estate, than

for other sectors. In addition, bank private credit to GDP tends to have smaller economic

significance than lending-deposit interest spread. The results may reflect the greater

scarcity of finance in Latin America, and possibly the smaller share of state-owned firms

enjoying preferential access to credit. Since credit may be scarcer in Latin America, the

marginal importance of the quantity of finance is larger than in East Asia. The larger credit

base of East Asia implies that region has reached the stage where quality may be at least

as important as the quantity.

       Figure 4 plots the average and variation of bank private credit to GDP, comparing

East Asia and Pacific vis-à-vis Latin America & the Caribbean. Over the past two decades,

the level of financial depth has always been larger in East Asia. Prior to the Asian financial

crisis, bank private credit to GDP was 10% higher in East Asia than in Latin America.

From 1999-2003, the difference fell to about 5%, but has rebounded to 10% recently.

East Asia also hosts several financial centers – Tokyo, Hong Kong, and Singapore –

which may improve the overall quality and quantity of financial intermediation, although

identifying the impact of financial centers remains a challenge.

       Over the long run, the quality of financial intermediation should be positively

correlated with the quality of macroeconomic policies and quality of institutions. We

measure the quality of macroeconomic policies by the average inflation and volatility of

inflation in the past 5 years. For 1976-2012, Table 5 provides the correlation between

quality of macroeconomic policies and quality of financial intermediation.

       For East Asia, bank private credit to GDP is negatively correlated with average

inflation, but positively correlated with risk premium on lending (measured as lending rate



                                             14
minus Treasury bill rate). Average inflation is highly correlated with inflation volatility. For

Latin America, the lending-deposit interest spread is correlated with average and volatility

of inflation, as well as risk premium on lending. The volatility of inflation is also highly

correlated with risk premium on lending. We have yet to formally confirm via regression

analysis the association of sectoral output growth, quality of macroeconomic policies, and

their interaction with the quality of financial intermediation and institutions. Furthermore,

some of the financial quality measures are highly correlated with each other, potentially

posing multicolinearity issues. However, based on the correlation analysis, it is highly

plausible that over the long run, sectoral output growth rates are driven by financial quality

factors.

       In order to capture the role of service flows of the financial sector on sectoral

growth, we provide additional estimation results in Table 6. Instead of bank private

credit/GDP, we use bank private credit/financial&business services value added (%), in

level and non-linear squared term, as alternative proxy for quality of finance. This new

variable is constructed from bank private credit/GDP and financial&business services

value added/GDP, both of which are available from the World Development Indicators.

Consistent with our conjecture, there is some evidence, notably for public utilities sector

and for community and social services sector, in both the whole sample and sub-samples,

that the effect of service flow of financial sector to sector growth is non-linear. The

coefficient estimate of lagged bank private credit/financial&business services is positive,

while the estimate of lagged [bank private credit/financial&business services]2 is negative

in manufacturing and financial sectors.




                                              15
          The evidence suggests that the level of service flow of financial sector is good only

up to a point, after which it becomes a drag on sectoral growth in the sample countries.

However, we also found an opposite pattern, namely the coefficient estimate of lagged

bank private credit/financial&business services is negative, while the estimate of lagged

[bank private credit/financial&business services]2 is positive in construction and mining.

The association of interest spread and sectoral growth remains largely the same.

          Finally, we offer another alternative specification in Table 7. To verify the possibility

of “financial Dutch disease” – i.e. booming financial service flows reduces the supply of

long term funding to manufacturing and other sectors that rely on stable external finance

– we add a lagged growth of finance and business services, and control for the interest

spread as well as its interaction with the growth of finance and business services. We find

some support of this hypothesis in the whole sample since the coefficient estimate on the

interaction term is negative and statistically significant for the growth of manufacturing

sector.

6 Concluding Observations

          At a broader level, our paper was motivated by the observation that what matters

for economic growth is the quality of finance rather than the quantity of finance. Yet

standard measures of financial development are quantitative measures of size rather than

measures of financial efficiency that measure the capacity of a financial system to allocate

financial resources to their most productive uses. The global financial crisis that wrought

havoc on the financial systems of the US and EU underlines the possibility that expansion

of the financial sector may be beneficial for growth but only up to a point. Even in

developing countries, quantity of finance may be a poor measure of quality of finance.



                                                 16
For example, in China, the relentless expansion of credit in recent years, much of it to

state-owned firms, has given rise to concerns about deterioration in the quality of

investment. A key dimension of financial efficiency is the extent to which the financial

system channels resources to productive sectors of the real economy.

       Overall, our evidence is consistent with the hypotheses we set forth at the outset,

in particular the non-linear effect of financial development on growth and its uneven effect

across sectors. For one measure of the quality of finance, we find that the level has a

positive, significant effect but the squared term has a negative, significant effect for a few

sectors. Therefore, our evidence lends some support to the conjecture that financial

development has a non-linear effect on output growth. In addition, we find that the effect

of financial depth on output growth varies across sectors. More specifically, we find that

financial depth has a negative effect on manufacturing in East Asia and a positive effect

on finance, insurance, and real estate sector in Latin America. Financial efficiency, as

measured by lending-deposit interest spread, is positively associated with the growth of

finance, insurance, and real estate sector. Construction sector growth is negatively

associated with the spread in East Asia, but positively in Latin America.

       More generally, several of the differences between the regions may reflect the

greater scarcity of finance in Latin America in comparison to East Asia. This may explain

why the marginal importance of the quantity of finance is higher in Latin America than in

East Asia. It may be that the expansion of East Asia’s financial sector has reached the

stage where the quality of finance may be at least as important as its quantity. We also

find some evidence of a financial Dutch disease. More specifically, the faster the growth

of financial services and the larger the lending-deposit interest spread, the slower the



                                             17
growth of the manufacturing sector. It should be emphasized that our empirical analysis

is preliminary and marks a first step toward more in-depth analysis of an important issue.

Future research would benefit greatly from, subject to data availability, better

measurement of the quality of finance by controlling for, for example, the degree of

financial repression and the role of directed credit and state-owned banks.




                                           18
Data Appendix



        Variable                           Source and Definition

Sectoral Output Growth     Groningen Growth and Development Centre 10-
per Worker (%); VAK        Sector Database. Provide a long-run internationally
                           comparable dataset on sectoral productivity
                           performance in Asia, Europe, Latin America and the
                           US. Variables covered in the data set are annual
                           series of value added, output deflators, and persons
                           employed for 10 broad sectors. It gives sectoral
                           detail to the historical macro data in Maddison (2003)
                           from 1950 onwards. It consists of series for 10
                           countries in Asia, 9 in Latin-America and 9 in Europe
                           and the US. The present data differentiate between
                           ten sectors of the economy, namely: agriculture,
                           mining, manufacturing, construction, public utilities,
                           retail and wholesale trade, transport and
                           communication, finance and business services,
                           other market services and government services.
                           (Estimates for the total economy are aggregated
                           across sectors and that, given several adjustments
                           at sectoral level; the aggregate results are not fully
                           consistent with the national accounts aggregates.
                           Value added data in this database are at constant
                           prices).

Bank Private Credit to     Global Financial Development Database (GFDD);
GDP (%); BCRY              GFDD.DI.01. The financial resources provided to
                           the private sector by domestic money banks as a
                           share of GDP. Domestic money banks comprise
                           commercial banks and other financial institutions that
                           accept transferable deposits, such as demand
                           deposits. (International Monetary Fund, International
                           Financial Statistics, and World Bank GDP estimates)

Lending-Deposit Interest   GFDD; GFDD.EI.02. Difference between lending
Spread (%); SPRD           rate and deposit rate. Lending rate is the rate
                           charged by banks on loans to the private sector and
                           deposit interest rate is the rate offered by commercial
                           banks on three-month deposits.             (International
                           Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics)




                                          19
Getting Credit Index   Doing Business: Measuring Business Regulations
(score); GTCR          Database. Measure of the legal rights of borrowers
                       and lenders with respect to secured transactions
                       through one set of indicators and the sharing of credit
                       information through another. The first set of
                       indicators measures whether certain features that
                       facilitate lending exist within the applicable collateral
                       and bankruptcy laws. The second set measures the
                       coverage, scope and accessibility of credit
                       information available through public credit registries
                       and private credit bureaus. The ranking on the ease
                       of getting credit is based on the percentile rankings
                       on the sum of its component indicators: the depth of
                       credit information index and the strength of legal
                       rights index. This measure shows the distance of
                       each economy to the “frontier.” The frontier
                       represents the highest performance observed or
                       each of the indicators across all economies
                       measured in Doing Business since the inclusion of
                       the indicator. An economy’s distance to frontier is
                       reflected on a scale from 0 to 100, where 0
                       represents the lowest performance and 100
                       represents the frontier.

Resolving Insolvency   Measure the time, cost and outcome of insolvency
Index (score); REIN    proceedings involving domestic entities. The data
                       are derived from questionnaire responses by local
                       insolvency practitioners and verified through a study
                       of laws and regulations as well as public information
                       on bankruptcy systems. The ranking on the ease of
                       resolving insolvency is based on the recovery rate.
                       This measure shows the distance of each economy
                       to the “frontier.” The frontier represents the highest
                       performance observed or each of the indicators
                       across all economies measured in Doing Business
                       since the inclusion of the indicator. An economy’s
                       distance to frontier is reflected on a scale from 0 to
                       100, where 0 represents the lowest performance and
                       100 represents the frontier.

Depositors with        Financial Access Survey. Number of depositors with
Commercial Bank per    commercial banks per 1,000 adults. The data is from
1,000 Adults; DCBA     commercial banks-bank survey.        (International
                       Monetary Fund, Financial Access Survey)




                                      20
SME Loans from          Financial Access Survey. Outstanding SME loans
Commercial Banks (%     from commercial banks relative to the size of GDP.
GDP); LSME

Inflation (%); INF      World Development Indicators. (FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG)
                        Inflation, consumer prices (annual %), as measured
                        by the consumer price index reflects the annual
                        percentage change in the cost to the average
                        consumer of acquiring a basket of goods and
                        services that may be fixed or changed at specified
                        intervals, such as yearly. The Laspeyres formula is
                        generally used.       Data for Argentina are from
                        Economist Intelligence Unit, of which prior to 2007,
                        data are from the Instituto Nacional de Estadística y
                        Censos; from 2007 the source for consumer price
                        inflation data is PriceStats.

Risk Premium on         World Development Indicators. (FR.INR.RISK) Risk
Lending (%); RPLN       premium on lending (lending rate minus treasury bill
                        rate, %). Risk premium on lending is the interest rate
                        charged by banks on loans to private sector
                        customers minus the "risk free" treasury bill interest
                        rate at which short-term government securities are
                        issued or traded in the market. In some countries this
                        spread may be negative, indicating that the market
                        considers its best corporate clients to be lower risk
                        than the government. The terms and conditions
                        attached to lending rates differ by country, however,
                        limiting their comparability.

Bank Private Credit /   World Development Indicators.          Bank Private
Financial&Business      Credit/GDP     divided     by     Financial&Business
Services (%); FSER      Services/GDP. Financial&Business Services/GDP
                        (NV.SRV.TETC.ZS) corresponds to ISIC divisions
                        50-99 and include value added in financial
                        professional services, wholesale and retail trade
                        (including hotels and restaurants), transport, and
                        government, and personal services such as
                        education, health care, and real estate services. Also
                        included are imputed bank service charges.




                                       21
Countries and Regions
Note: * included in the estimation sample in East Asia and Pacific; ** in Latin America &
the Caribbean; *** economies in other regions included in the estimation.


East Asia and Pacific

Cambodia (KHM), People Republic of China (CHN), Fiji (FJI), Indonesia (IDN)*, Kiribati
(KIR), Korea, Dem. Rep. (PRK), Lao PDR (LAO), Malaysia (MYS)*, Marshall Islands
(MHL), Micronesia, Fed. Sts. (FSM), Mongolia (MNG), Myanmar (MMR), Palau (PLW),
Papua New Guinea (PNG), Philippines (PHL)*, Samoa (WSM), Solomon Islands (SLB),
St. Kitts and Nevis (KNA), Thailand (THA)*, Timor-Leste (TMP), Tonga (TON), Tuvalu
(TUV), Vanuatu (VUT), Vietnam (VNM)


Latin America & the Caribbean

Antigua and Barbuda (ATG), Argentina (ARG)**, Belize (BLZ), Bolivia (BOL)**, Brazil
(BRA)**, Chile (CHL), Colombia (COL)**, Costa Rica (CRI)**, Cuba (CUB), Dominica
(DMA), Dominican Republic (DOM), Ecuador (ECU), El Salvador (SLV), Grenada (GRD),
Guatemala (GTM), Guyana (GUY), Haiti (HTI), Honduras (HND), Jamaica (JAM), Mexico
(MEX)**, Nicaragua (NIC), Panama (PAN), Paraguay (PRY), Peru (PER)**, St. Lucia
(LCA), St. Vincent and the Grenadines (VCT), Suriname (SUR), Uruguay (URY),
Venezuela, RB (VEN)


Europe and Central Asia

Albania (ALB), Armenia (ARM), Azerbaijan (AZE), Belarus (BLR), Bosnia and
Herzegovina (BIH), Bulgaria (BGR), Georgia (GEO), Kazakhstan (KAZ), Kosovo (KSV),
Kyrgyz Republic (KGZ), Latvia (LVA), Lithuania (LTU), Macedonia, FYR (MKD), Moldova
(MDA), Montenegro (MNE), Romania (ROM), Russian Federation (RUS), Serbia (SRB),
Tajikistan (TJK), Turkey (TUR), Turkmenistan (TKM), Ukraine (UKR), Uzbekistan (UZB)


High-income OECD members

Australia (AUS), Austria (AUT), Belgium (BEL), Canada (CAN), Czech Republic (CZE),
Denmark (DNK)***, Estonia (EST), Finland (FIN), France (FRA)***, Germany (DEU),
Greece (GRC), Hungary (HUN), Iceland (ISL), Ireland (IRL), Israel (ISR), Italy (ITA)***,
Japan (JPN), Korea, Rep. (KOR)*, Luxembourg (LUX), Netherlands (NLD)***, New
Zealand (NZL), Norway (NOR), Poland (POL), Portugal (PRT), Slovak Republic (SVK),
Slovenia (SVN), Spain (ESP)***, Sweden (SWE)***, Switzerland (CHE), United Kingdom
(GBR)***, United States (USA)***




                                           22
High-income non-OECD members

Andorra (ADO), Aruba (ABW), Bahamas, The (BHS), Bahrain (BHR), Barbados (BRB),
Bermuda (BMU), Brunei Darussalam (BRN), Cayman Islands (CYM), Croatia (HRV),
Cyprus (CYP), Equatorial Guinea (GNQ), Faeroe Islands (FRO), French Polynesia (PYF),
Hong Kong SAR, China (HKG)*, Isle of Man (IMY), Kuwait (KWT), Liechtenstein (LIE),
Macao SAR, China (MAC), Malta (MLT), Monaco (MCO), New Caledonia (NCL), Oman
(OMN), Qatar (QAT), San Marino (SMR), Saudi Arabia (SAU), Singapore (SGP), Trinidad
and Tobago (TTO), United Arab Emirates (ARE), Virgin Islands (U.S.) (VIR)


Middle East and North Africa

Algeria (DZA), Djibouti (DJI), Egypt, Arab Rep. (EGY)***, Iran, Islamic Rep. (IRN), Iraq
(IRQ), Jordan (JOR), Lebanon (LBN), Libya (LBY), Morocco (MAR), Syrian Arab Republic
(SYR), Tunisia (TUN), West Bank and Gaza (WBG), Yemen, Rep. (YEM)


South Asia

Afghanistan (AFG), Bangladesh (BGD), Bhutan (BTN), India (IND), Maldives (MDV),
Nepal (NPL), Pakistan (PAK), Sri Lanka (LKA)


Sub-Saharan Africa

Angola (AGO), Benin (BEN), Botswana (BWA)***, Burkina Faso (BFA), Burundi (BDI),
Cameroon (CMR), Cape Verde (CPV), Central African Republic (CAF), Chad (TCD),
Comoros (COM), Congo, Dem. Rep. (ZAR), Congo, Rep. (COG), Cote d'Ivoire (CIV),
Eritrea (ERI), Ethiopia (ETH)***, Gabon (GAB), Gambia, The (GMB), Ghana (GHA),
Guinea (GIN), Guinea-Bissau (GNB), Kenya (KEN)***, Lesotho (LSO), Liberia (LBR),
Madagascar (MDG), Malawi (MWI)***, Mali (MLI), Mauritania (MRT), Mauritius (MUS)***,
Mozambique (MOZ), Namibia (NAM), Niger (NER), Nigeria (NGA)***, Rwanda (RWA),
Sao Tome and Principe (STP), Senegal (SEN), Seychelles (SYC), Sierra Leone (SLE),
Somalia (SOM), South Africa (ZAF), Sudan (SDN), Swaziland (SWZ), Tanzania (TZA)***,
Togo (TGO), Uganda (UGA), Zambia (ZMB)***, Zimbabwe (ZWE)***




                                          23
                                      References
Aizenman J., B. Pinto and Vl. Sushko (2013) “Financial sector ups and downs and the
      real sector in the open economy: Up by the stairs, down by the parachute,”
      Emerging Markets Review, 16 (2013) 1–30.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Vadym Volosovych (2003) “Why doesn’t
       Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation” University
       of Houston, December.

Arcand, Jean-Louis, Enrico Berkes, and Ugo Panizza. 2012. "Too Much Finance?" IMF
      Working Paper No. 12/161.

Boyd, J.H., Smith, B.D. (1992). “Intermediation and the equilibrium allocation of
      investment capital: Implications for economic development”. Journal of Monetary
      Economics 30, 409–432.

Boyd, J.H., Levine, R., Smith, B.D. (2001). “The impact of inflation on financial sector
      performance”. Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 221–248.

Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012) ‘Reassessing the impact of finance on growth,’ in
     proceedings of the Second International Research Conference of the Reserve
     Bank of India, forthcoming.

Claessens, S., Laeven, L. (2003). “Financial development, property rights, and growth”.
      Journal of Finance 58, 2401–2436.

Dehejia, R., Lleras-Muney, A. (2003). “Why does financial development matter? The
      United States from 1900 to 1940”. Working Paper No. 9551. National Bureau of
      Economic Research.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Kris J. Mitchener (2003), “The Great Depression as a Credit
      Boom Gone Wrong”, BIS Working Paper No. 137, September.

Jayaratne, J., Strahan, P.E. (1996). “The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank
      branch deregulation”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 639–670.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor (2011) “When Credit Bites Back:
      Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crises,” NBER Working Paper No. 17621




                                          24
Ju Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei (2011) “When Is Quality of Financial System a Source of
       Comparative Advantage?” Journal of International Economics, 84(2), pages 178-
       187.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. (2000). “Investor protection
      and corporate governance”. Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3–27.

Lawa, Siong Hook and Nirvikar Singh (2014) “Does too much finance harm economic
      growth?” Journal of Banking & Finance 41, 36–44

Lucas, Robert (1990). "Why doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?", The
      American Economic Review 80 (2): 92–96.

Minsky, H. P. (1974), "The modeling of financial instability: An introduction," in Modelling
      and Simulation, Vol. 5, Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Pittsburgh Conference,
      Instruments Society of America, pp. 267.72.

OECD       (2013),   “Health    at    a    Glance    2013     OECD     INDICATORS”
       http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/Health-at-a-Glance-2013.pdf

Philippon, Thomas, and Ariell Reshef.(2013) "An international look at the growth of
       modern finance." The Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (2): 73-96.

Rajan, R.G., Zingales, L. (1998). “Financial dependence and growth”. American
      Economic Review 88, 559–586.

Rajan, R. G. (2005), "Has financial development made the world riskier?" Proceedings of
      the 2005 Jackson Hole Conference organized by the Kansas City Fed.

Rousseau, P., and Wachtel, P., (2011), "What is Happening to The Impact of Financial
     Deepening on Economic Growth?" Economic Inquiry, 49, 276-288.


Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor (2009), “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
      Policy, Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008”, NBER Working Paper
      15512.




                                            25
Table 1: Financial Depth, Efficiency, and Access, 2005-2011
This table provides measures of financial depth -- Bank Private Credit to GDP (%, BCRY); efficiency -- Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%,SPRD); governance -- Getting Credit
Index (GTCR) and Resolving Insolvency Index (REIN), and access -- Depositors with Commercial Banks per 1,000 Adults (DCBA) and Outstanding SME Loans from
Commercial Banks (%GDP, LSME).
Sources: Authors' calculation on World Bank Global Financial Development Database (BCRY, SPRD), Doingbusiness Database (GTCR, REIN); and IMF Financial Access
Survey (DCBA, LSME)

Country             BCRY       SPRD       GTCR         REIN       DCBA       LSME          Country           BCRY        SPRD       GTCR         REIN       DCBA       LSME
          avg. =     50.6        7.8       50.5         35.1      510.8       11.5             std.dev. =     49.9         5.9       22.3         25.6      530.6       11.4
ABW                  55.0        7.6          ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   LBY                 6.6         3.6          ..           ..     675.6          ..
ADO                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   LCA                96.8         7.3       43.8         44.8          ..         ..
AFG                   7.1          ..      16.7         17.6       96.0          ..   ..   LCN                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
AGO                  11.8       16.7       37.5          0.0       52.2       15.3    ..   LCR                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
AIA                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   LDC                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
ALB                  27.5        7.0       71.9         41.0          ..         ..   ..   LIC                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
AND                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   LIE                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
ANR                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   LKA                27.9         5.5       49.0         44.7          ..         ..
ANT                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   LMC                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
ARB                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   LMY                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
ARE                  67.5          ..      46.9         29.0          ..         ..   ..   LSO                10.3         7.9       37.5         28.2      282.9          ..
ARG                  11.9        3.6       62.5         35.3      635.9          ..   ..   LTU                46.0         2.5       68.8         52.1          ..         ..
ARM                  16.7       10.5       63.5         38.4          ..         ..   ..   LUX               165.0           ..      25.0         44.6          ..         ..
ASM                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   LVA                73.2         5.6       88.5         34.1     1142.1       33.9
ATG                  68.3        7.2       43.8         36.9          ..         ..   ..   MAC                46.7         5.2          ..           ..         ..      11.7
AUS                 113.7        4.0       87.5         84.4          ..         ..   ..   MAF                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
AUT                 115.8          ..      81.3         76.9          ..         ..   ..   MAR                64.0         8.0       34.4         37.8          ..       8.3
AZE                  13.1        8.0       65.6         32.8      246.5          ..   ..   MCA                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
BDI                  14.4          ..      25.0          7.4       20.0        6.2    ..   MCO                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
BEL                  86.3          ..      62.5         91.5          ..      17.2    ..   MDA                29.8         5.8       50.0         30.2     1053.2          ..
BEN                  19.4          ..      25.0         18.6       86.1          ..   ..   MDG                10.1        27.3       15.6         17.4       27.0        2.1
BFA                  18.0          ..      25.0         22.7          ..         ..   ..   MDV                67.7         6.4       50.0         51.6     1048.9          ..
BGD                  36.9        5.9       56.3         25.5      304.9        5.2    ..   MEA                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
BGR                  47.3        6.2       90.6         34.5          ..         ..   ..   MEX                16.5         4.8       68.8         68.6      267.1        4.1
BHR                  53.9        5.3       37.5         67.2          ..         ..   ..   MHL                   ..          ..      35.4         18.9          ..         ..
BHS                  75.3        2.0       56.3         65.8          ..         ..   ..   MIC                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
BIH                  48.9        4.5       62.5         36.9          ..      24.9    ..   MKD                34.8         4.4       65.6         42.9          ..      16.9
BLR                  24.4        0.7       39.6         34.9          ..         ..   ..   MLI                17.4           ..      25.0         20.8       84.9          ..
BLZ                  58.8        6.1       43.8         67.2      947.6          ..   ..   MLT               117.7         2.7          ..           ..     934.9       35.0
BMU                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   MMR                   ..        5.0          ..           ..     121.7        1.6
BOL                  33.7        9.3       42.7         40.1          ..         ..   ..   MNA                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
BRA                  40.4       34.7       50.0         13.8      500.5          ..   ..   MNE                61.9           ..      77.5         45.6          ..         ..
BRB                  71.8        5.9          ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   MNG                34.3        10.3       56.3         21.0          ..       3.6
BRN                  37.6        4.7       43.8         49.2     1389.0          ..   ..   MNP                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
BTN                  27.5       10.5       18.8          0.0          ..         ..   ..   MOR                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
BWA                  22.4        6.8       62.5         60.4      412.9          ..   ..   MOZ                16.6         7.7       40.6         15.9          ..         ..
CAA                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   MRT                23.5        12.6       25.0          0.0       46.4          ..
CAF                   6.9       11.5       31.3          0.0       27.6          ..   ..   MSR                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
CAN                 126.7        3.2       81.3         94.7          ..         ..   ..   MTQ                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
CEA                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   MUS                76.7         5.7       51.0         36.2          ..         ..
CEB                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   MWI                 9.7        21.3       43.8         15.7      163.5        2.0
CEU                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   MYS               101.8         2.9      100.0         41.1          ..      16.5
CHE                 161.1        2.3       81.3         49.8          ..      43.2    ..   NAC                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
CHI                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   NAM                47.1         4.9       68.8         34.6      254.6        0.8
CHL                  64.6        3.8       56.3         30.9          ..       7.8    ..   NCL                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
CHN                 109.9        3.2       49.0         36.3        8.8       29.6    ..   NER                 9.7           ..      25.0         13.3          ..         ..
CIV                  15.8          ..      25.0         32.2      105.2          ..   ..   NGA                22.8         7.3       59.4         29.1      406.6        0.0
CLA                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   NGA(alt)              ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
CME                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   NIC                31.9         7.9       49.0         36.2          ..         ..
CMR                   9.9       11.5       30.2         13.8       49.1          ..   ..   NIU                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
COD                     ..         ..         ..           ..       7.3          ..   ..   NLD               185.5         0.5       68.8         90.0          ..         ..
COG                   3.5       11.5       31.3         18.5       42.8          ..   ..   NOC                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
COK                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   NOR                77.3         1.9       62.5         95.6     1153.0          ..
COL                  29.2        6.9       62.5         56.3     1061.8        0.6    ..   NPL                38.6         5.5       64.6         25.9      316.7          ..
COM                  11.3        6.8       18.8          0.0       61.5        2.7    ..   NRU                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
CPV                  52.4        7.2       35.4          0.0     1204.1          ..   ..   NZL               134.1         1.5       93.8         82.0          ..         ..
CRI                  40.8       11.7       50.0         23.1      937.5          ..   ..   OEC                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
CSA                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   OED                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
CSS                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   OMN                34.4         3.3       37.5         37.2          ..         ..
CUB                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   OSS                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
CUW                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   PAK                24.6         6.2       61.5         42.0      201.8          ..
CYM                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   PAN                78.1         4.7       68.8         28.1      915.5          ..
CYP                 220.8        3.3       60.4         74.8          ..         ..   ..   PER                20.4        19.4       77.1         28.0      349.8        6.4
CZE                  40.3        4.6       71.9         27.4          ..      10.0    ..   PHL                26.1         4.6       43.8          4.5      394.1          ..
DEU                 108.0          ..      84.4         85.7          ..         ..   ..   PLW                   ..          ..       6.3         33.5          ..         ..
DEW                     ..         ..         ..           ..         ..         ..   ..   PNG                20.4         9.1       34.4         25.3          ..         ..
DJI                  21.6        9.3       12.5         16.8       64.6          ..   ..   POL                33.9         3.7       84.4         36.0          ..         ..
DMA                  49.9        6.2       56.3         29.6          ..         ..   ..   PRI                   ..          ..      87.5         68.5          ..         ..
DNK                 183.8          ..      80.2         86.0          ..         ..   ..   PRK                   ..          ..         ..           ..         ..         ..
DOM                  19.6        9.1       55.2          8.5      569.6          ..   ..   PRT               166.1           ..      50.0         76.8          ..         ..
DZA                  12.6        6.2       30.2         44.1      326.0          ..   ..   PRY                23.9        24.5       56.3         17.8       91.8          ..


                                                                                      26
Table 1, cot.: Financial Depth, Efficiency, and Access, 2005-2011
This table provides measures of financial depth -- Bank Private Credit to GDP (%, BCRY); efficiency -- Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%,SPRD); governance -- Getting Credit
Index (GTCR) and Resolving Insolvency Index (REIN), and access -- Depositors with Commercial Banks per 1,000 Adults (DCBA) and Outstanding SME Loans from
Commercial Banks (%GDP, LSME).
Sources: Authors' calculation on World Bank Global Financial Development Database (BCRY, SPRD), Doingbusiness Database (GTCR, REIN); and IMF Financial Access
Survey (DCBA, LSME)

Country             BCRY        SPRD       GTCR         REIN        DCBA      LSME          Country          BCRY        SPRD       GTCR        REIN       DCBA        LSME
          avg. =     50.6         7.8       50.5         35.1       510.8      11.5             std.dev. =    49.9         5.9       22.3        25.6      530.6        11.4
EAP                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   PSE                  ..          ..          ..         ..     571.7         2.1
EAS                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   PSS                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
ECA                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   PYF                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
ECC                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   QAT               36.2         3.5        31.3       55.9      674.8           ..
ECS                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   REU                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
ECU                  24.4         7.1        51.0        17.5        437.9        ..   ..   ROM               30.5         7.5        85.4       26.5          ..          ..
EGY                  40.3         5.6        44.8        17.7        353.7      1.7    ..   ROU                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
EMU                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   RUS               34.6         5.7        37.5       43.7          ..        6.7
ERI                     ..          ..       12.5         0.0            ..       ..   ..   RWA               10.2         8.9        37.5        3.4      126.2         2.5
ESP                 182.1           ..       68.8        75.3            ..       ..   ..   SAS                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
EST                  86.7         3.7        69.8        40.3       1958.6        ..   ..   SAU               39.0           ..       56.3       30.4      628.1           ..
ETH                  17.3         3.4        35.4        43.5         87.4        ..   ..   SCE                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
EUU                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   SDN                9.2           ..       25.0       34.0          ..          ..
FCS                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   SEN               22.7           ..       25.0       21.5          ..          ..
FIN                  83.7           ..       75.0        93.6            ..       ..   ..   SGP               92.4         5.0        82.3       94.7     2075.2           ..
FJI                  44.3         3.2        68.8        47.6            ..     1.8    ..   SLB               19.3        12.4        30.2       24.8          ..          ..
FRA                 103.7           ..       64.6        49.0            ..       ..   ..   SLE                6.9        13.4        35.4        9.1      109.6           ..
FRO                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   SLV                4.7           ..       67.7       31.2          ..       17.7
FSM                     ..       13.4        39.6         3.5            ..     8.5    ..   SMR              336.7           ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
GAB                   8.7        11.5        31.3        15.6        159.7        ..   ..   SOM                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
GBR                 183.9           ..      100.0        90.4            ..    12.5    ..   SRB               36.8         8.7        69.8       25.8          ..          ..
GEO                  24.4        12.8        61.5        28.9        476.8      8.3    ..   SSA                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
GHA                  12.9           ..       46.9        25.4        250.6        ..   ..   SSD                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
GIN                   4.4           ..       18.8        22.0            ..     4.1    ..   SSF                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
GMB                  12.0        14.9        31.3        29.1            ..       ..   ..   SST                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
GNB                   4.1           ..       25.0         0.0         40.3        ..   ..   STP               27.5        18.3        12.5        4.6      349.8           ..
GNQ                   4.7        11.5        31.3         0.0        148.4        ..   ..   SUR               19.0         6.9        25.0        8.1          ..          ..
GRC                  93.5           ..       52.1        47.4            ..    19.8    ..   SVK               41.5         3.7        72.9       49.2          ..          ..
GRD                  69.0         7.1        43.8         0.0            ..       ..   ..   SVN               76.4         3.7        49.0       49.0          ..          ..
GRL                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   SWE              111.9         2.5        70.8       80.0          ..          ..
GTM                  24.6         8.2        69.8        29.6            ..       ..   ..   SWZ               21.6         6.2        68.8       38.5      456.8           ..
GUF                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   SXM                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
GUM                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   SYC               23.1         7.7        25.0       41.9      608.5           ..
GUY                  38.1        12.2        25.0        18.6            ..       ..   ..   SYR               15.3         2.8         8.3       30.9      192.7           ..
HIC                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   TCA                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
HKG                 148.5         5.1        93.8        84.7            ..       ..   ..   TCD                3.8        11.5        25.0        0.0          ..          ..
HND                  45.1         8.8        71.9        21.2            ..       ..   ..   TGO               19.3           ..       25.0       27.0      118.0           ..
HPC                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   THA               94.9         4.3        61.5       45.3     1051.1        26.3
HRV                  61.8         8.1        55.2        31.3       1440.3        ..   ..   TJK               15.4        13.0        17.7       38.9      333.8           ..
HTI                  12.6        18.6        27.1         0.0            ..       ..   ..   TKM                  ..          ..       47.9       42.9          ..          ..
HUN                  55.6         2.4        75.0        40.4            ..    13.9    ..   TLS                  ..          ..          ..         ..     130.0           ..
IDN                  23.5         5.5        51.0        16.0            ..     6.2    ..   TMP               17.0        12.7        12.5        0.0          ..          ..
IMN                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   TON               46.4         6.3        43.8       26.8          ..       19.6
IMY                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   TTO               28.7         6.7        79.2       26.7          ..          ..
IND                  42.3           ..       74.0        25.7            ..     3.6    ..   TUN               56.6           ..       41.7       54.8      693.0           ..
INX                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   TUR               30.3           ..       56.3       19.7     1236.4         8.8
IRL                 197.9         2.6        87.5        92.4            ..    34.9    ..   TUV                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
IRN                  27.6         1.8        44.8        22.5            ..       ..   ..   TWN                  ..          ..       59.4       85.6          ..          ..
IRQ                   4.2           ..       18.8         0.0            ..     0.2    ..   TZA               12.9         8.1        43.8       22.8          ..          ..
ISL                 179.1           ..       75.0        83.6            ..       ..   ..   UGA               10.0        10.4           ..         ..     141.1           ..
ISR                  90.7         2.9        87.5        54.9       1042.0        ..   ..   UKR               51.1         7.0        66.7        9.2     3063.9           ..
ITA                 102.8           ..       51.0        63.4        788.1        ..   ..   UMC                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
JAM                  24.7        11.3        50.0        68.3            ..       ..   ..   URY               22.5         8.0        61.5       43.1      495.3         4.6
JEY                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   USA               58.4           ..       93.8       82.6          ..          ..
JOR                  76.6         4.3        25.0        29.0            ..       ..   ..   UVK                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..       20.7
JPN                 102.0         1.2        81.3        98.1            ..       ..   ..   UZB                  ..          ..       21.9       19.0      860.7         3.5
KAZ                  41.0           ..       42.7        42.3        915.9        ..   ..   VCT               48.1         6.5        43.8        0.0          ..          ..
KEN                  28.1         8.8        83.3        33.3            ..     0.1    ..   VEN               18.8         4.7        19.8        6.6      728.2         0.6
KGZ                   9.1        22.1        69.8        15.3        109.6        ..   ..   VIR                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
KHM                  18.5           ..       25.0         9.8            ..       ..   ..   VNM               85.3         3.0        67.7       19.4          ..          ..
KIR                     ..          ..       31.3         0.0        161.0     11.8    ..   VUT               51.7         5.1        42.7       43.3          ..          ..
KNA                  58.5         4.6        43.8         0.0            ..       ..   ..   WBG                6.7           ..       20.8        0.0          ..          ..
KOR                  95.5         1.6        84.4        86.0            ..    38.9    ..   WLD                  ..          ..          ..         ..         ..          ..
KSV                  25.6           ..       81.3        36.3            ..       ..   ..   WSM               40.7         7.1        39.6       18.9      650.1        25.1
KWT                  57.0         3.2        41.7        30.6            ..       ..   ..   YEM                5.9         5.4        16.7       30.2       83.0           ..
LAC                     ..          ..          ..          ..           ..       ..   ..   ZAF               71.8         3.7        79.2       35.4          ..          ..
LAO                   9.9        21.8        24.0         0.0            ..       ..   ..   ZAR                2.9        37.5        18.8        3.4          ..          ..
LBN                  67.9         2.2        49.0        31.8        825.6        ..   ..   ZMB               10.2        13.2        64.6       29.0       24.1         0.4
LBR                  11.5        11.3        28.8         8.6            ..       ..   ..   ZWE                8.1           ..       50.0        0.2      244.5           ..




                                                                                 27
Table 2: Correlation between Quality of Finance Measures, 2005-2011

This table provides correlations of financial depth -- Bank Private Credit to GDP (%, BCRY); efficiency -- Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%,SPRD);
governance -- Getting Credit Index (GTCR) and Resolving Insolvency Index (REIN), and access -- Depositors with Commercial Banks per 1,000
Adults (DCBA) and Outstanding SME Loans from Commercial Banks (%GDP, LSME).
Sources: Authors' calculation on World Bank Global Financial Development Database (BCRY, SPRD), Doingbusiness Database (GTCR, REIN); and
IMF Financial Access Survey (DCBA, LSME)
Note: Highlighted cell signifies statistical significance at 1 percent level.


                                           East Asia and Pacific                                         Latin America & the Caribbean
                                                                       Depositors
                                      Lending-                               with                        Lending-                         Depositors
                            Bank       Deposit                        Commercial               Bank       Deposit                               with
                          Private      Interest    Getting Resolving Banks per               Private      Interest   Getting Resolving Commercial
                         Credit to      Spread      Credit Insolvency      1,000            Credit to      Spread     Credit Insolvency   Banks per
                         GDP (%)           (%)      Index       Index     Adults            GDP (%)           (%)     Index       Index 1,000 Adults


      Lending-Deposit
                               -0.7                                                               0.3         1.0
  Interest Spread (%)


 Getting Credit Index          0.5         -0.5                                                   -0.3        0.1       1.0


Resolving Insolvency
                               0.9         -0.5        0.6                                        -0.3       -0.4       0.6         1.0
               Index

     Depositors with
  Commercial Banks             -0.1        0.5         0.6          0.4                           0.3        -0.4       -0.4        0.1           1.0
    per 1,000 Adults
    SME Loans from
  Commercial Banks             0.7         -0.1        -0.6         0.5              -0.6         0.5         0.0       0.4         0.0          -0.6
          (%GDP)



                                                                                28
Table 3: Baseline Estimation Results
This table reports OLS regression of sectoral output growth (%) on its lag, bank private credit to GDP (%) and lending-deposit interest spread (%). The sample is from 1996 to 2011,
covering 41 economies, of which 11 are in East Asia and Pacific (CHN, HKG, IDN, IND, JPN, KOR, MYS, PHL, SGP, THA, TWN) and 9 are in Latin America & the Carribean (ARG, BOL,
BRA, CHL, COL, CRI, MEX, PER, VEN). Standard errors are in parentheses; *** (**, *) denotes statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) percent level.
Sources: Authors' calculation on Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC) 10-Sector Database and World Bank Global Financial Development Database (BCRY, SPRD).


                                                      Lagged Sectoral Growth             Bank Private Credit to GDP (%)   Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%)
Dependent Variable: Sectoral Output Growth (%)                                                                                                                  R-sq.   observations
                                                   coeff.  (std. err.)                   coeff.   (std. err.)               coeff.  (std. err.)

                                                                              Whole Sample (41 economies)
Agriculture                                          -.52       (.03)***                  .19       (.11)*                   -1.59       (.60)***                 .44       454
Mining                                               -.41       (.06)***                 -.48       (.19)**                  -1.35      (1.04)                    .11       452
Manufacturing                                        -.50       (.02)***                  .03       (.10)                     -.53       (.51)                    .47       455
Public Utilities                                     -.50       (.03)***                  .54       (.12)***                  2.31       (.62)***                 .41       456
Construction                                         -.50       (.02)***                 -.55       (.11)***                  -.70       (.57)                    .50       456
Wholesale and Retail Trade                           -.52       (.02)***                  .08       (.10)                     -.65       (.54)                    .51       454
Transport, Storage, and Communication                -.47       (.02)***                 -.11       (.09)                      .05       (.49)                    .45       454
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                  -.49       (.03)***                 -.54       (.14)***                   .96       (.72)                    .34       459
Government Services                                  -.42       (.03)***                 -.00       (.13)                     2.11       (.68)***                 .34       343
Community, Social and Personal Services              -.56       (.04)***                  .78       (.13)***                 -1.01       (.68)                    .40       444

                                                                           East Asia and Pacific (11 economies)
Agriculture                                          -.52       (.05)***                   -.09        (.16)                 -8.62      (4.96)*                   .49       141
Mining                                               -.46       (.10)***                   -.34        (.32)                 -5.30     (10.02)                    .14       137
Manufacturing                                        -.52       (.04)***                   -.46        (.15)***              -4.46      (4.67)                    .52       139
Public Utilities                                     -.51       (.04)***                    .01        (.15)                  6.06      (4.71)                    .49       140
Construction                                         -.50       (.04)***                   -.56        (.15)***             -14.20      (4.76)***                 .53       139
Wholesale and Retail Trade                           -.48       (.05)***                    .64        (.17)***              10.31      (5.13)**                  .52       139
Transport, Storage, and Communication                -.52       (.04)***                    .27        (.16)*                 2.00      (4.94)                    .53       138
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                  -.43       (.05)***                   -.18        (.19)                 18.83      (5.86)***                 .38       140
Government Services                                  -.45       (.07)***                   -.54        (.28)*               -28.88      (9.51)***                 .37        92
Community, Social and Personal Services              -.52       (.06)***                    .70        (.22)***               8.58      (6.72)                    .37       140

                                                                     Latin America & the Caribbean (9 economies)
Agriculture                                          -.44       (.06)***                  1.28      (.65)*                   -2.51      (.67)***                  .42       111
Mining                                               -.62       (.08)***                 -2.47      (.82)***                   .18      (.83)                     .37       112
Manufacturing                                        -.42       (.05)***                  -.59      (.61)                     -.77      (.63)                     .42       113
Public Utilities                                     -.47       (.07)***                   .16      (.76)                     2.78      (.78)***                  .40       114
Construction                                         -.60       (.05)***                 -1.90      (.59)***                   .85      (.61)                     .61       114
Wholesale and Retail Trade                           -.53       (.05)***                 -1.31      (.60)**                   -.18      (.62)                     .55       112
Transport, Storage, and Communication                -.49       (.05)***                  1.45      (.57)**                  -1.01      (.59)*                    .51       112
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                  -.54       (.05)***                  1.56      (.66)**                    .30      (.69)                     .52       113
Government Services                                  -.43       (.07)***                  -.23     (1.06)                     2.65      (.78)***                  .42        62
Community, Social and Personal Services              -.57       (.05)***                  1.40      (.62)**                  -2.06      (.64)***                  .53       114




                                                                                           29
Table 4: Alternative Specification - I
This table reports OLS regression of sectoral output growth (%) on its lagged term, lending-deposit interest spread, and bank private credit to GDP (%); including lagged term and squared term. The sample is from 1996 to 2011, covering 41 economies, of which 11 are in
East Asia and Pacific (CHN, HKG, IDN, IND, JPN, KOR, MYS, PHL, SGP, THA, TWN) and 9 are in Latin America & the Carribean (ARG, BOL, BRA, CHL, COL, CRI, MEX, PER, VEN). Standard errors are in parentheses; *** (**, *) denotes statistical significance at 1 (5,
10) percent level.
Sources: Authors' calculation on Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC) 10-Sector Database and World Bank Global Financial Development Database (BCRY, SPRD).


                                                       Lagged Sectoral Growth         Lagged Bank Private Credit to GDP (%)     Bank Private Credit to GDP (%)     [Bank Private Credit to GDP (%)] Squared Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%)
Dependent Variable: Sectoral Output Growth (%)                                                                                                                                                                                                       R-sq.    observations
                                                    coeff.  (std. err.)                   coeff.   (std. err.)                  coeff.   (std. err.)                   coeff.     (std. err.)                 coeff.  (std. err.)

                                                                                                                      Whole Sample (41 economies)
Agriculture                                           -.51       (.03)***                 -1.46         (2.19)                  2.90      (2.22)                      -.01           (.00)***                    -1.34       (.60)**                   .45        454
Mining                                                -.41       (.06)***                 -1.17         (2.95)                  -.16      (3.03)                       .01           (.00)                       -1.52      (1.04)                     .11        451
Manufacturing                                         -.50       (.02)***                 -3.08         (2.87)                  3.39      (2.92)                      -.00           (.00)                        -.50       (.51)                     .47        455
Public Utilities                                      -.51       (.03)***                 -2.62         (2.77)                  3.82      (2.80)                      -.00           (.00)*                       2.43       (.62)***                  .42        456
Construction                                          -.51       (.02)***                 -6.27         (3.67)*                 4.34      (3.69)                       .01           (.00)***                     -.90       (.56)                     .53        456
Wholesale and Retail Trade                            -.52       (.02)***                 -1.72         (1.59)                  1.16      (1.59)                       .00           (.00)**                      -.76       (.54)                     .51        453
Transport, Storage, and Communication                 -.47       (.02)***                  -.37         (1.07)                   .49      (1.12)                      -.00           (.00)                         .09       (.49)                     .45        454
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                   -.49       (.03)***                   .11         (4.20)                 -1.79      (4.21)                       .01           (.00)***                      .74       (.72)                     .35        459
Government Services                                   -.42       (.03)***                 -2.54         (1.80)                  2.81      (1.85)                      -.00           (.00)                        2.12       (.68)***                  .34        343
Community, Social and Personal Services               -.56       (.04)***                 -2.98         (3.93)                  4.76      (3.96)                      -.01           (.00)***                     -.81       (.68)                     .41        442

                                                                                                                  East Asia and Pacific (11 economies)
Agriculture                                           -.52       (.05)***                  -.60         (1.92)                    .24       (2.02)                     .00           (.00)                       -9.07      (5.15)*                    .49        141
Mining                                                -.45       (.10)***                   .32         (3.03)                   -.56       (3.28)                    -.00           (.01)                       -5.05     (10.42)                     .14        137
Manufacturing                                         -.52       (.04)***                 -3.86         (3.09)                   3.55       (3.24)                    -.00           (.00)                       -3.47      (4.87)                     .53        139
Public Utilities                                      -.50       (.04)***                 -3.99         (2.36)*                  4.46       (2.45)*                   -.00           (.00)                        7.38      (4.82)                     .51        140
Construction                                          -.52       (.04)***                 -4.64         (3.68)                   1.80       (3.74)                     .01           (.00)***                   -19.15      (4.56)***                  .60        139
Wholesale and Retail Trade                            -.48       (.05)***                   .23         (2.44)                    .78       (2.44)                    -.00           (.00)                       11.11      (5.31)**                   .52        139
Transport, Storage, and Communication                 -.53       (.04)***                  -.69         (1.51)                   2.35       (1.65)                    -.01           (.00)**                      4.41      (4.98)                     .55        138
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                   -.43       (.05)***                 -1.05         (3.96)                   1.75       (4.00)                    -.00           (.00)                       20.70      (6.03)***                  .39        140
Government Services                                   -.46       (.07)***                -20.65        (21.89)                  18.17      (21.82)                     .01           (.00)**                    -33.93      (9.51)***                  .41         92
Community, Social and Personal Services               -.52       (.06)***                 -8.28         (5.13)                   9.22       (5.22)*                   -.00           (.00)                        9.28      (6.90)                     .38        140

                                                                                                                Latin America & the Caribbean (9 economies)
Agriculture                                           -.46       (.06)***                  4.29        (10.10)                    -6.41     (10.95)                    .05           (.04)                       -2.22      (.72)***                   .43        111
Mining                                                -.60       (.08)***                 15.84        (13.89)                   -26.60     (14.52)*                   .12           (.05)**                       .78      (.86)                      .40        112
Manufacturing                                         -.43       (.05)***                 -3.92         (9.09)                     1.59      (9.47)                    .02           (.04)                        -.68      (.67)                      .42        113
Public Utilities                                      -.47       (.07)***                -30.72        (19.30)                    38.79     (19.62)*                  -.11           (.05)**                      2.21      (.80)***                   .44        114
Construction                                          -.61       (.05)***                  2.15         (6.14)                    -4.28      (6.74)                    .00           (.04)                         .85      (.65)                      .61        114
Wholesale and Retail Trade                            -.54       (.05)***                 -8.23         (8.21)                     3.40      (8.77)                    .05           (.04)                         .11      (.65)                      .56        112
Transport, Storage, and Communication                 -.48       (.05)***                 10.58         (5.26)**                  -9.38      (6.03)                    .00           (.04)                        -.90      (.61)                      .53        112
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                   -.55       (.05)***                  7.30         (8.83)                    -6.36      (8.68)                    .01           (.04)                         .36      (.73)                      .52        113
Government Services                                   -.43       (.07)***                -31.89        (34.41)                    28.90     (33.60)                    .04           (.08)                        2.90      (.85)***                   .43         62
Community, Social and Personal Services               -.58       (.05)***                 -8.34         (7.77)                    18.03      (8.07)**                 -.12           (.04)***                    -2.75      (.65)***                   .58        112




                                                                                                                                 30
Table 5: Financial Stability and Quality of Finance Measures, 1976-2012
This table provides for countries in estimation sample the correlations of financial depth -- Bank Private Credit to GDP (%,
BCRY); efficiency -- Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%,SPRD); and financial stability -- Average Inflation over the Past 5
Years above the OECD level (%, INFA), Inflation Volatility over the Past 5 Years above the OECD level (%, INFV), and Risk
Premium on Lending (%, RPLN).
Sources: Authors' calculation on World Bank Global Financial Development Database (BCRY, SPRD) and World
Devevelopment Indicators (INFA, INFV, RPLN).
Note: Highlighted cell signifies statistical significance at 1 percent level.


                                             East Asia and Pacific                                Latin America & the Caribbean
                                 (CHN, HKG, IDN, IND, JPN, KOR, M YS, PHL, SGP, THA, TWN)        (ARG, BOL, BRA, CHL, COL, CRI, M EX, PER, VEN)

                                                                Average     Inflation                                      Average     Inflation
                                                                Inflation Volatility                                       Inflation Volatility
                                                                over the over the                                          over the over the
                                               Lending-          Past 5      Past 5                        Lending-         Past 5      Past 5
                                   Bank         Deposit           Years       Years             Bank        Deposit          Years       Years
                                 Private        Interest      relative to relative to         Private       Interest     relative to relative to
                                Credit to        Spread      the OECD the OECD               Credit to       Spread     the OECD the OECD
                                GDP (%)             (%)        level (%) level (%)           GDP (%)            (%)       level (%) level (%)



  Lending-Deposit Interest
                                    -0.05                                                       -0.12
             Spread (%)



 Average Inflation over the
  Past 5 Years relative to          -0.22            0.12                                        0.07            0.20
      the OECD level (%)


Inflation Volatility over the
   Past 5 Years relative to         -0.13            0.17            0.93                       -0.01            0.23           0.90
        the OECD level (%)



Risk Premium on Lending
                                     0.25           -0.04           -0.41            -0.21       0.50            0.99           0.50              0.52
                    (%)




                                                                              31
Table 6: Alternative Specification - II
This table reports OLS regression of sectoral output growth (%) on its lagged term, lending-deposit interest spread, and bank private credit to financial&business services; including lagged term and squared term. The sample is from
1996 to 2011, covering 41 economies, of which 11 are in East Asia and Pacific (CHN, HKG, IDN, IND, JPN, KOR, MYS, PHL, SGP, THA, TWN) and 9 are in Latin America & the Carribean (ARG, BOL, BRA, CHL, COL, CRI, MEX, PER,
VEN). Standard errors are in parentheses; *** (**, *) denotes statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) percent level.
Sources: Authors' calculation on Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC) 10-Sector Database and World Bank Global Financial Development Database (BCRY, FSER, SPRD).


                                                       Lagged Sectoral Growth          Lagged Bank Privat e Credit t o Finance&Business Services   Lagged [ Bank Privat e Credit t o Finance&Business Services] Squared   Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%)
Dependent Variable: Sectoral Output Growth (%)                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R-sq.   observations
                                                    coeff.  (std. err.)                    coeff.          (std. err.)                                    coeff.             (std. err.)                                    coeff.  (std. err.)

                                                                                                           Whole Sample (41 economies)
Agriculture                                           -.51      (.03)***                  1.08               (.21)***                -.04                                         (.01)***                                   -1.26       (.60)**                  .47       449
Mining                                                -.40      (.06)***                  -.72               (.38)*                   .03                                         (.01)**                                     -.68      (1.07)                    .11       446
Manufacturing                                         -.50      (.02)***                   .00               (.19)                    .00                                         (.01)                                       -.49       (.53)                    .47       450
Public Utilities                                      -.51      (.03)***                   .75               (.23)***                -.02                                         (.01)**                                     2.31       (.64)***                 .41       451
Construction                                          -.50      (.02)***                 -1.25               (.20)***                 .03                                         (.01)***                                   -1.26       (.57)**                  .52       452
Wholesale and Retail Trade                            -.52      (.02)***                  -.21               (.20)                    .01                                         (.01)                                       -.98       (.55)*                   .50       450
Transport, Storage, and Communication                 -.46      (.02)***                  -.13               (.18)                    .00                                         (.01)                                       -.13       (.50)                    .45       450
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                   -.48      (.03)***                 -1.18               (.27)***                 .04                                         (.01)***                                    1.01       (.74)                    .34       454
Government Services                                   -.42      (.03)***                   .03               (.25)                   -.01                                         (.01)                                       1.76       (.69)**                  .34       343
Community, Social and Personal Services               -.55      (.04)***                  1.30               (.25)***                -.03                                         (.01)***                                    -.83       (.70)                    .40       437

                                                                                                     East Asia and Pacific (11 economies)
Agriculture                                           -.52      (.05)***                  -.08             (.38)                     -.00                                         (.01)                                     -10.16      (5.08)**                  .52       137
Mining                                                -.44      (.10)***                 -1.35             (.77)*                     .05                                         (.02)**                                    -1.24      (9.90)                    .23       133
Manufacturing                                         -.52      (.05)***                  -.40             (.40)                      .01                                         (.01)                                      -3.88      (4.95)                    .51       135
Public Utilities                                      -.52      (.04)***                   .69             (.38)*                    -.02                                         (.01)**                                     7.21      (4.79)                    .53       136
Construction                                          -.51      (.04)***                 -2.02             (.35)***                   .05                                         (.01)***                                  -19.77      (4.60)***                 .59       136
Wholesale and Retail Trade                            -.50      (.05)***                   .88             (.42)**                   -.02                                         (.01)*                                     11.22      (5.61)**                  .49       134
Transport, Storage, and Communication                 -.53      (.04)***                   .84             (.39)**                   -.02                                         (.01)*                                      3.57      (5.06)                    .54       135
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                   -.43      (.05)***                  -.03             (.48)                      .00                                         (.01)                                      20.48      (6.16)***                 .38       136
Government Services                                   -.48      (.07)***                 -2.16             (.62)***                   .05                                         (.02)***                                  -36.50      (9.00)***                 .44        92
Community, Social and Personal Services               -.50      (.06)***                  1.61             (.54)***                  -.04                                         (.01)***                                    9.52      (7.08)                    .36       136

                                                                                             Latin America & the Caribbean (9 economies)
Agriculture                                           -.46      (.06)***                 -1.39        (1.67)                      .16                                             (.13)                                      -2.05      (.70)***                  .42       110
Mining                                                -.59      (.08)***                 -6.88        (1.94)***                   .46                                             (.16)***                                     .73      (.83)                     .41       111
Manufacturing                                         -.43      (.05)***                  -.74        (1.52)                      .02                                             (.12)                                       -.76      (.65)                     .42       112
Public Utilities                                      -.49      (.07)***                  4.31        (1.82)**                   -.32                                             (.14)**                                     2.14      (.79)***                  .43       113
Construction                                          -.60      (.05)***                  -.86        (1.45)                     -.03                                             (.11)                                        .75      (.62)                     .62       113
Wholesale and Retail Trade                            -.54      (.05)***                 -2.77        (1.45)*                     .15                                             (.12)                                        .01      (.62)                     .57       112
Transport, Storage, and Communication                 -.47      (.05)***                   .36        (1.36)                      .04                                             (.11)                                       -.92      (.59)                     .50       111
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                   -.55      (.05)***                   .15        (1.67)                      .06                                             (.13)                                        .54      (.71)                     .52       112
Government Services                                   -.43      (.07)***                  -.60        (3.87)                      .06                                             (.41)                                       2.63      (.84)***                  .42        62
Community, Social and Personal Services               -.57      (.05)***                  5.26        (1.48)***                  -.35                                             (.12)***                                   -2.53      (.63)***                  .58       111




                                                                                                                            32
Table 7: Alternative Specification - III
This table reports OLS regression of sectoral output growth (%) on its lagged term, lending-deposit interest spread, and bank private credit to financial&business services; including lagged term and squared term. The sample is from
1996 to 2011, covering 41 economies, of which 11 are in East Asia and Pacific (CHN, HKG, IDN, IND, JPN, KOR, MYS, PHL, SGP, THA, TWN) and 9 are in Latin America & the Carribean (ARG, BOL, BRA, CHL, COL, CRI, MEX, PER,
VEN). Standard errors are in parentheses; *** (**, *) denotes statistical significance at 1 (5, 10) percent level.
Sources: Authors' calculation on Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC) 10-Sector Database and World Bank Global Financial Development Database (BCRY, FSER, SPRD).


                                                                                                                                                                            Interaction of [Grow th of Bank Private
                                                                                         Growth of Bank Private Credit to                                                  Credit/Financial&Business Services] and
Dependent Variable: Sectoral Output Growth (%)                                                                                                                                                                        R-sq.   observations
                                                       Lagged Sectoral Growth             Finance&Business Services               Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%)                   Interest Spread
                                                    coeff.  (std. err.)                  coeff.     (std. err.)                    coeff.     (std. err.)                    coeff.    (std. err.)

                                                                                                     Whole Sample (41 economies)
Agriculture                                           -.52      (.03)***                  -.31         (2.26)                 -1.96               (.55)***                     .20         (.15)                        .44       449
Mining                                                -.40      (.06)***                  3.41         (1.96)*                 -.44               (.97)                       -.12         (.15)                        .10       445
Manufacturing                                         -.50      (.02)***                  1.37         (1.34)                  -.58               (.48)                       -.09         (.10)                        .47       449
Public Utilities                                      -.51      (.03)***                  -.53         (1.01)                  1.17               (.60)**                      .04         (.13)                        .38       451
Construction                                          -.51      (.03)***                  2.35         (1.11)**                 .43               (.54)                       -.08         (.09)                        .48       451
Wholesale and Retail Trade                            -.52      (.02)***                   .96          (.84)                  -.82               (.50)*                       .03         (.08)                        .51       447
Transport, Storage, and Communication                 -.46      (.02)***                   .38          (.74)                   .33               (.46)                       -.10         (.09)                        .45       449
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                   -.49      (.04)***                  1.53         (2.52)                  2.16               (.69)***                    -.10         (.17)                        .31       454
Government Services                                   -.42      (.03)***                  2.25         (1.39)                  2.07               (.63)***                    -.07         (.12)                        .34       343
Community, Social and Personal Services               -.56      (.04)***                 -2.03         (1.73)                 -2.70               (.65)***                     .31         (.20)                        .35       436

                                                                                                  East Asia and Pacific (11 economies)
Agriculture                                           -.52      (.05)***                   5.69         (7.25)                    -7.12          (4.96)                      -1.45         (1.57)                       .50       137
Mining                                                -.45      (.10)***                   4.06         (6.21)                    -3.96         (10.01)                      -1.20         (1.30)                       .14       133
Manufacturing                                         -.53      (.05)***                  -1.10         (3.41)                    -2.07          (4.86)                        .84         (1.25)                       .50       134
Public Utilities                                      -.51      (.04)***                 -11.00         (9.55)                     5.53          (4.66)                       3.02         (2.17)                       .51       136
Construction                                          -.50      (.05)***                   4.90         (7.87)                   -10.16          (4.93)**                     -.84         (2.25)                       .48       136
Wholesale and Retail Trade                            -.50      (.05)***                  -2.92         (3.21)                     6.79          (5.34)                        .92          (.67)                       .47       134
Transport, Storage, and Communication                 -.52      (.04)***                  -1.87         (4.15)                     1.18          (4.99)                       -.39          (.98)                       .53       135
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                   -.45      (.05)***                   6.61        (11.78)                    19.40          (5.83)***                    -.46         (2.82)                       .39       136
Government Services                                   -.47      (.07)***                 -11.32        (30.93)                   -18.99          (8.50)**                     3.25         (7.36)                       .35        92
Community, Social and Personal Services               -.49      (.06)***                   -.06         (7.14)                     4.14          (6.80)                       1.52         (2.02)                       .34       136

                                                                                             Latin America & the Caribbean (9 economies)
Agriculture                                           -.45      (.06)***                 -3.80        (3.92)                    -2.20             (.66)***                     .31         (.25)                        .41       110
Mining                                                -.60      (.08)***                 -5.50        (3.96)                     -.75             (.85)                        .03         (.16)                        .34       110
Manufacturing                                         -.43      (.05)***                   .38        (3.02)                    -1.01             (.61)                       -.00         (.20)                        .41       112
Public Utilities                                      -.47      (.07)***                  3.78        (6.43)                     2.89             (.75)***                    -.14         (.24)                        .40       113
Construction                                          -.61      (.05)***                  2.41        (2.56)                      .22             (.62)                       -.11         (.11)                        .58       112
Wholesale and Retail Trade                            -.53      (.05)***                  2.64        (4.06)                     -.63             (.60)                        .00         (.14)                        .54       111
Transport, Storage, and Communication                 -.46      (.05)***                  -.23        (2.24)                     -.47             (.58)                       -.14         (.20)                        .47       111
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                   -.55      (.06)***                  1.48        (2.93)                      .96             (.69)                       -.14         (.17)                        .49       112
Government Services                                   -.49      (.08)***                  6.82        (6.73)                     3.17             (.71)***                     .08         (.19)                        .46        62
Community, Social and Personal Services               -.57      (.05)***                 -2.99        (3.07)                    -1.66             (.61)***                     .52         (.27)*                       .54       111




                                                                                                                33
Figure 1: Value-Added (constant 2005 prices) per Worker in 10 Sectors
This figure provides average value added per worker in East Asia and Pacific, and Latin America & the Caribbean, from 1995-2011.
Sources: Authors' calculation on 10-Sector Database.


  60,000



  50,000



  40,000

                     East Asia and Pacific    Latin America & the Caribbean
  30,000



  20,000



  10,000



        0
              Agriculture    Construction       Finance,      Government    Manufacturing       Mining        Community,     Public Utilities     Transport,  Wholesale and
                                             Insurance, and    Services                                       Social and                         Storage, and  Retail Trade
                                               Real Estate                                                     Personal                         Communication
                                                                                                               Services




                                                                                    34
Figure 2: Regional Differences in Quality of Finance, 2005-2011
This figure provides an average for each region measures of financial depth -- Bank Private Credit to GDP (%, BCRY); efficiency -- Lending-Deposit Interest Spread
(%,SPRD); governance -- Getting Credit Index (GTCR) and Resolving Insolvency Index (REIN), and access -- Depositors with Commercial Banks per 1,000 Adults
(DCBA) and Outstanding SME Loans from Commercial Banks (%GDP, LSME).
Sources: Authors' calculation on World Bank Global Financial Development Database (BCRY, SPRD), Doingbusiness Database (GTCR, REIN); and IMF Financial
Access Survey (DCBA, LSME)


                                            Bank Private Credit to GDP (%)                                                                                       Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%)
140                                                                                                                     14
120                                                                                                                     12
100                                                                                                                     10
  80                                                                                                                        8
  60                                                                                                                        6
  40                                                                                                                        4
  20                                                                                                                        2
      0                                                                                                                     0
              East Asia and Europe and High-income High-income Latin America Middle East    South Asia   Sub-Saharan            East Asia and Europe and      High-income High-income Latin America Middle East   South Asia   Sub-Saharan
                 Pacific    Central Asia  OECD      nonOECD        & the     and North                      Africa                 Pacific    Central Asia       OECD      nonOECD        & the     and North                     Africa
                                         members    members     Caribbean       Africa                                                                         members     members     Caribbean       Africa



                                                   Getting Credit Index                                                                                               Resolving Insolvency Index
80                                                                                                                      80
70                                                                                                                      70
60                                                                                                                      60
50                                                                                                                      50
40                                                                                                                      40
30                                                                                                                      30
20                                                                                                                      20
10                                                                                                                      10
  0                                                                                                                         0
          East Asia and Europe and     High-income High-income Latin America Middle East    South Asia   Sub-Saharan            East Asia and Europe and      High-income High-income Latin America Middle East   South Asia   Sub-Saharan
             Pacific    Central Asia      OECD      nonOECD        & the     and North                      Africa                 Pacific    Central Asia       OECD      nonOECD        & the     and North                     Africa
                                        members     members     Caribbean       Africa                                                                         members     members     Caribbean       Africa



                                 Depositors with Commercial Banks per 1,000 Adults                                                                           SME Loans from Commercial Banks (%GDP)
1400                                                                                                                    25

1200
                                                                                                                        20
1000

  800                                                                                                                   15

  600                                                                                                                   10
  400
                                                                                                                            5
  200

          0                                                                                                                 0
               East Asia and Europe and High-income High-income Latin America Middle East   South Asia Sub-Saharan              East Asia and Europe and      High-income High-income Latin America Middle East   South Asia   Sub-Saharan
                  Pacific    Central Asia  OECD      nonOECD        & the     and North                   Africa                   Pacific    Central Asia       OECD      nonOECD        & the     and North                     Africa
                                          members    members     Caribbean       Africa                                                                        members     members     Caribbean       Africa




                                                                                                                       35
Figure 3: Economic Significance on Sectoral Output Growth
This figure provides economic significance (annualized) based on estimation results of ten years of data (1996-2011) of Bank Private Credit to GDP (%, BCRY;
including lagged, current, and squared terms) and Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%,SPRD) on Sectoral Output Growth (%), based on estimation results. The
economic significance is calculated as a product of coefficient estimate and sample standard deviation of variable.
Sources: Authors' calculation on Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC) 10-Sector Database and World Bank Global Financial Development Database
(BCRY, SPRD).


                                                                                  Bank Private Credit to GDP (%, BCRY)
   60.0
                     East Asia and Pacific                                  49.9
   50.0
                     Latin America & the Caribbean
   40.0
   30.0                                                                                                                                                                                23.1
   20.0                                                                                                                           13.7
   10.0
              0.0 0.0             0.0                0.0 0.0                               0.0 0.0           0.0 0.0        0.0               0.0 0.0           0.0 0.0          0.0
    0.0
  -10.0
  -20.0
                                                                    -18.4
  -30.0
  -40.0                               -34.2
             Agriculture           Mining       Manufacturing     Public Utilities       Construction    Wholesale and     Transport,         Finance,         Government      Community,
                                                                                                          Retail Trade    Storage, and     Insurance, and       Services        Social and
                                                                                                                         Communication       Real Estate                     Personal Services


                                                                             Lending-Deposit Interest Spread (%,SPRD)
    4.0                                                                                                                                                                3.5
                      East Asia and Pacific                                 2.7                                                               2.9
    3.0
                      Latin America & the Caribbean
    2.0                                                                                                      1.6

    1.0
                                  0.0 0.0            0.0 0.0         0.0                         0.0               0.0      0.0 0.0                 0.0                          0.0
    0.0
   -1.0
   -2.0       -1.3

   -3.0
                     -2.7                                                                 -2.7
   -4.0                                                                                                                                                                                -3.3
   -5.0
                                                                                                                                                                -4.8
   -6.0
             Agriculture           Mining       Manufacturing     Public Utilities       Construction    Wholesale and     Transport,         Finance,         Government      Community,
                                                                                                          Retail Trade    Storage, and     Insurance, and       Services        Social and
                                                                                                                         Communication       Real Estate                     Personal Services




                                                                                                        36
Figure 4: Financial Depth in East Asia and Pacific vis-à-vis Latin America & the Caribbean
This figure provides box plots of bank private credit to GDP (%) for East Asia and
Pacific vis-à-vis the ratio for Latin America & the Caribbean.
Sources: Authors' calculation on World Bank Global Financial Development Database.



   1991
   1992
   1993
   1994
   1995
   1996
   1997
   1998
   1999
   2000
   2001
   2002
   2003
   2004
   2005
   2006
   2007
   2008
   2009
   2010
   2011

          0                      50                       100                       150
                    East Asia and Pacific : Bank Private Credit to GDP (%)




   1991
   1992
   1993
   1994
   1995
   1996
   1997
   1998
   1999
   2000
   2001
   2002
   2003
   2004
   2005
   2006
   2007
   2008
   2009
   2010
   2011

          0         20       40       60        80       100
                Latin America & the Caribbean : Bank Private Credit to GDP (%)


                                                37
