                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES COMPETITION ELIMINATE DISCRIMINATION? EVIDENCE FROM THE
                 COMMERCIAL SEX MARKET IN SINGAPORE

                                              Huailu Li
                                             Kevin Lang
                                            Kaiwen Leong

                                        Working Paper 20911
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20911


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




We are very grateful to Claudia Olivetti, Andrew Oswald, Johannes Schmieder and seminar participants
at the Asian meeting of the Econometrics Society, Boston University, Georgetown University (Doha),
Nanyang Technological University, the National University of Singapore, the Singapore Economic
Review Conference, Cornell University, Duke University and NBER Labor Studies for their helpful
comments. Leong also thanks Nanyang Technological University for start-up funding and its support
for this research while Lang acknowledges funding from the National Science Foundation under grant
SES-1260197. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Huailu Li, Kevin Lang, and Kaiwen Leong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Does Competition Eliminate Discrimination? Evidence from the Commercial Sex Market
in Singapore
Huailu Li, Kevin Lang, and Kaiwen Leong
NBER Working Paper No. 20911
January 2015
JEL No. J7,O17

                                              ABSTRACT

The street sex worker market in Geylang, Singapore is highly competitive. Clients can search legally
at negligible cost. Sex workers discriminate based on client ethnicity despite an excess supply of sex
workers. Workers are more (less) likely to approach and ask a higher (lower) price of Caucasians
(Bangladeshis), based on their perceived willingness to pay. They avoid Indians, set a significantly
higher price and are less likely to reach an agreement with them, suggesting that Indians face taste
discrimination. These findings remain even after controlling for prostitute fixed effects and are consistent
with the workers' self-reported attitudes and beliefs.


Huailu Li                                             Kaiwen Leong
School of Economics                                   School of Humanities and Social Sciences
Fudan University                                      Nanyang Technological University
600 Guoquan Road                                      14 Nanyang Drive
Shanghai, 200433,                                     Singapore 637332
People's Republic of China                            kleong@ntu.edu.sg
huailu@bu.edu

Kevin Lang
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
lang@bu.edu
1 Introduction
In the canonical economic model of discrimination, Becker (1957), competition elim-
inates discrimination. More generally, under competition the law of one price pre-
vails. Comparable workers in similar jobs must be paid the same wage; consumers
must pay the same price for a homogeneous good. In contrast, Diamond (1971)
shows that with sequential search even a very small search cost creates an equilib-
rium in which …rms set the monopoly price (or o¤er the monopsony wage as in Black
(1995)). This, in turn, implies that customers with a higher willingness to pay will
be charged a higher price and that sellers can, within limits described below, indulge
discriminatory tastes.
    We use an apparently highly competitive market, the market for street sex work-
ers in Singapore, to test these competing theories. During “usual business hours”
sex workers are readily available; times between meetings are no more than two to
…ve minutes. Potential customers are at no legal risk, and the social risk is small
because the sex workers operate in an area regularly frequented by individuals who
are on neither side of the sex trade. Thus search costs are very low but nonzero.
    While clearly there is some heterogeneity among sex workers, we can control
for sex worker …xed e¤ects. Moreover, our qualitative interviews suggest that this
heterogeneity is relatively unimportant. We would anticipate that, especially within
a narrow segment of the sex market, the importance of worker heterogeneity for
a brief sexual encounter would be small relative to worker heterogeneity in stan-
dard employment relationships. The setting is almost ideal for contrasting the two
theories.
    We …nd that sex workers use ethnicity to discriminate based on the client’s
willingness to pay, which we term statistical discrimination. To a lesser degree, they
also discriminate against ethnic groups with darker skin tones (taste discrimination).
Some of the sex workers justify their dislike of Indians, the primary group with darker
skin, by claiming that they bargain harder, want longer service duration or are more
prone to violence. We …nd no evidence of harder bargaining or of longer service
duration and …nd that Indians have a relatively low demand for forms of sex that
the sex workers …nd more unpleasant. However, we cannot completely rule out the
violence explanation.
    There is considerable evidence of discriminatory behaviors by …rms. Audit and
correspondence studies (e.g. Ayres and Siegelman, 1995; Neumark, 1996; Bertrand
and Mullainathan, 2004) consistently …nd di¤erential treatment of men and women
and of blacks and whites. However, as Heckman and Siegelman (1993) and Heckman
(1998) argue, such studies can reveal discriminatory behaviors but not whether the

                                          1
equilibrium is discriminatory. Unlike the “applicants” in such studies, workers and
consumers do not apply to …rms randomly. Potential objects of discrimination may
know how to avoid transacting with prejudiced individuals or have su¢ ciently fre-
quent opportunities for transactions to eliminate any impact on transaction prices.
In addition, in audit studies it is impossible to ensure that testers di¤er only with
respect to race or sex. Since the number of testers is typically small, it is often
di¢ cult, if not impossible, to know whether they also di¤er on some dimension
other than the one intended by the researchers. For example, Castillo et al’s (2013)
intriguing study of taxis in Lima, Peru relies on six male and sex female testers.1
Similar problems can even arise in correspondence studies. Jacquemet and Yannelis
(2012) …nd considerable within-race variation in callback rates for di¤erent names.
Kristen was called back at a rate three times that of Laurie, and Ebony at three
times that of Lakisha and almost twice that of Laurie.
     These concerns have generated interest in studies that can capture discrimination
in actual transactions prices by regular participants in markets. There are very
interesting studies of on-line markets (Zussman (2013); Doleac and Stein (2013) and
Pope and Sydnor (2011)), but these are likely to di¤er from discrimination in face-
to-face encounters with more visual and verbal clues. Thus, List (2004) uses the
natural setting of the sportscard trading platform and real market participants to
identify the existence and nature of discrimination. In this setting, there is some
risk that because the experimenter in‡uences the interactions, he biases the results.
It would be preferable, if possible, to observe a large number of naturally occurring
transactions.
     This is the approach followed by Graddy (1995) who …nds price discrimination in
favor of Asians and against whites in one wholesaler’s sales of whiting at the Fulton
Fish Market in New York. She suggests that, because of the markets in which they
resell the whiting, demand for whiting is more elastic among Asians. Our approach
is, in many ways, similar to Graddy’s. However, we examine a market with a very
large number of sellers. In contrast, only six wholesalers carried whiting at FFM,
and the sellers are careful not to announce prices, making it easier for them to avoid
competition.
     Bayer, Casey, Ferreira, and McMillan (2012) is in some ways the study closest to
ours in that it studies a large number of transactions in the housing market. After
controlling for a large number of factors, including housing unit, the authors …nd
that black and Hispanic homebuyers pay a premium of roughly three percent. This
   1
    The authors do allow for random tester e¤ects, but as discussed in Donald and Lang (2007),
such techniques are only appropriate when the number of clusters (in this case testers) is large.



                                               2
di¤erence while nontrivial is also modest and occurs in a market in which there is
often little face-to-face interaction between buyers and sellers.
    We investigate price discrimination based on ethnicity in a market with a large
number of nearly identical sex workers selling homogeneous services to clients who
search at negligible cost. We collected data on both sex workers and their recent
transactions, recording information only after the transaction so as to avoid interfer-
ing. We combine this with rich survey and ethnographic data. In interviews, the sex
workers revealed that they price services di¤erently based on the client’s ethnicity,
which they take as a signal of the client’s willingness to pay. They tend to actively
approach whites, Japanese, and Koreans, the ethnic groups whom they believe to
be wealthier, and in‡ate the prices quoted to these clients. On the other hand, sex
workers express animus towards ethnic groups with darker skin tones. They report
that they avoid these clients (such as Indians) or ask for a higher price to compen-
sate for the disutility of working with them. The former hints at statistical price
discrimination (Arrow, 1973; Phelps, 1972), while the latter suggests taste-based
discrimination.
    We build a simple model in which sex workers approach the potential client
and o¤er him a take-it-or-leave-it price. Clients engage in sequential search until
they meet a sex worker with an acceptable combination of price and match-speci…c
quality. We show that if a sex worker believes a client has a high willingness to pay,
she will be more likely to approach, set a higher price and be more likely to have
her price accepted. This is consistent with what we observe for whites and, in the
opposite direction, Bangladeshis. On the other hand, if she is driven by distaste, she
will be less likely to approach the potential client, set a higher price and be less likely
to have her price accepted. This is consistent with what we observe when comparing
Indians and Bangladeshis. Thus our survey and transactions data are consistent.
The sex workers tend to discriminate against whites and in favor of Bangladeshis
based on their perceived willingness to pay but against Indians based on animus.
These results are robust to including sex worker …xed e¤ects in the analysis of the
transactions data.


2 The Commercial Sex Industry in Singapore
There is considerable demand for prostitution among locals.2 In many professions,
women in Singapore have outperformed men, and few are willing to marry below
   2
    Almost half of the sex clients in Indonesia’s Riau region, an island proximate to Singapore, are
from Singapore (Williams, Lyons, and Ford, 2012).



                                                 3
their education and economic status. Around 2005, there were headlines about the
existence of 300,000 white-collar workers who could not …nd wives. At the same
time, the roughly 1.2 million foreign workers comprise one third of the Singaporean
workforce (Ministry of Manpower, Singapore, 2012). Ten percent of foreign workers
are professional, managers, executives or technicians, while 703 percent are low- and
semi-skilled workers, including many men in the construction and manufacturing
sectors. In addition, in 2011 Singapore attracted 13.2 million tourists (Singapore
Tourism Board, 2012), many of whom seek sexual services. Consequently, the client
base for prostitution is comprised of many di¤erent ethnicities.
    Prostitution in Singapore dates to the 1800s when Singapore was a British colony
(Warren, 1993). In the late 1990s, the authorities issued special licenses for the
operation of “legal” brothels, over 100 of which remain.4 There is also an illegal
market with three main segments: the even-numbered lanes of Geylang (the low-
end), the renowned Orchard Tower Bars (the mid-tier), and nightclubs (the high-
end). Sex workers in Geylang and Orchard Tower Bars are mostly full-time with
no other source of income. In contrast, many women working in the nightclubs are
hired legally by the clubs as dancers, singers or hostesses and make money as sex
workers on a part-time basis. The illegal sex workers come primarily from China,
Thailand, Vietnam and the Philippines on short-term visitor passes (Agence France
Press, 2008). They visit Singapore from time to time seeking lucrative earning
opportunities and marriage opportunities with Singaporean and western men.
    We focus on Geylang, the low end and largest section of the market, but some
of our data on sex workers’ beliefs and tastes also draw on interviews with sex
workers at Orchard Tower and the nightclubs. We have no data on more scattered
forms of illegal prostitution such as KTVs (entertainment pubs with activities such
as karaoke), massage parlors and social escorts. Sex workers from these venues
represent a relatively small portion of the total sex worker population in Singapore.
    Sex workers in Geylang are located on the even numbered lorong (lanes). Our
qualitative interviews suggest that each lorong is controlled by one or more pimps
who oversee the business, protect the women from abnormal clients and arrest in
the event of a police raid, and provide accommodation. Tourist visas enable sex
workers to re-enter Singapore frequently. When a sex worker travels to Singapore,
the costs are usually borne by the parties who manage her trip and work. In return,
she provides the …rst 60 services for free and pays S$10/day and 30-40 percent of
her subsequent earnings to the pimp. Our survey results are consistent with these
   3
    These statistics exclude foreign domestic workers. (Ministry of Manpower, Singapore)
   4
    This license is not a license for prostitution per se, but a special business license which allows
brothel owners to operate the brothel under police authority


                                                  4
numbers for those sex workers who report having a pimp. However, even among
those answering the question, roughly half of the sex workers reported not having a
pimp. Our qualitative interviews suggest that even sex workers who do not have a
pimp have some form of male protection. We expect that the distinction is related
to the nature of the “contractual” relation. Whether the sex worker is employed
by a pimp or vice versa, pimps are typically distant from the negotiation since the
penalties for pimping are quite severe. Therefore, pimps are not in a position to
control prices, and as we will see, there is considerable within sex worker variation
in price even controlling for detailed services.
    Geylang is a favorite destination for less wealthy clients seeking cheap sexual
services. Chinese, Thai and Vietnamese sex workers dominate. The plentiful supply
of Chinese women makes Geylang the preferred choice for Chinese clients who desire
a “girlfriend”experience with the sex worker. It is also a particularly attractive venue
for elderly single men who desire companionship. Clients are mostly Singaporean,
Bangladeshi, white and Indian. Bangladeshi construction workers, in particular, are
frequent visitors to the Geylang red light district, representing a sizable demand for
a¤ordable sexual services.
    The Geylang market is highly competitive.5 Prostitution activities are concen-
trated in a small zone within which large numbers of nearly homogeneous sex workers
solicit on the streets. There is little di¤erentiation in the services o¤ered. Di¤erences
in sex workers’characteristics, such as beauty, may make one more desirable than
the other. Nevertheless, our interviews with clients indicate that they are nearly
perfect substitutes in the clients’ eyes.6 We also note that this tendency is rein-
forced by the segmentation of the market. More attractive sex workers are likely to
be at Orchard Towers. Older sex workers frequent Petain Road, a smaller red light
area. We will further address this issue by controlling for sex worker …xed e¤ects.
    At the same time, clients face no legal risk from patronizing sex workers, and the
reputational risk is minimal because Geylang is a popular tourist and dining desti-
nation. Most importantly, during “normal business hours” (roughly late afternoon
    5
      According to police estimates, there are approximately 2,000 street sex workers in Geylang,
Desker Road and nearby Petain Road and Keong Saik Road in Singapore on any given night (Chong
Chee Kin, 2005). It is a safe bet that more than 1,200 street sex workers are active in Geylang on
a typical night as Geylang is the largest red light district. There are roughly 11,500 linear feet of
road in the Geylang red light district. Allowing for both sides of the road, this suggests an average
of about 30 feet between sex workers on a single side of the road. Of course, the sex workers do
not distribute themselves evenly or even randomly. So a novice might take a few minutes to …nd a
group of sex workers but would be likely to …nd several in close proximity once he does. Newspaper
reports by The Electric New Paper (2008) and Othman and Yusof (2014) also indicate a large sex
worker population in Geylang in recent years
    6
      Levitt and Dubner (2009) makes this claim in SuperFreakeconomics. Our interviews with the
clients reveal the same fact.


                                                 5
until early morning), clients can easily locate a match within 2-5 minutes due to the
high density of sex workers on the street.
    Because the initial exchange between sex workers and clients takes place on a
public street, ‡irting and negotiation time are relatively short. Based on our survey,
almost 40 percent of negotiations are reported as having taken zero minutes, and the
median is three minutes. The service rate ranges from S$27 to S$250 with a median
of S$60 and mean of S$70.7 Over 92 percent of sexual services took place in motels
and hotels, with the remainder primarily at the client’s residence. A full-time sex
worker will return to her original venue immediately after …nishing with a client.
Any costs, such as taxi fare and hotel room charges are usually borne by clients.


3 Theory Model
Customers, c, search for sex workers, i. And sex workers search for customers.
When a potential client and sex worker meet, the sex worker must decide whether
to approach the client. She o¤ers a price, and the potential client decides whether
to accept the o¤er.
    We assume that the client’s utility from a successful match with a sex worker is
given by
                                uic = vc wic + 'ic                              (1)

where v is the value he places on the service, w is the wage paid to the sex worker and
' is match-speci…c quality (i.e. how much this customer likes this sex worker). We
will assume that v is public knowledge but only the client observes ': It simpli…es
analysis to assume that 'ic is entirely idiosyncratic.


3.1 The Client’s Problem
The client searches for a sex worker sequentially without recall. We assume that he
meets one sex worker each period, but this assumption could easily be relaxed by
reinterpreting the discount factor. When the client meets a sex worker, he observes
his value of ' from the match and learns her wage demand. We write the cumulative
distribution of ' w as G: In equilibrium with identical sex workers, all sex workers
will choose the same w so that G will just be the distribution of ': However, at this
stage we allow w to vary since we have not yet established that its distribution is
degenerate. In addition, this establishes that the results for clients hold even when
sex workers charge di¤erent prices.
  7
      At the time of writing, a Singapore dollar is worth eighty U.S. cents.


                                                  6
  As is standard in such problems, the client chooses a reservation utility, u , to
maximize his expected utility from the search process, which is given by
                                                Z
            U [u ] = (1   G [u        v]) v +                   xdG (x) + G [u           v] U:        (2)
                                                    u       v


The …rst term is the standard value of the service multiplied by the probability that
' w is su¢ ciently high that the client accepts the sex worker’s o¤er. The second
term is the added surplus from good matches that are accepted. The last term is the
discounted value of returning to search multiplied by the probability of this event.
Rearranging terms and dropping the arguments of the G function gives:
                                                    R
                                 (1     G) v +          u       v
                                                                    xdG (x)
                          U=                                                   :                      (3)
                                            1               G

Optimality requires that the client be indi¤erent between accepting his reservation
utility and searching again next period so that

                                            u = U                                                     (4)

or                                                              Z
                  u (1    G) +         (1    G) v +                         xdG (x)   = 0:            (5)
                                                                    u   v
           @u
Lemma 1.   @v
                < 1:
Proof. By the implicit function theorem

                                 @u    (1               G)
                                    =                      < 1:                                       (6)
                                 @v   (1                G)



Lemma 2. If each sex worker increases her wage demand by dw; du =dw >                            1:
Proof. vi and wic enter (equation 1) symmetrically. An equal increase in all wic is
identical to an equal and opposite change in vi :
Remark 1. If sex workers change their prices by di¤erent amounts, du must be
greater than the additive inverse of the largest price increase. If sex workers have
mass, u is decreasing in each sex worker’s pricing decision.


3.2 The Sex Worker’s Problem
Each time the sex worker meets a potential client, she makes him a take-it-or-leave-
it o¤er. If the o¤er is accepted, she receives w; pays an e¤ort or psychic cost of c;

                                                7
which may depend on the client, and returns to work after a delay re‡ecting the
time it takes to provide the service. If the o¤er is declined, she returns to work after
a delay caused by bargaining.8 We denote the value of a vacancy by v : Note that
  v deviates from   both because she will generally face a delay before meeting a new
client and because the current client may be more or less desirable than average.
Faced with a client, she chooses w to maximize her expected pro…t which is given
by

                 = (1     F [u          v + w]) (w      c+        v)   + F [u     v + w]       v        (7)

where F is the cumulative distribution of ': We assume that F has the increasing
hazard property. Note that < since she is out of the market longer providing a
service than if the o¤er is rejected.
    The sex worker will choose not to approach the client if

            max (1      F [u          v + w]) (w     c+      v)   + F [u        v + w]     v   <   v:
             w


       The …rst-order condition for the sex worker’s problem is

                                F 0 (w     c+(          )   v)   + (1     F) = 0                        (8)

where we have again dropped the argument of the distribution function for ease of
presentation.
                                 (1 F ) 00
            @w                 F 0+F0
                                       F           @w
Lemma 3. 0> @u =               (1  F)        =     @v
                                                        >    1
                           F 00 F 0 +2F 0

Proof. By the implicit function theorem

                          dw              (F 00 + F 0 (w c + (              ) v ))
                             =                                                     :
                          du             (F 00 (w c + (       )                  0
                                                                        v ) + 2F )


Substituting using (equation 8) proves the …rst part of the lemma. Proof of the
second part is identical. The inequalities follow from the assumption of an increasing
hazard function and inspection.

Lemma 4. 1 > @w=@c > 0
   8
    It might appear that there is a contradiction between assuming take-it-or-leave it o¤ers and
including a bargaining delay in the model. However, sex workers must …rst ascertain the services in
which the potential client is interested before quoting a price. Therefore even immediately rejected
o¤ers take time.




                                                        8
Proof. By the implicit function theorem

                    @w                      F0
                       =
                    @c           F 00 (w  c+(        )   v)   2F 0
                                             2
                                       (F 0 )
                         =                         :
                           F 00 (1 F ) + 2 (F 0 )2

The inequalities follow from the increasing hazard assumption.


3.3 Comparative Statics
We are now in a position to prove the main theoretical result of the paper.

Theorem 1. An increase in v

  1. Lowers u     v and thus increases the acceptance rate

  2. Raises w

  3. Raises :

Proof. Lemma 1 establishes part 1 in the absence of a wage increase by sex workers
(lemma 3), which induces a decrease in u (lemma 2). However, each of these
responses reinforces the e¤ect. Therefore to prove parts 1 and 2, we need only show
that the system of equations is stable which follows from the fact that @w=@u > 1
(lemma 3) and @u =@w > 1 (lemma 2). The third part of the theorem follows from
the …rst two parts.

Theorem 2. An increase in c for all sex workers raises w; lowers the acceptance rate
and lowers :

Proof. From lemma 4, absent other changes, @w=@c > 0: Since 1 < @u =@w < 0
(lemma 2) and @w=@u < 0 (lemma 3), additional adjustments reinforce this result,
but lemma 2 ensures that the acceptance rate cannot rise. Suppose that increased.
Since the acceptance rate declines, we must have that dw > dc: But by (equation
8) and the increasing hazard assumption, this can be an equilibrium only if the
acceptance rate is higher, a contradiction.
    It has been convenient to assume that all sex workers are identical except for
an idiosyncratic match-speci…c component. However, none of the lemmas depend
on this assumption. Proof of the theorems would be more complicated, and it does
not appear that allowing for such heterogeneity would add much insight. Similarly,
although take-it-or-leave-it bargaining gives rise to a simple solution, most models

                                          9
of bargaining under one-sided asymmetric information imply that those who value
the item more do worse in bargaining.
    If some, but not all, sex workers were prejudiced against a given group, the
prejudiced sex workers would raise the price they charge members of that group.
As noted in remark 1, this will lower the reservation utility of clients subject to
discrimination. By lemma 3, this will, in turn, cause unprejudiced sex workers to
also charge higher prices, but not su¢ ciently to reduce the probability of acceptance
and pro…t to the level that would prevail in the absence of prejudiced sex workers.9
In essence, clients who face discrimination have a higher willingness to pay and
unprejudiced sex workers subject them to discrimination in the same way that they
do other clients with a perceived high willingness to pay.
    For the most part, we do not pursue this prediction because we have very few
transactions between Indians, the group against whom we suspect there is taste dis-
crimination, and sex workers who report not being prejudiced against them. More-
over, unless Indians could tell whether they were bargaining with a prejudiced or
unprejudiced sex worker, we would have two-sided imperfect information which cre-
ates signi…cant theoretical problems for bargaining models. Nevertheless, we brie‡y
discuss some suggestive evidence based on the behavior of Singaporean Indian sex
workers.


3.4 Empirical Predictions
Step 1. Decision to Approach
    Sex workers will be more likely to approach ethnicities whom they associate with
higher willingness to pay and less likely to approach those for whom they express
dislike.
Step 2. Price Setting
    Conditional on approaching the client, sex workers will ask a higher price of both
those ethnicities whom they associate with a higher willingness to pay and those for
whom they express dislike.
Step 3 Client’s reaction to the price o¤er
    Conditional on the sex worker approaching, members of groups whom sex workers
associate with higher willingness to pay will be more likely to accept. Members of
groups subject to taste discrimination will be less likely to accept.
  9
      This is similar to the result in Black (1995).




                                                   10
4 Survey and Data
4.1 Survey Design and Data Collection
The survey, conducted under the direction of the …rst author, collected information
about the sex worker and her recent business transactions. For each worker we have
basic demographic information, attitudinal information regarding clients of di¤erent
ethnicities and her report regarding the factors that in‡uence her decision to ap-
proach a client and the price to ask. In addition, enumerators rated the interviewees
on aspects such as beauty, physical …gure and English skills as they believed clients
would judge them. Rating workers from the client’s point of view is a common
practice in surveys of sex workers. We also collected information regarding the most
recent 4 to 7 transactions (who initiated the contact, initial price, whether agree-
ment was reached, …nal price, services provided and characteristics of the client such
as ethnicity, attractiveness, and quality of dress).
    The questionnaire provided a general structure to the interview. The combi-
nation of the nature of the subject and frequent language di¢ culties meant that
enumerators found it more e¤ective to use the questionnaire to guide the conversa-
tion while maintaining the freedom to change the order of questions and to rephrase
questions in order to make sure the sex worker understood what was being asked.
    To gain access to the sex workers, we hired one female and three male enumera-
tors, all roughly forty years old, who had prior experience in this market and were
friendly with sex workers and/or pimps.10 Their personal connections enabled us
to conduct phone and personal interviews with the sex workers, pimps and regular
patrons and thereby acquire much of the institutional background that informs this
study and allowed us to develop and re…ne the survey instrument before taking it
into the …eld.
    It is not feasible to fully randomize the sample in this market since due to the
underground nature of the business, we lack complete information on the composi-
tion of the target population and its geographic distribution. In addition, some sex
workers refused to be interviewed or were forbidden from doing so by their pimps
although this latter case could sometimes be addressed through a small gift or in-
vitation to have a drink. The enumerators estimate a refusal rate of about 30%.11
  10
     One was the boyfriend of a female pimp in Orchard Tower; the second worked in a non-sex
worker capacity at a night club. The third and fourth were a close friend of a Geylang pimp and
that pimp.
  11
     It is not possible to have a precise refusal rate because in some settings the objections of a pimp
would require the enumerator to withdraw from a location without information on the number of
sex workers who would have been selected for the sample.



                                                  11
Strikingly, experienced sex workers were more open to our interview requests. Fi-
nally, less attractive sex workers have longer unemployment periods during each shift
and are more tempted by the gift voucher we o¤er.
    Nonetheless, we compensated for this limited control by visiting di¤erent lanes
at di¤erent times and on di¤erent days of the week. This strategy ensures a mod-
erately randomized sample since the locations at which we sought interviews were
random. Furthermore, sex workers spend a fair amount of their work day waiting for
a customer so that we had a good chance of …nding a sex worker if she was usually
located at the spot and time we selected.
    We study only heterosexual transactions where the women are the sellers and
the men are the buyers. The enumerators read a letter of consent to gain the sex
workers’understanding and consent before starting the interviews. Each interview
took about 30-45 minutes. The enumerator was paid S$15 for each survey, and each
interviewee received a gift voucher of S$10 to compensate for her time. Sometimes
the sex workers agreed to take the survey as a favor to our enumerators and did
not ask for a monetary reward. In those cases, the enumerators invited them for a
simple meal and conducted the interview either during the meal or on a separate
occasion.
    The …rst author scrutinized each completed survey carefully to weed out major
mistakes, especially in the early stages. Reviewing the survey right after submission
allowed us to correct errors immediately before the enumerators forgot the informa-
tion. Data-entering personnel recorded any unconventional answers following the
rules we formulated and made notes on a separate sheet for the changes for each
data point. For example, many of the sex workers could not recall the exact amount
of their earnings and their clients’ages. Thus, the data entry personnel calculated
the average using the range provided and made a note of these changes. About
thirty of the earliest surveys were excluded because of clear communication failures.
About twenty interviews were interrupted by events such as police patrols and had
to be discarded because they could not be completed.
    Business in the sex market is seasonal. June (Great Singapore Sale), September
(Formula One Grand Prix) and December (Holiday season), when Singapore faces a
surge of tourists, are the peak months. January and February have both less supply
and demand due to the Chinese New Year. The data were deliberately collected
during the low season for tourists, late February to August, excluding the period
of the Great Singapore Sale. We were somewhat concerned that prices might rise
during the high tourist season. This could increase the proportion of inexperienced
sex workers in the market and might also lead some locals to signi…cantly reduce


                                         12
their demand. Nevertheless, there is a signi…cant tourist component in the client
base at all times of the year.


4.2 Data Description
The sample consists of 176 street sex workers from Geylang and 814 transactions.
Three observations were dropped because client’s ethnicity was not recorded. There
were 678 transactions where the sex worker made the …rst o¤er, 130 transactions
where the clients initiated the price and 6 where this was not determined. We focus
on the …rst set of transactions although we use all transactions in some speci…cations.
    Transactions are limited to cases in which there was real interaction between
the sex worker and the potential client. They do not include the common event
where the sex worker tries to attract a client and is rebu¤ed with no expression of
interest. Consequently our measure of whether the sex worker approached the client
corresponds only imperfectly to our theoretical measure. If a potential client was
near to a sex worker but neither party approached the other, we are unaware of
the event. We only have information on who initiated the interaction if one party
approached the other, and there was su¢ cient engagement that price was discussed.
The validity of our approach is predicated on the assumption that the sex worker’s
tendency to approach a client of a given type is associated with the probability that
the sex worker rather than the client initiated the interaction.

4.2.1 Sex Workers’Characteristics

Table 1 reports the characteristics of the sex workers in the full sample. About one-
third of the sex workers come from each of China and Thailand. The remainder come
from Vietnam and Indonesia except for a small group of Singaporean Indians. As
expected, they have low educational attainment. Fully 72 percent have completed no
more than primary education, including 21 percent who are illiterate. Less than 10
percent of the sample have been educated through high school. The average age of
the sex workers is 26, with the youngest aged 18 and the oldest aged 39. Two-thirds
of the sex workers in the sample are single and only 11 percent are currently married
while 23 percent have at least one child. Over half the sample had at least 2 years’
experience as a sex worker prior to working in Singapore. The average respondent
had been working in Singapore for about 2 years.
    Geylang street sex workers report that they work 6-7 days a week, averaging 9
hours on weekdays and 11 hours on weekend days. They on average have only about
4 customers per day, suggesting that much of their day involves waiting for clients.


                                          13
They earn an average of somewhat more than S$3,200/month from sex, substantially
more than they earn at home. About one-third of the sex workers report income
from sources other than sex.12
    Despite our understanding that Geylang sex workers are controlled by pimps,
over half of the sex workers who answered the question and one-third of all sex
workers said that they did not have a pimp. Interestingly, the sex workers who report
having pimps also report less experience in Singapore, in the sense of stochastic
dominance. This is true even if we drop the Singapore Indian sex workers, none of
whom reports having a pimp. Of the small number who report the pimp share, the
mean is within the 30-40 percent range, which is consistent with the share reported
to us in conversations with insiders.

4.2.2 Client Characteristics

Chinese, mostly Singaporean but including some Malaysian Chinese, comprise the
largest ethnic group among the clients, followed by Bangladeshis, whites and In-
dians. There are smaller numbers of Malays, Japanese and Koreans, and Middle
Easterners and a handful of black Americans. Except for Indians and Bangladeshis
who comprise the vast majority of the clients of the Indian sex workers, there is sur-
prisingly little matching between the ethnicity of clients and sex workers (see table
2). In particular, Chinese clients are no more likely to frequent Chinese sex workers
than are other clients.
    Clients’ages, as estimated by the sex workers, range from 20 to 60 and average
about 37. About 30 percent of customers are tourists and about 20 percent are
repeat customers. There is no statistically signi…cant di¤erence in these proportions
by sex worker country of origin.
    On a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 is dress very badly and 5 is dress very well, sex
workers tend to think that their clients dress rather poorly (mean equals 2.4) and
on a similar scale …nd their customers unattractive (mean equals 2.0).13

4.2.3 Sex Workers’Views of Clients

The sex workers were asked to rate di¤erent ethnicities on a scale of 1 (dislike)
to 5 (like very much) with 3 being “like.” They consistently give high ratings to
Chinese (4.2) and white (3.9) clients (see the top row of table 3).14 In contrast,
  12
     Our understanding is that these are primarily payments for nonsexual companionship.
  13
     These means exclude sex workers who claim not to notice dress/attractiveness.
  14
     Although not shown in the table, Koreans/Japanese receive ratings similar to those of Cau-
casians while Malaysians fall between Bangladeshis and Indians.



                                              14
the Bangladeshi and Indian clients earn average ratings of 3.1 and 2.1.15 Although
sample sizes are small, this distinction does not appear to be greatly a¤ected by the
sex worker’s country of origin except that Singaporean Indian sex workers assign
higher ratings to Indians and Bangladeshis.16
    To understand the sex worker’s preferences, we rely on informal conversation with
sex workers and pimps and a nonrandom sample of 66 sex workers from all three
illegal market segments whom we asked “Given the same price and equally attractive
clients, do you prefer ethnicity X or ethnicity Y and why?” and, for cases where
bargaining failed, we inquired about the reason. The attraction of Chinese clients is
that they are more likely to be returning customers. White, Korean and Japanese
clients are willing to pay a higher price. In contrast, Indians are less popular among
sex workers mainly because of their dark skin tone and lower expected wealth, and
to a lesser extent because they are perceived as more demanding/rough and bargain
a lot. Surprisingly, since we would expect few sex workers to be able to distinguish
between the two, many sex workers compare Bangladeshis favorably to Indians.
Feedback from sex workers and pimps suggests that they uniformly describe men
with lighter skin tone as Bangladeshi.17 The sex workers often maintained that
Indians take longer to service but are unwilling to pay a commensurately higher
price and bargain harder. Some interviewees justify their distaste towards Indians
by claiming that Indian men have a higher probability of being sexually violent.
While we cannot preclude the possibility that the sex workers’dislike for Indians is
based on a rational assessment of the risk of violence or more demanding sex, the
qualitative interviews point us towards prejudice. The implications of our model do
not depend on whether dislike is justi…ed or unjusti…ed.
    The sex workers reported that ethnicity was an important factor in determining
which potential customers to approach and the initial price to set. In addition, the
value of previous tips and gifts (for repeat customers) and the client’s appearance
were also listed as important factors.
  15
     For reasons we have been unable to ascertain, the question about Bangladeshis was not asked
of a signi…cant minority of the sex workers.
  16
     These discriminatory attitudes appear to be mutual. Interviews with insiders reveal dark skin
sex workers like Singaporean Indians and Indonesians are least popular in the market, especially
among the light skin clients
  17
     Indian and Bangladeshi clients in Geylang are mostly construction workers. Among this group,
the association between skin tone and nationality appears largely to be empirically valid.




                                               15
4.2.4 Transaction Characteristics

The average unit price for sex is S$70 with lowest rate of S$27 and highest rate of
S$250.18 The average service duration is around an hour, but this is skewed by a
modest number of cases where the service was for all or most of the night. The
median is 45 minutes. Most of the transactions take place in either motels (70
percent) or hotels (22 percent). Only about 6 percent of the transactions occur in
the client’s residence. There is very high awareness of contraception among both
clients and sex workers in Singapore. There is only one case in which the sex worker
reported that the client had not used a condom.
    Table 3 shows some transaction characteristics for the four most common client
ethnicities and for all ethnicities together. In row 2, we show the initial price o¤ered
by sex workers to their potential clients. Among these groups, whites face the
highest initial price (S$91) and Bangladeshis the lowest (S$49) with Chinese (S$74)
and Indian (S$67) clients falling in between. Row 3 restricts the sample to those
transactions where bargaining was successful. Perhaps surprisingly, the mean initial
o¤ers are similar.
    Note that while the model assumes that sex workers can make take-it-or-leave-it
o¤ers, in practice clients can and do sometimes make counter-o¤ers. We know that
in 55 percent of the cases in which the sex worker made the …rst o¤er, the transaction
price equaled her initial o¤er while in 2 percent of the cases it was higher. Bargaining
failed after a very short interval in a further 2 percent of cases.
    Row 4 shows the mean contracted price. The ranking of prices is unchanged
although whites receive a somewhat larger discount. These di¤erentials are in line
with or somewhat larger than those in Levitt and Dubner (2009) who report that in
Chicago whites pay $9 more per sexual service than do black customers, with prices
for Hispanic customers falling in between.
    Row 5 shows that sex workers make the …rst move almost three-quarters of
the time. However, they are almost always the …rst mover with whites. Even
though both initial prices and transactions prices are higher for Indians than for
Bangladeshis, sex workers are much more likely to be the one who approaches a
potential client who is Bangladeshi (67 percent) than one who is Indian (43 percent).
At the same time, we see in row 6 that while bargaining almost never fails with whites
and rarely fails with Chinese potential clients, there are signi…cant failure rates with
both Bangladeshis (24 percent) and Indians (26 percent).
  18
    The rate in legal brothels in Geylang is …xed at S$50 per 20 minutes, half of which goes to
brothel owner. It is typical for a legal brothel sex worker to serve 10-20 customers a day, as the
average duration for each service is about 20 minutes.



                                               16
    These results are largely consistent with our theoretical model and qualitative
evidence. Sex workers view whites as willing to pay high prices. They therefore are
more likely to approach them, ask for a higher price and are more likely to reach a
deal, while the opposite is true for Bangladeshis. The results for Indians compared
with Bangladeshis are consistent with our …ndings of animosity towards Indians.
On the other hand, Indians are charged lower prices than are Chinese customers,
suggesting that sex workers also believe they have a lower willingness to pay than
Chinese or white customers. With respect to the claim by some sex workers that
their dislike of Indian clients is objective rather than subjective, we see that contrary
to claims that some of them make, Indians do not have long service duration, do not
get an unusually large price reduction from the initial o¤er (suggesting that they do
not bargain harder) and do not have an unusually high rate of demand for anal sex,
our only proxy for roughness. Their average bargaining time (not shown) is shorter
than the average for all other ethnicities except Chinese clients whose three-second
shorter average bargaining time relative to Indians is more than entirely explained
by shorter bargaining with Chinese sex workers. While we can never completely rule
out objective factors, these …ndings support the clear inference from the qualitative
interviews that it is skin tone rather than objective factors that drives many sex
workers’dislike of Indians.
    Of course, these di¤erences could re‡ect other factors. The next rows show
characteristics of the transactions that actually took place. Almost all clients request
vaginal sex. The real variation is in demand for oral and anal sex, both of which
command a price premium. Chinese and white clients are most likely to have oral
sex. This is somewhat less common among Indians and much less common among
Bangladeshis. On the other hand, anal sex is most common with whites and less
common with other ethnicities. Median duration of service is highest among whites
and lowest among Bangladeshis and Indians19 which may suggest that the higher
prices paid by whites and lower prices paid by Bangladeshis re‡ect a compensating
di¤erential for longer service. Except for Indians, the average prices per minute do
not vary much by ethnicity. However, we will see that the marginal cost of duration
is below the average so that duration does not account for the di¤erentials.
    It is not clear whether it should be advantageous to engage in “sweet talk.”20 On
the one hand, sex workers may prefer clients who tell them they are beautiful. On
  19
     We use medians instead of means to minimize the e¤ect of a small number of very lengthy
exchanges, some of which lasted the entire night.
  20
     Sweet talk captures the ‡irtation between the sex worker and the client. We control for
this factor because the sex workers indicated in the survey that their decisions on price may be
in‡uenced by the client’s sweet talk.



                                              17
the other, such cheap talk may be perceived as an indication of higher willingness
to pay. The mean of this categorical variable (from 1 to 5) is highest for whites and
lowest for Bangladeshis.


5 Identi…cation
5.1 Estimation Equations
Since our model has the sex worker making a take-it-or-leave-it o¤er, our principal
speci…cation restricts the sample to cases where the sex workers initiate price. Only
one out of seven transactions involved the client suggesting the initial price. We do,
however, use all transactions as a robustness check.
   We estimate the following equations:

                                                                           1
                M oveij =          j       1j Ej   + Xj B1 +    1i Wi   + Zig     1   + "1ij        (9)
                                                                             2
               ln P riceij =           j    2j Ej   + Xj B2 +     2i Wi   + Zig       3   + "2ij   (10)
                                                                           3
                 F ailij =     j       3j Ej       + Xj B3 +    3i Wi   + Zig   3   + "3ij         (11)

where i is the sex worker and j is the client.
    The dependent variable M ove is a latent variable capturing the tendency of
the sex worker to approach the client. If and only if the latent variable is positive,
we observe that the sex worker approached the client rather than vice versa. This
is an imperfect proxy for whether the sex worker …nds it worthwhile to approach.
There are undoubtedly occasions where the client approached …rst where the sex
worker’s expected surplus was positive and many occasions on which we do not
observe the sex worker’s failure to approach because the potential client also chose
not to approach. Our principal estimation method for (9) is …xed-e¤ects logit. If
price discrimination is driven by perceived willingness to pay, we should see that the
ethnicities for whom the initial price is higher are also those that the sex workers
are more likely to approach.
    The variable ln Price is the natural logarithm of the initial price o¤ered by the
sex worker. Equation (10) is estimated by ordinary least squares with sex worker
…xed e¤ects. As a robustness check, we also estimate versions of the equation in
which the transaction price is used in lieu of the initial price. Of course, we do
not observe the transaction price when the bargaining fails. Consequently, these
estimates must be used with caution.
    F ail is the latent tendency for negotiation to fail. We estimate (11)using …xed-


                                                        18
e¤ects logit. However, since failure to reach an agreement is relatively rare, this
approach results in the loss of a large number of observations. Therefore, we also
rely on standard logit and control for sex worker characteristics21 while clustering
on sex worker.
    The explanatory variables in the equations are Ej ; dummy variables for the eth-
nicity of the client (Chinese men are the base group), X; a set of client characteristics,
which includes the client’s age, whether he is a regular customer and whether he
is a tourist and the ratings the sex worker gives to the client based on his out…t,
attractiveness and “sweet talk,” except that this last variable is excluded from the
decision to approach, Wi ; sex worker …xed e¤ects, and Z; a set of match-speci…c
variables that varies among the equations because of di¤erent information available.
    Our theory distinguishes three cases although we recognize that hybrids are pos-
sible:
Case 1. Statistical discrimination + No/Weak Taste Discrimination:
      1 > 0, 2 > 0, 3 < 0
    If, for example, as suggested by our qualitative interviews, sex workers believe
that whites have a higher willingness to pay than the Chinese and if there is no
or only very weak taste-based discrimination, we expect, ceteris paribus, the sex
workers to more actively approach whites, suggest a higher price and to be more
likely to successfully conclude negotiations with them. Of course, a group like the
Bangladeshis whom we anticipate bene…t from statistical discrimination based on
willingness to pay should have coe¢ cients with the opposite signs.
Case 2. Taste Discrimination + No/Weak Statistical discrimination:
      1 < 0, 2 > 0, 3 > 0
    If, as suggested by our qualitative interviews, sex workers tend to dislike Indi-
ans, and, if statistical discrimination based on willingness to pay is of little or no
importance, sex workers should be less likely to approach Indians, suggest a higher
initial price and be less likely to reach an agreement with them.
Case 3. No Statistical discrimination + No Taste Discrimination:
      1 = 2 = 3 = 0
    This is a trivial case. When there is no discrimination, we should observe equal
treatment towards clients of all ethnicities.
    Finally, we note that other combinations are either inconsistent with our model
or are possible only if there are multiple sources of discrimination.
  21
    The sex worker’s country of origin, age, years of experience, education, marital status, beauty
and English skills.




                                                19
6 Empirical Results
6.1 Price Discrimination
We saw in table 3 that the raw price di¤erences among ethnic groups were consistent
with our qualitative data on sex workers’beliefs. However, these di¤erentials might
simply re‡ect matching of more attractive and therefore higher price sex workers
to wealthier clients. Our qualitative interviews do not support this interpretation;
clients claim that sex workers are highly substitutable in their eyes. While richer
clients favor more beautiful sex workers and can a¤ord them, our interviews suggest
that they are (almost) equally happy to buy services from less attractive workers.
And those who are willing to pay more for higher class sex workers generally frequent
Orchard Towers or the night clubs.
    Nevertheless, to determine whether the raw price di¤erences merely re‡ect sort-
ing, we include sex worker …xed-e¤ects in the price equation. In addition we control
for client’s age (as estimated by the sex worker) and its square, and dummy vari-
ables for whether the client is a repeat customer, a tourist, rated above the median
in attractiveness, rated above the median in quality of dress, rated above the median
in “sweet talk”and indicators for each of these variables being missing.
    The …rst column of table 4 shows the results from this estimation. Relative to the
base group (Chinese), the same sex worker suggests an initial price to whites with
an 11 percent (10 log points) premium and gives Bangladeshis a 13 percent discount
on the initial price o¤er, thus asking whites for almost 30 percent more than she
asks from Bangladeshis. The point estimate suggests that our small sample of black
Americans is asked the highest premium (not shown), but this estimate is very
imprecise. The initial price asked of Indians is similar to that asked of Chinese
prospects.
    Although we have not focused on tourists as a group, we would not be surprised
if they had higher willingness to pay. We observe that the initial price they face is 15
percent higher than locals (not shown). Being well-dressed and older raise the asking
price. The former is presumably an indicator of willingness to pay. The latter could
re‡ect presumed …nancial status or tastes, but the fact that attractiveness of the
client does not a¤ect the initial price points us towards the former. Telling the sex
worker she is beautiful (“sweet talk”) also raises the asking price. Finally, regular
clients do not seem to be charged a premium or receive a discount relative to other
locals.
    Column 2 repeats the exercise but drops all observations with missing data on
client characteristics and the corresponding dummy variables. The estimates are


                                          20
broadly similar to those in the …rst column but generally suggest somewhat larger
ethnicity e¤ects.22
    Column 3 adds dummy variables for eight combinations of sex acts. In principle,
there are …fteen possible combinations. In practice we observe only eight in our data.
The excluded category is “sex acts unknown” which applies to virtually all of the
cases where bargaining fails. The sex acts over which the parties were bargaining are
reported in only four cases where sex did not take place. Note also that the services
the client is requesting may not be known when the sex worker initiates price. There
were …ve transactions in which the …nal price exceeded the sex worker’s initial o¤er.
    Despite this limitation, we …nd highly signi…cant e¤ects of the transacted sex acts
on the initial price. However, the sex acts are not strongly correlated with ethnicity,
and therefore, their inclusion does not greatly alter the ethnic di¤erentials.
    In the fourth column, we control for where the sexual activity took place. This
de facto limits the sample to completed transactions and greatly reduces the sample.
Controlling for duration (column 5) further reduces the sample. Nevertheless, we
view this speci…cation as important because our qualitative interviews revealed that
some sex workers believe that Indians require longer service. In fact, the estimate
for Indians remains almost unchanged. We continue to …nd robust evidence of a
white premium and a Bangladeshi discount.
    Finally, in column 6 we include all encounters regardless of who made the …rst
o¤er. Again the results are robust to the change of sample because white clients
o¤er higher initial prices and Bangladeshi clients o¤er lower initial prices, consistent
with sex workers’beliefs. The modest drop in the coe¢ cient on Indian re‡ects their
tendency to o¤er a lower initial price.
    In table 5, we examine the relation between the transaction price and ethnicity.
We remind the reader that we do not observe this price when bargaining fails. More-
over, our model does not have predictions about the transaction price independent
of the initial price since sex workers make take-it-or-leave it o¤ers. Subject to these
caveats, we note that bargaining does not eliminate the ethnicity di¤erentials, which
supports the rationality of the sex workers’pricing behavior. The white premium
and Bangladeshi discount are similar in the corresponding columns of tables 4 and
5.
    When we estimate the speci…cation in column 5 using the sample for whom we
  22
    We further experimented with including whether the transaction took place on a week-end
and whether it took place during the day. Although the coe¢ cient on white became smaller and
statistically insigni…cant, the loss of additional observations due to missing variables led to a loss
of statistical signi…cance even if we left out these additional variables and simply dropped the
additional missing observations.



                                                 21
have a transaction price, there are some interesting di¤erences (not shown). “Sweet
talk”is associated with a higher initial price but a lower …nal price, suggesting that
this is an e¤ective negotiating strategy. The e¤ect of service duration on the …nal
price is still small, about 1 percent for an additional ten minutes but is substantially
larger than the e¤ect on the initial price (about 0.6 percent). If we limit ourselves to
service durations of less than four hours, these numbers rise to 1.3 and 0.9 percent.
    Before moving on to other outcomes, we examine the relation between initial
o¤ers and ethnicity when the client makes the …rst o¤er using the speci…cation in
column 1. Clients who make the …rst o¤er are not necessarily representative of all
clients. Nevertheless, it is striking that Bangladeshis make substantially lower and
white substantially higher initial o¤ers relative to Chinese customers. Perhaps even
more signi…cantly, the o¤ers made by Indians are lower than those of Bangladeshis.
This is consistent either with Indians having a lower willingness to pay or with the
claims of sex workers that Indians bargain harder. We …nd the latter view less
compelling because when we limit the sample to the cases where the transaction
was completed and the sex worker made the initial o¤er, both the initial and …nal
prices for Indians were similar to those charged to Chinese clients (not shown).
    Taken together, we view our price results as consistent with the view that whites
have a relatively high willingness to pay, while Bangladeshis and Indians have a
relatively low willingness to pay, but that in the case of Indians this low willingness
to pay is largely o¤set by the sex workers’antipathy, with the consequence that they
do not receive relatively low initial price o¤ers.


6.2 Who Approaches Whom?
If our interpretation of prices in the previous subsection is correct, sex workers
should be more likely to approach whites and less likely to approach Bangladeshis
and Indians than they are to approach Chinese potential clients despite the fact that
the prices paid by Indians and Chinese clients are similar.
    Table 6 shows the relation between client characteristics and the probability that
it was the sex worker who initiated the contact. We remind the reader that this is
an imperfect measure of the theoretical variable which is whether the sex worker
wishes to engage in negotiation. If the sex worker did not approach the client, and
the client found the sex worker unattractive and did not approach her, we do not
observe her failure to approach. The theoretical model does not permit the client
to make the approach, but it seems that he should be more likely to do so in cases
where she was not intending to approach him.
    Column 1 shows the results from …xed-e¤ects logit when, as in our main spec-

                                          22
i…cation, we restrict the sample to interactions in which the sex worker made the
…rst o¤er. We observe that, as predicted, sex workers are more likely to approach
whites (signi…cant at the .05 level using a one-tailed test) and less likely to approach
Indians (signi…cant at any conventional level) than they are to approach Chinese
clients. The point estimate for Bangladeshis is negative as predicted but falls well
short of signi…cance at conventional levels.
    Unfortunately, the coe¢ cients from …xed-e¤ects logit are not readily interpretable.
Therefore in the second column we replace the sex worker …xed e¤ects with sex
worker characteristics23 and do the estimation using ordinary logit while clustering
the standard errors by sex worker.24 The results, shown in column 2, are similar to
the …xed-e¤ects results.
    Consequently, the marginal e¤ects (shown in square brackets) from the ordinary
logit estimates are likely to be a reasonable guide to the magnitude of the ethnicity
e¤ects. The point estimates suggest that sex workers are substantially more likely
(21 percentage points) to approach whites, substantially less likely to approach In-
dians (21 percentage points) and somewhat less likely to approach Bangladeshis (8
percentage points) than they are to approach Chinese clients. Recall that overall,
sex workers approach clients in 72 percent of cases.
    Columns 3 and 4 repeat the exercise but include transactions in which the client
initiated the price. The estimates are considerably less precise when we add these
observations, but the magnitude of the estimated e¤ects are similar to those in
the main speci…cation for whites (14 percentage points) and Bangladeshis (negative
7 percentage points), and substantially more negative (27 percentage points) for
Indians.


6.3 Failed Bargains
So far our results are broadly consistent with the view that, relative to what they
o¤er Chinese clients, sex workers charge a premium to whites and o¤er a discount to
Bangladeshis based on the sex workers’perception of willingness to pay but dislike
Indians and therefore do not o¤er them a discount even though they, too, generally
exhibit a low willingness to pay. Based on this interpretation, we expect that, relative
to bargaining with Chinese clients, bargaining is more likely to fail when the client
  23
     This is …guratively but not literally true since Chamberlain’s conditional logit does not involve
estimation of …xed e¤ects but rather partials them out.
  24
     Given the small number of clients per sex worker, clustered standard errors should be treated
with caution. For some parameters the clustered standard errors are lower than the conventional
standard errors while the reverse is true for others. In no case is the interpretation of the ethnicity
coe¢ cients a¤ected by this choice.



                                                  23
is Indian or Bangladeshi and less likely to fail when the client is white.
    Table 7 shows the relation between ethnicity and the probability that the bar-
gaining fails. As in table 6, the sample in the …rst two columns is restricted to our
main sample in which the sex worker made the …rst o¤er. Using the …xed-e¤ects
logit results shown in the …rst column, bargaining with both Bangladeshis and In-
dians is more likely to fail relative to bargaining with Chinese clients. The estimate
also suggests that bargaining with whites is less likely to fail, but the coe¢ cient falls
just short of statistical signi…cance at the .05 level even using a one-tailed test.
    In order to be able to discuss the magnitude of the marginal e¤ect, we again
replace the sex worker …xed e¤ects with sex worker characteristics. In contrast
with the analysis of the decision to approach the client, the coe¢ cient on white is
sharply lower in the second column than in the …rst, suggesting that we should be
cautious about using these estimates to calculate the marginal e¤ect of the client
being white on the probability that the bargain fails. Subject to this caveat, we
…nd that bargaining fails with whites 14 percentage points less frequently and with
Bangladeshi and Indians 20 and 18 percentage points more frequently than with
Chinese customers. We note that these point estimates are very large. Bargaining
fails in about 12 percent of cases in the entire sample and only in 4 percent of
transactions involving the base group, Chinese customers.
    When we extend the sample to transactions in which the bargaining was initiated
by the client, we get similar results except that the one-tailed test is now statistically
signi…cant at the .05 level for whites. The magnitude of the estimated e¤ect is slightly
larger than in column 2 for whites (18 percentage points) and slightly smaller for
Bangladeshis (17 percentage points) and Indians (16 percentage points).


6.4 Singaporean Indian Sex Workers
The theoretical model implies that if most sex workers engage in taste discrimination
against Indians, sex workers who do not have a distaste for Indians should never-
theless charge a premium and therefore be more likely to approach them and reach
an agreement. We use being a Singaporean Indian sex worker (hereafter Indian) as
a proxy for not having a distaste for Indians. The sample is small; we have only 11
transactions between Indian sex workers and Indian clients. Therefore, all results
should be viewed as suggestive. For this analysis we drop Bangladeshis from the
sample and combine the remaining non-Indian ethnicities into a single group. We
summarize the results, but do not present them in tabular form.
   Indian sex workers charge Indian clients as much as other sex workers do. The
coe¢ cient in the initial price equation on the interaction between Indian sex worker

                                           24
and Indian client is actually positive but highly imprecise. However, Indian sex
workers are much more likely to approach Indian clients. Using a linear probability
model with the other controls, including sex worker e¤ects, the di¤erence is 54
percentage points and signi…cant at the .05 level. Similarly, bargaining is less likely
to fail. The di¤erence is 32 percentage points and signi…cant at the .1 level using a
two-tailed test.25
    Despite their obvious limitations, these results are broadly consistent with the
theoretical model.


7 Conclusion
Recall that our prediction was that because sex workers believe whites have a high
willingness to pay, sex workers would be more likely to approach potential clients
who are white, would chose a higher initial price and would be more likely to reach
an agreement. Conversely, because sex workers believe Bangladeshis have a lower
willingness to pay, they are less likely to approach, set a lower initial price and are
less likely to reach an agreement with Bangladeshi clients. Drawing on rich data
collected by the …rst author on street sex workers in Singapore, we have robust
evidence supporting all three predictions.
    We also predicted that because there is widespread antagonism towards Indian
clients, they would be charged a higher price. Prejudiced sex workers would be
less likely to approach and less likely to reach an agreement with the Indian clients
they approach. We …nd robust evidence that sex workers are less likely to approach
Indians and that they are less likely to reach an agreement. We do not con…rm the
expectation of a higher price relative to Chinese clients; the initial prices demanded of
the two ethnicities are similar, perhaps because sex workers also believe that Indian
clients have a relatively low willingness to pay, a belief that would be consistent with
the low o¤ers made by Indians when they make the …rst o¤er. Consistent with our
expectations, Indians pay a premium relative to Bangladeshis.
    Even though this market is highly competitive with very low search costs, price
discrimination is not driven from the market. Instead, we …nd support for Diamond’s
prediction that sellers have monopoly power even when search costs are very small.
This, in turn, permits price discrimination based on willingness to pay. Strikingly,
these modest search costs also allow the survival of taste-based discrimination, in
contradiction with Becker’s model.
  25
     We con…rm the results of the linear probability models with …xed-e¤ects logit for which we use
bootstrapped standard errors and calculate the 95 percent con…dence interval from the distribution
of the bootstrap replications.


                                                25
    The consistency between the implications for discrimination based on sex work-
ers’ self-reported preferences and beliefs and the actual pricing and approaching
decisions made by sex workers and the rate at which bargaining is concluded suc-
cessfully provides strong evidence that discrimination persists even in this highly
competitive market with low search costs.
    Of course, it might be argued that our setting is not truly competitive. After
all, sex workers are not identical. To some extent we agree. A competitive market
is an ideal that, at best, will be only approximated in real-world settings. The issue
is the extent to which this approximation produces relatively accurate predictions.
Our view is that there are few labor markets that are likely to approximate the
competitive ideal more closely than the market for sex workers in Geylang. The
importance of worker heterogeneity is unlikely to be as important for a half-hour
sexual encounter than it is for most employment relationships.
    Thus we conclude that our …ndings support more recent search-theoretic mod-
els of the labor market rather than those using the traditional competitive market
assumption.




                                         26
References
Agence France Press (2008): “Women tra¢ cked to Singapore lured into prostitu-
  tion,”http://http://globalnation.inquirer.net/news/breakingnews/view/20080901-
  158083/Women-tra¢ cked-to-Singapore-lured-into-prostitution,         accessed
  1/17/2015.

Arrow, K. (1973): “The Theory of Discrimination,” in Discrimination in Labor
  Markets, ed. by O. Ahenfelter, and A. Rees, pp. 3–33. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
  University Press.

Ayres, I., and P. Siegelman (1995): “Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining
 for a New Car,”American Economic Review, 85(3), 304–321.

Bayer, P., M. D. Casey, F. Ferreira, and R. McMillan (2012): Price discrimination
  in the housing market. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Becker, G. S. (1957): The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press,
  2nd edn.

Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan (2004): “Are Emily and Greg More Employable
  than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,”
  American Economic Review, 94(4), 991–1013.

Black, D. A. (1995): “Discrimination in an Equilibrium Search Model,” Journal of
  Labor Economics, 13(2), 309–334.

Chong Chee Kin (2005): “Are you free for tar pau?,” http://unwomen-
  nc.org.sg/resources/2005/30Jul2005_Are%20you%20free%20for%20tar%20pau.pdf.

Diamond, P. A. (1971): “A Model of Price Adjustment,”Journal of Economic The-
  ory, 3, 156–168.

Doleac, J. L., and L. C. Stein (2013): “The visible hand: race and online market
 outcomes,”The Economic Journal, 123(572), F469–F492.

Graddy, K. (1995): “Testing for Imperfect Competition at the Fulton Fish Market,”
  The Rand Journal of Economics, 26(1), 75–92.

Heckman, J., and P. Siegelman (1993): “The Urban Institute Audit Studies: Their
  Methods and Findings,” in In Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement
  of Discrimination in America, ed. by Fix, and Struyk, pp. 187–258. The Urban
  Institute Press, Washington, D.C.

                                        27
Jacquemet, N., and C. Yannelis (2012): “Indiscriminate discrimination: a correspon-
  dence test for ethnic homophily in the Chicago Labor Market,”Labour Economics,
  19(6), 824–832.

Levitt, S., and S. Dubner (2009): Super Freakeconomics, 0-06-088957-8. William
  Morrow, 1st edn.

List, J. A. (2004): “The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace:
  Evidence from the Field,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 49–89.

Ministry of Manpower, Singapore (2012): “Labour Force In Singapore,”.

Neumark, D. (1996): “Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit Study,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3), 915–41.

Othman, Z., and Z. M. Yusof (2014):                “Welcome         to   Geylang,”
  http://news.asiaone.com/news/singapore/welcome-geylang.

Phelps, E. S. (1972): “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism,” American
  Economic Review, 62, 659–61.

Pope, D. G., and J. R. Sydnor (2011): “What’s in a Picture? Evidence of Discrimi-
  nation from Prosper.com,”Journal of Human Resources, 46(1), 53–92.

Singapore Tourism Board (2012):      “Singapore Tourism Board Annual Report
  2011/2012,”.

The Electric New Paper (2008): “Is Geylang Boom Town Or Cowboy Town?,”
  http://propertyhighlights.blogspot.com/2008_04_21_archive.html.

Warren, J. F. (1993): Ah Ku and Karayuki-san: Prostitution in Singapore (1870-
 1940). Oxford University Press.

Williams, S., L. Lyons, and M. Ford (2012): Men and Masculinities in Southeast
 Asiachap. Homosociality and desire: charting Chinese Singaporean sex tourists’
 online conversations, pp. 68–85. Routledge, Milton Park, Abingdon.

Zussman, A. (2013): “Ethnic discrimination: Lessons from the Israeli online market
  for used cars,”The Economic Journal, 123(572), F433–F468.




                                        28
 Table 1: Sex Worker’s Characteristics


Variable                      Mean
Age(Sex Worker)               26.3
Experience                     2.9
Experience in Singapore        1.7
Total Monthly Income(S$)      4371
Monthly Income from Sex       3246
Days/Week Worked               6.3
Hours Worked (Weekday)         9.0
Hours Worked (Weekend)        11.0
Customers/Day                  3.9


                                Col %

Country
China                           33.5
Thailand                        33.0
Vietnam                         21.0
Indonesia                       9.1
SgpIndian                       3.4

Education
Illiterate                      21.1
Primary                         50.9
Secondary                       20.6
High School                      5.7
College                          1.7

MaritalStatus
Single/Relationship             67.6
Married                         11.4
Divorced                        19.3
Widow                            1.7

Beauty(1=lowest; 5=highest)
2                               17.6
3                               33.5
4                               45.5
5                               3.4

Urban                           35.6
Has Child                       22.7
Has Pimp                        47.9

N                                176




                       29
             Table 2: Client’s Characteristics by Sex Worker’s Country of Origin



                                            Sex Worker’s Country of Origin

                          China      Thailand         Vietnam   Indonesia    SingIndiana    Total

Ethnicity
Chinese                     39.9          34.7           33.8        42.2          10.7      36.4
Caucasian                   15.7           9.4           16.2        13.3           3.6      13.1
Bangladeshi                 17.4          23.4           17.6        21.7          39.3      20.6
Indian                       9.6          12.1            4.9          9.6         39.3      10.6
Malay                       10.2           6.4            7.0          2.4          3.6       7.4
Middle Eastern               3.4           3.8           10.6          1.2          0.0       4.4
JapaneseKorean               3.4           9.4            9.2          8.4          0.0       6.8
Black(American)              0.3           0.8            0.7          1.2          3.6       0.7

Tourist                     26.6          32.3           30.7        25.3          42.9      29.5
Repeat Clients              20.5          13.9           22.5        21.7          17.9      18.8
Age                         37.2          36.5           36.9        40.7          37.0      37.3
Dressb                       2.3           2.2            2.8          2.5          2.3       2.4
Looks                        2.0           1.8            2.4          2.1          2.0       2.0

 a
     SingIndian are the Singaporean Indian sex workers, who typically have dark skin tone
 b
     For both Dress and Looks, 1=worst and 5=best




                                                 30
                  Table 3: Transaction Characteristics by Client’s Ethnicity

                                              Chinese White Bangladeshi Indian                 All
Mean Rating(1=dislike, 5=like most)             4.16       3.93         3.15          2.08

Initial Price (S$)                              73.80     91.22         49.04        67.14    71.28

Initial Price (Bargain Successful)              73.88     91.13         47.45        64.62    72.13

Transaction Price                               68.07     81.34         43.74        57.69    65.78

Sex Worker Approaching First                    72.8       91.8         67.3          42.9     71.9

Bargain Fails                                      4.2      1.0         24.0          25.7     11.8

Oral Sex                                        76.1       89.6         33.0          62.0     67.2

Anal Sex                                           4.9     45.8          1.9          8.0      15.0

Duration of Service                                60       85           35            40       45

Sweet Talk(1=least, 5=most)                     2.08       2.69         1.58          1.85     2.08
1
    Top line baseed on up to 174 observations. Remaining rows based on up to 677 transactions in which
    the sex worker was the …rst to suggest a price.




                                              31
                       Table 4: Log Initial Price by Client Ethnicity

                                  (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)

Ethnicity (Base=Chinese)

White                           0.103      0.127       0.121       0.132       0.130     0.143
                                (0.043)    (0.052)     (0.051)     (0.055)     (0.062)    (0.040)

Bangladesh                     -0.144      -0.186     -0.139      -0.133      -0.123     -0.135
                                (0.033)     (0.040)    (0.043)     (0.044)     (0.049)    (0.033)

Indian                           0.019       0.015      0.022       0.031       0.013      -0.035
                                (0.034)     (0.040)    (0.039)     (0.040)     (0.044)    (0.034)

Only Sex Worker                   Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         No
Makes 1st O¤er

Dummies for missing               Yes         No         Yes         Yes          -         Yes

Sex Acts                          No          No         Yes         Yes        Yes         No

Sex Venue                         No          No          No         Yes        Yes         No

Service Duration                  No          No          No         No         Yes         No

N                                 676        548         525         513         413        810
R2 Within                        0.522      0.521       0.607       0.616       0.598      0.454
R2 Between                       0.072      0.280       0.002       0.000       0.000      0.336
R2 Overall                       0.221      0.301       0.180       0.198       0.245      0.294
1
    All regressions include sex worker …xed e¤ects and control for additional dummy variables
    for Malay, Middle Eastern, East Asian, and black American, a quadratic in client’s perceived
    age, dummies for repeat customer, tourist, dresses well, dress not noticed, customer attractive,
    attractiveness not noticed, and "sweet talk" above average.
2
    Dummies for missing information on client age, dress and attractiveness included where noted
3
    Sex act dummies: 8 combinations of sex acts plus "not reported."
4
    - No observations missing client age, repeat customer or tourist.




                                                32
                       Table 5: Log Final Price by Client Ethnicity

                                  (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

Ethnicity (Base=Chinese)

White                          0.145       0.182      0.153       0.152       0.159      0.181
                                (0.043)     (0.056)    (0.052)     (0.055)     (0.058)    (0.037)

Bangladesh                     -0.125      -0.172     -0.110     -0.118      -0.141      -0.132
                                (0.035)     (0.045)    (0.044)    (0.045)     (0.046)     (0.032)

Indian                           0.014      0.008       0.024      0.024       0.015       0.008
                                (0.037)    (0.045)     (0.040)    (0.040)     (0.041)     (0.034)

Only Sex Worker                  Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         No
Makes 1st O¤er

Dummies for missing              Yes          No         Yes        Yes          -          Yes

Sex Acts                          No          No         Yes        Yes         Yes         No

Sex Venue                         No          No         No         Yes         Yes         No

Service Duration                  No          No         No         No          Yes         No

N                                 596        469         524        513         413         709
R2 Within                        0.506      0.496       0.546      0.559       0.589       0.481
R2 Between                       0.025      0.282       0.015      0.006       0.007       0.269
R2 Overall                       0.157      0.265       0.121      0.144       0.232       0.239
1
    All regressions include sex worker …xed e¤ects and control for additional dummy variables
    for Malay, Middle Eastern, East Asian, and black American, a quadratic in client’s perceived
    age, dummies for repeat customer, tourist, dresses well, dress not noticed, customer attractive,
    attractiveness not noticed, and "sweet talk" above average.
2
    Dummies for missing information on client age, dress and attractiveness included where noted.
3
    Sex act dummies: 8 combinations of sex acts plus "not reported."
4
    - No observations missing client age, repeat customer or tourist.




                                                33
           Table 6: Did Sex Worker Approach Client? By Client Ethnicity

                                       (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)
                                Fixed E¤ect Logit       Logit     Fixed E¤ect Logit      Logit

Ethnicity (Base=Chinese)

White                                 1.515             1.244           0.574            0.769
                                      (0.842)          (0.772)         (0.632)          (0.662)
                                                       [0.208]                          [0.138]

Bangladesh                             -0.484          -0.447           -0.423           -0.364
                                      (0.481)         (0.404)          (0.420)          (0.390)
                                                      [-0.075]                          [-0.065]

Indian                               -1.434           -1.271          -1.621           -1.499
                                      (0.469)          (0.373)         (0.412)          (0.365)
                                                       [-0.213]                         [-0.268]

Only Sex Worker                         Yes              Yes             No               No
Makes 1st O¤er
Sex Worker Characteristics              No               Yes             No               Yes

N                                      483              586              595             650
Likelihood                           -154.849         -294.156         -202.402        -345.006
1
    All estimates include dummy variables for Malay, Middle Eastern, East Asian, and black
    American, a quadratic in client’s perceived age, dummies for repeat customer, tourist, dresses
    well, dress not noticed, customer attractive, and attractiveness not noticed. Dummies for
    missing information on client age, dress and attractiveness also included.
2
    Sex worker characteristics: quadratic in age, quadratic in experience,four country of origin
    dummies, marital status, education, beauty and English skills dummies.
3
    Fixed e¤ects logit drops sex workers who always or never approached clients. Their transac-
    tions and other cases where success/failure are perfectly predicted are excluded from N.
4
    Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on sex worker in columns 2 and 4. Marginal e¤ects
    in brackets.




                                                34
                    Table 7: Bargaining Failed By Client Ethnicity

                                       (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
                                Fixed E¤ect Logit      Logit     Fixed E¤ect Logit     Logit

Ethnicity (Base=Chinese)

White                                  -2.073          -1.455         -1.812           -1.753
                                      (1.515)         (1.420)         (1.094)         (1.287)
                                                      [-0.139]                        [-0.181]

Bangladesh                           1.951           2.114            1.358           1.584
                                     (0.781)          (0.543)         (0.632)          (0.507)
                                                      [0.202]                          [0.164]

Indian                               1.705           1.886            1.265           1.479
                                     (0.743)          (0.519)         (0.589)          (0.471)
                                                      [0.181]                          [0.153]

Only Sex Worker                        Yes              Yes             No              No
Makes 1st O¤er
Sex Worker Characteristics              No              Yes             No              Yes

N                                      338             563             438              627
Likelihood                           -73.253         -171.722        -101.944         -205.423
1
    All estimates include dummy variables for Malay, Middle Eastern, East Asian, and black
    American, a quadratic in client’s perceived age, dummies for repeat customer, tourist,
    dresses well, dress not noticed, customer attractive, and attractiveness not noticed. Dum-
    mies for missing information on client age, dress attractiveness and "sweet talk" above
    average also included.
2
    Sex worker characteristics: quadratic in age, quadratic in experience,four country of origin
    dummies, marital status, education, beauty and English skills dummies.
3
    Fixed e¤ects logit drops sex workers who always or never approached clients. Their trans-
    actions and other cases where success/failure are perfectly predicted are excluded from
    N.
4
    Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on sex worker in columns 2 and 4. Marginal e¤ects
    in brackets.




                                                35
