                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       VOTING ON PRICES VS. VOTING ON QUANTITIES IN A WORLD CLIMATE
                                 ASSEMBLY

                                          Martin L. Weitzman

                                         Working Paper 20925
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20925


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2015




The research for this paper was partially supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Martin L. Weitzman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Voting on Prices vs. Voting on Quantities in a World Climate Assembly
Martin L. Weitzman
NBER Working Paper No. 20925
February 2015
JEL No. F51,H41,Q54

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper posits the conceptually useful allegory of a futuristic "World Climate Assembly" that votes
on global carbon emissions via the basic principle of majority rule. Two variants are considered.
One is to vote on a universal price (or tax) that is internationally harmonized, but the proceeds from
which are domestically retained. The other is to vote on the overall quantity of total worldwide emissions,
which are then distributed for free (via a pre-decided fractional subdivision formula) as individual
allowance permits that are subsequently marketed in an international cap-and-trade system. The model
of the paper suggests that the majority-voted price is likely to be less distortionary and easier to enact
than the majority-voted total quantity of permits. While the study is centered on a formal model, the
tone of the policy discussion resembles more an exploratory think piece.


Martin L. Weitzman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 313
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mweitzman@harvard.edu
           Voting on Prices vs. Voting on Quantities
                 in a World Climate Assembly
                                     Martin L. Weitzman

                                     January 25, 2015
                                   Comments Appreciated



                                             Abstract

         This paper posits the conceptually useful allegory of a futuristic “World Climate
      Assembly” that votes on global carbon emissions via the basic principle of majority
      rule. Two variants are considered. One is to vote on a universal price (or tax) that
      is internationally harmonized, but the proceeds from which are domestically retained.
      The other is to vote on the overall quantity of total worldwide emissions, which are
      then distributed for free (via a pre-decided fractional subdivision formula) as individual
      allowance permits that are subsequently marketed in an international cap-and-trade
      system.    The model of the paper suggests that the majority-voted price is likely
      to be less distortionary and easier to enact than the majority-voted total quantity
      of permits.   While the study is centered on a formal model, the tone of the policy
      discussion resembles more an exploratory think piece.
         JEL Codes: F51, H41, Q54
         Keywords: Climate change, Global warming, International public goods, Prices
      versus quantities



1     Introduction: Global Warming Gridlock
Throughout this paper I use the terms “climate change”and “global warming”interchange-
ably. The term “climate change”is currently in vogue and is a more apt description overall.
But the term “global warming”is more evocative of this paper’s main theme. Global warm-
ing is a global public-goods externality whose resolution requires an unprecedented degree of
    Department of Economics, Harvard University (mweitzman@harvard.edu).


                                                  1
international cooperation and coordination. This international climate-change externality
has frequently been characterized as the most di¢ cult public goods problem that humanity
has ever faced. I concentrate in this paper on carbon dioxide emissions, but in principle the
discussion could be extended to emissions of all relevant greenhouse gases. Throughout the
paper I blur the distinction between carbon dioxide and carbon, since the two are linearly
related.1
    The world is currently mired in what has aptly been called global warming gridlock.2
The core problem confronting the economics of climate change is an inability to overcome
the obstacles associated with free riding on a very important international public good.
The ‘international’ part is signi…cant. Even within a nation, it can be di¢ cult to resolve
public goods problems. But at least there is a national government, with some governance
structure, able to exert some control over externalities within its borders. With climate
change there is no overarching international governance mechanism capable of overcoming,
by coordinated action, the problem of free riding.
    For purposes of exposition, at …rst I blur the distinction between a price and a tax. An
internationally harmonized but nationally retained carbon tax (or price) has already been
proposed as a potential solution to the global warming externality, and has been examined
on its merits.3 In what follows I very brie‡y summarize some of the possible virtues of an
internationally-harmonized but nationally-collected carbon tax (or price) that have already
been noted in the literature. My foil here is an internationally harmonized cap-and-trade sys-
tem. This kind of global-design comparison is complicated and full of subjective judgements
about what might or might not work better in practice and why or why not. Cap-and-trade
systems are currently more widely used throughout the world, and in that sense are perhaps
more visible or more familiar than pollution taxes. My purpose here is merely to indicate
that the perhaps less-familiar carbon tax already has some signi…cant arguments in its favor
–as a prelude to some new theoretical arguments for negotiating a uniform price on carbon
that I will later develop in this paper.
    Both quantity-based and price-based controls are inherently uncertain for the period
during which they apply (in between times of periodic review), but the uncertainty takes
di¤erent forms. With cap-and-trade, total emissions are known but the price or (marginal)
cost is uncertain. With a carbon tax, the price or (marginal) cost of carbon emissions is
known, but total emissions are uncertain. On the basis of economic models of climate change
   1
     One ton of carbon equals 3.67 tons of carbon dioxide. My default unit is carbon dioxide (CO2 ).
   2
     Global Warming Gridlock is the title of a book by David Victor (2011).
   3
     There is actually a fair-sized literature on a carbon-tax (or carbon-price) approach. See, e.g., Metcalf
and Weisbach (2009), Cooper (2010), Cramton, Ockenfels and Stoft (2013), Nordhaus (2007, 2013), and the
many further references cited in these works.



                                                     2
that include uncertainty, carbon taxes outperform tradeable permits, both theoretically and
in numerical simulations.4 In the real world, above and beyond theory and numerical
simulations, I think that energy price volatility is very poorly tolerated by the general public.
Swings in carbon prices, especially in extreme cases, could sour public opinion and discredit
for some time thereafter the entire idea of a market-based approach to the climate change
problem. On the other hand, it is di¢ cult for me to imagine the broad public getting quite
so upset because total emissions ‡uctuate.
    It has been argued, I think convincingly, that a carbon tax is more easily administered
and is more transparent than a cap-and-trade system. This consideration is especially
important in a comprehensive international context that would include all major emitting
countries. Under international cap-and-trade, governments will allocate valuable emissions
permits to their nation’s …rms and residents. In some places, under some circumstances,
there may be a great temptation for kleptocrats to e¤ectively steal these valuable emissions
permits and sell them on the international market.
    The collected revenues from an internationally harmonized carbon tax remain within
each country, and could be used to o¤set other taxes or even be redistributed internally
as lump sum payments. This, I think, is a desirable property. By contrast the revenues
generated from an internationally harmonized cap-and-trade system ‡ow as visible external
transfer payments across national borders, which might be less easily tolerated by countries
required to pay other countries large sums of taxpayer-…nanced money to buy permits.
    This extremely brief, and perhaps somewhat biased, discussion of the advantages of an
internationally harmonized carbon tax (compared to cap-and-trade) is not intended to be
comprehensive. There are also legitimate arguments in favor of internationally harmonized
tradeable permits and against a carbon tax.5
    A point in favor of tradeable permits, frequently emphasized by its advocates, is the
political appeal of giving free allowance permits to carbon-intensive industry groups (as
contrasted with taxing them directly on their carbon emissions). As was pointed out,
carbon taxes that are internally-levied and collected by a national government could be used
to reduce other, more distortionary, taxes –or they could even be distributed directly to the
citizenry as lump-sum payments. But this redistribution aspect of a carbon tax is hidden,
behind the scenes as it were. Firms will prefer, and typically strongly prefer, what they
perceive as the lesser burden of freely allocated permits over the greater perceived burden of
pollution taxes. Indeed, studies show that the market value of the free allowances is typically
  4
    See Hoel and Karp (2002), Pizer (1999), and Weitzman (1974).
  5
    For a critical review of carbon taxes vs. cap-and-trade, see Goulder and Schein (2013) and the many
further references they cite.



                                                  3
signi…cantly greater than the higher compliance costs of decarbonization that are incurred.6
Firms and countries in a cap-and-trade regime will therefore struggle hard for a larger share
of the stock of freely distributed emissions allocations. As will be shown and highlighted
later, the political appeal of free tradeable permits is a double-edged sword. When voting
on total emissions (or more generally during negotiations), a serious income distortion is
introduced because a nation is much more concerned with the revenues from its own free
quota allocations than it is concerned with overall social optimality. Auctioning o¤ the
allowances would eliminate this income-e¤ect distortion on the individually desired level of
free permit allocations, but then we are e¤ectively back in a tax-like system.
    Both approaches (an internationally harmonized but domestically collected carbon price,
and freely distributed marketable permits) are subject to immense – sometimes seemingly
overwhelming –criticisms. In both cases there are innumerable practical details that must
be attended to and worked out. In both cases an e¤ective international treaty needs to
be binding, which raises uncomfortable issues of enforcement mechanisms and international
sanctions. Additionally, there might be mixed hybrid systems. I merely want to establish
a level playing …eld where the idea of an internationally harmonized carbon tax already
commands at least as much intellectual respect as an internationally harmonized cap-and-
trade system.
    The Kyoto approach to global warming was inspired by the ultimate vision of a top-down
worldwide treaty limiting the output of each nation’s carbon dioxide emissions.        It had
been wishfully hoped that the highly incomplete Kyoto quantity assignments might have
grown over time into a comprehensive binding system of national emissions caps. If these
comprehensive caps were freely traded internationally as emissions permits, it would have
caused there to be one uniform worldwide price of carbon emissions, thereby guaranteeing
cost e¤ectiveness.
    As events played out, Kyoto did not come close to its inspirational vision of an inter-
nationally harmonized binding system of emissions caps.          By now, the quantity-based
Kyoto-type approach has pretty much broken down, leaving the world with a patchwork of
sporadic regional volunteerism that does not address centrally how to e¢ ciently correct the
critical international externality of global warming.
    Throughout this paper I argue that it is very di¢ cult to resolve the global warming ex-
ternality problem by directly assigning individual quantity targets. A meaningful compre-
hensive quantity-based treaty involves specifying as many di¤erent binding emissions quotas
(whether in the form of tradeable permits or not) as there are national entities. Each
national entity has a self-interested incentive to negotiate for itself a high cap on carbon
  6
      See Goulder et al (2010) and the further cited references therein.


                                                       4
emissions –much higher than would be socially optimal. The resulting free-rider problem
plagues a quantity-based approach. Even if there were a collective commitment to negotiate
or vote on a second-stage worldwide total emissions cap, which I will later assume for the
sake of argument, disagreements over the …rst-stage fractional subdivision formula (for dis-
aggregating the majority-voted aggregate worldwide quantity cap into individual quantity
caps) would make it di¢ cult to enact such a quantity-based approach.
    One aspect should perhaps be emphasized above all others at the outset. The global
warming externality problem cannot be resolved without a binding agreement on some over-
all formula for dividing emissions responsibilities among nations. Volunteer altruism alone
will not solve this international public-goods problem. Of necessity there must be some
impingement on national sovereignty in the form of an international mechanism for coor-
dinating targets, verifying ful…llment, and punishing non-compliance. The question then
becomes: Which collective-commitment frameworks and formulas are more promising than
which others?
    The inspiration for this paper is the perception of a desperate need for some radical
rethinking of international climate policy. I ask a reader to temporarily suspend disbelief by
considering what might happen in a “World Climate Assembly”(WCA) that votes on global
carbon emissions via the basic principle of one-person-one-vote majority rule. In the setup
of this paper nations will vote along a single dimension for their desired level of emissions
stringency on behalf of their citizen constituents, but the votes are weighted by each nation’s
population.
    Right now, a WCA seems hypothetical and futuristic. It presumes a state of mind
where the climate change problem has become su¢ ciently threatening on a grassroots level
that world public opinion is ready to consider novel governance structures which involve
relinquishing some national sovereignty in favor of the greater good. Two variants are con-
sidered, according to which instrument a World Climate Assembly might vote on. One is
to vote on a universal price (or tax) that is internationally harmonized, but the proceeds
from which are domestically retained. The other is to vote on the overall quantity of total
worldwide emissions, which are then distributed for free (via a pre-decided fractional subdi-
vision formula) as individual allowance permits subsequently marketable in an international
cap-and-trade system. The model of the paper, while highly speci…c, attempts to explain
how the majority-voted price is likely to be less distortionary and easier to enact than the
majority-voted total quantity of permits. I believe the model gives some insights, which
suggest that negotiating a uniform price on carbon emissions might be closer to a social
optimum than negotiating the total quantity of tradeable emissions permits.
    What is the justi…cation for a new international organization like the WCA? The ul-


                                              5
timate justi…cation is that big new problems may require big new solutions. For a world
desperately wanting new solutions to the important externality of climate change, perhaps
it is at least worth considering establishing a new organization along the lines of the WCA.
After all, it is useful to have some concrete fallback decision mechanism behind vague “ne-
gotiations” because even with the focus on a one-dimensional harmonized carbon price, or
with the focus on a one-dimensional quantity of total emissions, there are bound to be dis-
agreements, whose resolution is unclear. I merely assume that it is in the interest of enough
nations to forfeit their rights to pollute in favor of a WCA voting solution of the global
warming externality. This is truly a heroic assumption at the present time because the
WCA does not correspond to any currently-existing international body. Taken less literally,
the thought experiment of a hypothetical WCA can still help us to concentrate our thinking
and intuition on what negotiations should be trying to accomplish.
     One might object that a “consensus”voting rule, not a majority voting rule, is employed
in negotiations under the United Nations Framework on Climate Change. This “consensus”
voting rule has been widely interpreted as requiring near-unanimity. With such a restrictive
voting rule, signi…cant progress on resolving the global warming externality is virtually im-
possible. Surely, a less restrictive voting rule, such as majority rule, would render progress
more likely, and is at least worth considering.


2    The Model
The formulation here is at a heroic level of abstraction. I wave away innumerable “practical”
considerations to focus on a theoretical model. I beg the reader’s indulgence for a willing
suspension of disbelief while the basic argument is being developed.
    The analysis is made clearest and most transparent when the fundamental unit is the
person, so that everything is normalized per capita. In reality, of course, people belong to
some larger entity, here called a “nation,”that (hopefully or presumably) acts on their behalf.
(The nation here is an elastic concept, since for the purposes of this paper it might be more
appropriate to consider regional blocs like the European Union as if it comprised a single
nation or maybe even consider regional sub-national states.) It is easiest to conceptualize that
all of the people belonging to one nation are identical agents whose tastes and technology
are representative of that nation. For an individual belonging to a nation, everything –
emissions, costs, bene…ts –is expressed in per-capita terms for that nation. (Inversely, one
could take costs and bene…ts on the national level as given primitives and impute to each
citizen the corresponding per-capita costs and bene…ts as a function of per-capita emissions,
being careful to ensure that the imputed per-capita costs and bene…ts aggregate consistently

                                               6
to the given national costs and bene…ts.) The nation in this model is e¤ectively an entity
that votes or negotiates on behalf of its citizens in accordance with their preferences. It does
not matter which comes …rst here –individual preferences or national preferences –since at
this level of abstraction they are assumed to be essentially the same thing.
    The total world population is m. Each person-agent is indexed by i = 1; 2; :::; m. In what
follows I abstract away from dynamics in favor of a static-‡ow analysis. I assume agents can
convert their preferences about desired stocks of atmospheric carbon dioxide into consistent
preferences about corresponding emissions ‡ows for the period under consideration.
    Let Ei stand for the carbon dioxide emissions of agent i.         The cost of emissions level
Ei for agent i is given by the cost function Ci (Ei ), where Ci0 (Ei ) < 0 and Ci00 (Ei ) > 0.
    Total world emissions are
                                                Xm
                                          E=        Ei :                                       (1)
                                                 i=1

   The bene…t to i of world total emissions level E is given by the bene…t function Bi (E)
where, in the relevant range of E, it is postulated that Bi0 (E) < 0 and Bi00 (E) 0. (Note
that I could equivalently work with a “damages function”Di (E)        Bi (E).)
   For any given fEi g, world social welfare is

                                       X
                                       m               X
                                                       m
                                 W =         Bi (E)           Ci (Ei ),                       (2)
                                       i=1              i=1


where E is given by (1). Note that W expressed by (2) is a particular form of a public
goods setup where the producers of the public bad (pollution) coincide with the consumers
of the public bad (pollution).
    The socially optimal values of fEi g, which maximize welfare W in (2), are denoted fEi g.
            P
Then E =        Ei is the corresponding level of optimal worldwide total emissions. Let P
be the corresponding socially optimal price of carbon dioxide emissions. (Alternatively, P
is the optimal SCC, standing for Social Cost of Carbon.) The Samuelson-Lindahl solution
to maximizing (2) here takes the form

                                                X
                                                m
                                      P =             Bi0 (E );                               (3)
                                                i=1


where, for all i,
                                        P =       Ci0 (Ei ):                                  (4)

    I now make two further simplifying assumptions that will allow closed-form expressions
in the analysis that follows.


                                                 7
    The …rst assumption is that, throughout the short-term period for which the analysis is
intended to apply, bene…ts are linear in total emissions within the relevant range, having the
reduced form
                                     Bi (E) = i bi E:                                      (5)

   Equation (5) means that the marginal bene…t for each agent i is a constant

                                        Bi0 (E) =      bi                                 (6)

for some positive coe¢ cient bi that is allowed to di¤er for di¤erent i. I feel that (6) is
reasonably accurate for small time periods because emissions are a ‡ow, whereas bene…ts
(or damages) are a function of the accumulated stock, and for carbon dioxide the ‡ow-stock
ratio is small. Note that the marginal bene…t coe¢ cients fbi g can di¤er among di¤erent
agents i, while still being constant for each particular agent i.
    An immediate consequence of (6) combined with (3) is that

                                              X
                                              m
                                        P =           bi ;                                (7)
                                               i=1


independent of the cost functions. This property greatly simpli…es the analysis without, I
hope, losing too much realism. An equivalent rewriting of (7), which will later prove useful,
is
                                        P = m b;                                         (8)

where                                        Pm
                                                  i=1 bi
                                        b=                                                (9)
                                                  m
is the average value of marginal bene…ts bi .
    The second simplifying assumption makes the reduced form of all cost functions quadratic
in emissions with the same degree of curvature. (Again, this property on the cost side greatly
simpli…es the analysis and interpretation without, I hope, losing too much realism.) Then,
within the relevant range, the cost function Ci (Ei ) for agent i is assumed to be of the
quadratic form
                                 Ci (Ei ) = i ci Ei + Ei 2 ;                              (10)
                                                       2
where i , ci , are positive constants and the corresponding marginal cost function for agent




                                              8
i (which is what really interests us here) is the analytically convenient linear form7

                                        Ci0 (Ei ) =       ci + E i :                                (11)

   Combining (7) and (4) with (11), and then inverting the resulting expression, the optimal
values of Ei are immediately characterized for each i by the equation8
                                                           P
                                                  ci           bi
                                           Ei =                     :                               (12)

    Henceforth I refer to the “World Climate Assembly”by its initials: WCA.
    Armed with the two key simplifying assumptions (5) and (10) of this section, we are
ready to analyze the voting equilibrium of the WCA in price P and, after adding some more
structure, in quantity E.


3       Voting on a Single Price in the WCA
The nation in this section is presumed to vote its preferred carbon price in the WCA for
some particular time period on behalf of its citizens and in accordance with their preferences.
The nation then cooperates internationally to enforce the domestic imposition of the value of
the internationally harmonized carbon price that is voted by majority rule in the WCA, and
it recycles internally the domestic revenues raised by the tax-like price. I assume that this
domestic recycling is e¢ cient, as if by lump sum internal transfers, so there is no net national
loss from the internally-imposed carbon price per se. To the extent that majority voting
in the WCA mimics the outcome of a negotiating process, the voted price might mimic the
negotiated uniform price.
    In this section I examine the theoretical properties of a natural one-dimensional focus on
voting (or negotiating) a single binding price on carbon emissions, the proceeds from which
are domestically retained. For simplicity, I identify this single binding price on carbon as if
it is a harmonized carbon tax. At a theoretical level of abstraction, I blur the distinction
between a carbon price and a carbon tax. However, in actuality the important thing is
acquiescence by each nation to a binding minimum price on carbon emissions, whose level is
voted upon, not the particular mechanism by which this binding minimum price is attained
    7
     The relevant range of Ei for which (11) holds is 0 < Ei < ci = . Note that (11) is essentially the
same marginal cost functional form used in my original “Prices vs. Quantities” article of 1974, where the
speci…cation (11) corresponded to a family of linear supply-reaction schedules having the same slope that
are shifted up or down (or right or left) to varying
                                                   Pdegrees for various states of the world i.
   8
     I assume the interior solution condition ci >   bi holds for all i.



                                                      9
by a particular nation.9 I elaborate further on this issue in my concluding remarks.
   Let Ei (P ) denote the chosen emissions level of agent i as a parametric function of an
imposed price P on emissions. Agent i is choosing Ei (P ) to minimize over Ei the expression
P Ei + Ci (Ei ), resulting in the …rst order condition

                                               Ci0 (Ei (P )) = P:                                       (13)

       Plugging (11) into (13) and then inverting the resulting expression yields the formula

                                                         ci      P
                                             Ei (P ) =               :                                  (14)

                                                                                    P
   Total emissions as a function of the imposed price P are E(P ) =                     Ei (P ), which, when
combined with (14), gives the formula
                                                     Pm
                                                        i=1 ci       mP
                                           E(P ) =                                                      (15)

    Consider next what is the most preferred level of an internationally harmonized carbon
price from the narrow perspective of agent i. This is the price that agent i would pairwise
vote for in the WCA against any alternative price. Because revenues from the carbon price
are collected and recycled by the nation to which i belongs, there is no tax burden per se.
(The only real burden to i here is the higher compliance cost incurred by obeying condition
(13)). The emissions-price level Pi that i would most prefer solves the problem

                                     maxfBi (E(P ))           Ci (Ei (P ))g;                            (16)
                                       P


which satis…es the …rst-order condition

                                Bi0 (E(Pi ))E 0 (Pi ) = Ci0 (Ei (Pi )) Ei0 (Pi ):                       (17)

   It is readily shown that the second derivative with respect to P of the expression being
maximized in (16) is negative, meaning that the …rst-order condition (17) is necessary and
su¢ cient for a maximum, and also signifying that preferences over P for each i are single-
peaked.
   9
    A system of uniform national carbon taxes with revenues kept in the taxing country is a relatively simple
and transparent way to achieve harmonized carbon prices. But it is not necessary for the conclusions of this
paper. Nations or regions could meet the obligation of a minimum price on carbon emissions by whatever
internal mechanism they choose – a tax, a cap-and-trade system, a hybrid system, or whatever else results
in an observable price of carbon.



                                                       10
    From (6), (15), (13), (14), we have in (17) that Bi0 = bi , E 0 =      m= , Ci0 =     Pi ,
Ei0 = 1= , which substitutions allows (17) to be rewritten as

                                         Pi = m bi :                                    (18)

    What is the message of equation (18)? Compare the price that agent i most prefers,
(18), with the socially optimal price, (8). The two expressions are close. Equation (18) is
identical with equation (8), except that bi substitutes for b.     In other words, agent i is
picking what would be the socially optimal price if every other agent had identical bene…ts
to agent i. It is as if agent i is attempting to …nd the social optimum consistent with its
own bene…t function being universalized (as if the total social bene…t is m Bi (E)), in place
                                        P
of society’s true total bene…t function m  i=1 Bi (E).
    In the context of voting on a uniform price, expression (18) immediately suggests an
interpretation. Because the preferences of each agent are single peaked in price, the median
voter theorem applied here to (18) predicts the outcome of a voting equilibrium to be the
price
                                          !         !
                                          P =m b ;                                       (19)
        !                                              !
where P is the median of the sample fPi g while b is the median of the sample fbi g.
Now the symmetry between (8) and (19) is complete. The socially optimal price P given
                                                                                 !
by (8) is m times the mean value of fbi g, whereas the majority-voted price P given by
(19) is m times the median value of fbi g. Thus, the majority-voted price is close here to
                                                                            !
the socially optimal price to the extent that the median marginal bene…t b is close to the
mean marginal bene…t b. Although based on a particular speci…cation, even so I consider
this result to be an outcome in favor of majority voting for a uniform price on carbon, the
proceeds from which are internally retained.
    The model is indicating a sense in which population-weighted majority rule for an inter-
nationally harmonized carbon price might come as close to an optimal price on emissions
as the median per-capita marginal bene…t is close to the mean per-capita marginal bene-
…t. The key insight from this way of looking at things is that in voting (or more generally
negotiating) a universal carbon price, agents representing various nations are, to a greater
or lesser degree, internalizing the externality. Loosely speaking, a “representative” agent-
nation is fully internalizing the externality because its extra cost from a higher emissions
price is exactly o¤set by its extra bene…t from inducing all other nations to simultaneously
lower their emissions via the higher price.
                                                   !
    As noted, the majority-rule carbon price P is close to the optimal carbon price P
                                      !
when the median marginal bene…t b is close to the mean marginal bene…t b. This is as


                                             11
good a result as one might hope for from a voting solution. The mean and the median are
both measures of central tendency. At this level of abstraction I …nd it di¢ cult to argue
whether the mean marginal bene…t of abatement per capita should be greater or less than
the median marginal bene…t of abatement per capita. If the two are equal, then majority
voting obtains the optimal solution. If the two are unequal, the analysis provides a measure
of how far away from optimality is majority rule. Of course this is just a model with
quite restrictive assumptions, but in a post-Kyoto world of stalemated negotiations I …nd
attractive the image of a WCA-style population-weighted median carbon price as being a
useful point of departure that perhaps holds out some prospect of coming “close enough”to
an optimal solution. Of course, readers are free to form their own conclusions from what is
but a highly simpli…ed model with speci…c functional forms.
    This is about as far as theory can take us here. When the model is tightly structured
with the speci…cations and assumptions applying to this section of the paper, the main
result here indicates an exact sense in which majority rule for a harmonized national carbon
price can come close to fully and completely internalizing the global warming externality.
As was previously indicated, I think that the formal WCA voting result of the model of
this section of the paper may perhaps be interpreted somewhat less formally as indicating
that negotiating a uniform national carbon price may have a desirable property that favors
supplying a near-optimal level of emissions. If the median marginal bene…t (per capita) is
close to the mean marginal bene…t (per capita), then the socially optimal carbon price has
the property that roughly half of the world’s population wants the price to be higher, while
roughly the other half of the world’s population wants the price to be lower. This might
be interpreted as a desirable feature even without the formal mechanism of majority-rule
voting in the WCA.
    Why does the marginal cost coe¢ cient ci not appear anywhere in the formula (19)? The
underlying reason is that from (14), the agent has already performed a mental calculation
of what would happen to its desired emissions Ei if the price Pi were very slightly changed.
The …xed marginal cost coe¢ cient ci in (14) is irrelevant to a weighting by agent i of the
incremental bene…t against the incremental cost of very slightly changing the price Pi .
    The analysis has participants in the WCA voting on a single universal price (or tax)
that is internationally harmonized, but the proceeds from which are domestically retained.
I think that a single price is a natural focal point for voting or negotiations. Thomas Schelling
introduced and popularized the notion of a focal point in game theory.10 Generally speaking,
  10
     Schelling (1960). See also the special 2006 issue of the Journal of Economic Psychology devoted to
Schelling’s psychological decision theory, especially the introduction by Colman (2006). Three of the seven
articles in this issue concerned aspects of focal points, testifying to the lasting in‡uence of the concept.



                                                    12
a focal point of a multi-party coordination game is some salient feature that reduces the
dimensionality of the problem and simpli…es the negotiations by limiting bargaining to some
manageable subset, hopefully of one dimension. The basic idea is that by limiting bargaining
to a salient focus, there may be more hope of reaching a good solution. In a somewhat
circular de…nition, a focal point is anything that provides a focus of convergence. The
“naturalness” or “salience” of a focal point is an important aspect of Schelling’s argument
that is di¢ cult to de…ne rigorously and is ultimately intuitive. I am trying to argue here
that a single universal price (or tax) that is internationally harmonized, but the proceeds
from which are domestically retained, is a “natural”focal point for voting or negotiations.
    I might also try to defend the idea of a single universal carbon price by relying on the
higher transactions cost of voting or negotiating along multiple dimensions, as opposed to
voting or negotiating along a single dimension. With respect to voting on more than one
dimension, Arrow’s impossibility theorem11 indicates that there may not exist a voting equi-
librium over multiple dimensions, which always exists in the case of single-peaked preferences
along one dimension. With respect to negotiations over multiple dimensions, one might ar-
gue that the higher the number of dimensions, the more costly is it to negotiate a mutually
satisfactory resolution. The concept of “transactions cost” is associated with the work of
Ronald Coase.12 The basic idea is that multiple parties to a negotiation can be prevented
from attaining a socially desirable outcome by the costs of transacting the agreement among
themselves. One could try to argue that, other things being equal, transactions costs increase
at least proportionally with the dimensionality of the target to be agreed upon.
    In the case of international negotiations on climate change, I believe that both Schelling’s
concept of a salient focal point and Coase’s concept of transactions costs can be used as infor-
mal arguments to support negotiating a single harmonized carbon price whose proceeds are
nationally rebated. Put directly, it is easier to negotiate one price than multiple quantities
–perhaps especially when the one price can be interpreted as “fair” in terms of equality of
marginal e¤ort. I cannot defend this claim rigorously. At the end of the day, this is more
of a plausible conjecture than a rigorous theorem. Whether justly or not, throughout this
paper I basically assume that the essential contrast is between one binding price assignment
versus multiple binding quantity assignments on the allocation of tradeable permits as a
function of the total quantity of tradeable permits – and I then proceed to examine the
consequences in terms of one-dimensional voting in a WCA.
  11
     My description is a crude characterization of one aspect of multi-dimensional voting. See the Wikipedia
entry on Arrow’s impossiblity theorem and the many further references cited therein.
  12
     Coase himself apparently did not invent or even use the term “transactions cost” but he prominently
employed the concept. See Coase (1960). For an application of the transactions cost approach to controlling
greenhouse gas emissions, see Libecap (2013).



                                                    13
   I next proceed to analyze one-dimensional voting in the WCA on the total quantity of
tradeable permits, which are then sub-allocated to each agent on the basis of a previously
agreed upon predetermined formula.


4     Problems With Assigning Quantities Among Sov-
      ereign Entities
This paper now considers a system of voting (or negotiating) on the quantity side one world-
wide aggregate emissions cap, given a previous-round subdivision formula for disaggregating
the total cap into individual fractional caps. Such a formula might be set, for example,
by a preceding agreement on various individual target reductions from various baselines.
Unfortunately, there can be severe negotiating problems in agreeing on a …rst-round set of
national fractional quantity targets that would indicate how to sub-divide an overall world-
wide total cap on emissions. But, for the sake of comparing a majority voting rule for a
one-dimensional price with a majority voting rule for a one-dimensional quantity, I assume
for quantities that there is already in place an agreed-upon formula for decomposing the
single quantity of total emissions into its component sub-assignment of individual caps.
    With di¤erent national entities, a quantity-based treaty involves assigning di¤erent emis-
sions quotas (whether tradeable or not). Quantity-based treaty making can be viewed as
a coordination game with a number of di¤erent players. Such a game can have multiple
solutions, often depending delicately on the setup and what is being assumed. In the case
of Kyoto, the world has in practice arrived at a bad solution that has essentially devolved
into regional volunteerism.
    If I am assigned a cap on emissions, then it is in my own narrow free-riding self interest to
want my cap to be as large as possible (whether or not my cap will be tradeable as a permit).
The self-interested part of me wants maximal leniency for myself. Other than altruism, there
is no countervailing force on the other side encouraging me to lower my desired emissions
cap because of the externality bene…ts I will be bestowing on others. I believe that such a
multi-dimensional negotiating problem associated with quantity allocations is very di¢ cult
to resolve.
    Within a nation, the government assigns caps. But among sovereign nations, caps
must be negotiated. I believe that this is a crucial distinction for the success or failure of
a cap-and-trade regime. A Kyoto-type quantity-based international system fails because
no one has an incentive to internalize the externality and everyone has the self-interested
incentive to free ride. What remains is essentially an erratic pattern of altruistic individual


                                               14
volunteerism that is far from a socially optimal resolution of the problem.
    With the following example, I try to illustrate some of the problems involved in setting
the initial decomposition formula. After having voted in the WCA by majority rule the one-
dimensional total quantity of allocated caps E in a cap and trade system, the decomposition
formula sub-allocates the total E into individual tradeable caps fE  bi g where E = P E bi .
    Let Ei0 be the “pledged” or “targeted” or “base” level of emissions for agent i. I
assume that the levels of pledged emissions Ei0 are internationally accepted as a base case,
although there is a severe free rider problem here because everyone wants their “negotiated
volunteered”target level of Ei0 to be as large as possible. The worldwide base level of total
                            P 0
emissions is then E 0 =        Ei . Suppose the world is contemplating cutting back further
                              0
on total emissions than E . Suppose that agent i agrees to a proportionate cutback of
                                                                                P
emissions from Ei0 by the positive fraction i of total world cutbacks, where        i = 1. (In

reality there is a severe free rider problem here too because everyone wants their “negotiated
volunteered”decomposition coe¢ cient of i to be as large as possible.)
    Let E represent the total quantity of worldwide emissions, which the WCA votes on by
majority rule. Let E   bi (E) represent the emissions cap assigned to agent i as a function of
the total quantity of emissions E that the WCA votes for. Then the proposed rule for
decomposing E into E   bi (E) is

                                  Ei0    bi (E) =
                                         E           i   (E 0       E)                     (20)

whose reduced form is

                                        bi (E) = ai +
                                        E                  i   E;                          (21)
                                                              P               P
where ai Ei0           0
                    i E . Then in (21) we have the property      ai = 0 and       i = 1.

    From now on, in this section of the paper I work directly with the linear reduced form (21)
                                                             P                       P
as if the coe¢ cients fai g and f i g are given (always with    ai = 0, i > 0, and       i = 1).

If fact I regard the determination of the coe¢ cients fai g and f i g as being likely subject
to severe free riding problems because it is in the narrow self interest of everyone to have
their own values of ai and i be as large as possible. I do not believe that there are values
here of the coe¢ cients fai g and f i g that correspond to the natural symmetry of assuming
a majority vote in the WCA on the “natural”single uniform price of last section.
    If each party would accept as given the assigned distributional coe¢ cients fai ; i g and
the decomposition formula (21), one might then imagine voting for the total emissions E in
a WCA. Contingent upon fai ; i g being accepted as given, this system seemingly possesses
the desirable property of having a one-dimensional locus of negotiations or voting (here on


                                                15
E). And there is also some countervailing force against negotiating or voting for a high
value of E.      Although i’s automatic assignment of a high emissions target E       bi (E) when
E is high (via (21) with given i > 0) helps i directly by lowering its emissions costs, this
domestic e¤ect is counteracted to some extent by the bene…ts that i would lose from high E
because then everyone else would also be emitting more.
     But now follow the thought experiment further by asking : Where do the distributional
coe¢ cients fai ; i g come from in the …rst place? They are presumably the result of a
multi-party negotiating process where there is no countervailing force to the sel…sh desire of
country i to make its own ai and i as high as possible. With many di¤erent agents, there
will be the usual di¢ cult bargaining over many di¤erent distributional coe¢ cients fai ; i g,
with no externality-internalizing incentive countervailing each nation’s desire to secure for
itself a high fraction of emissions –again presumably resulting in a Kyoto-like breakdown.
    When a cap-and-trade system is used to control pollution within a nation, the government
of that nation assigns the caps analogous to E bi (or the fractions analogous to ai and i ).13 In
this intra-national case there is no voting and there exists a kind of natural symmetric duality
between a one-dimensional price P and a one-dimensional total quantity of tradeable permits
E. But there is no international governance organization that has the unilateral power to
assign caps or fractions. These caps or fractions must be negotiated among sovereign national
entities. This breaks the one-dimensional symmetry because now one price P is contrasted
with the asymmetry of many vested sovereign interests jockeying for initial distributions
of the form E  bi or fai ; i g. There is thus a critical distinction between intra-national and
international cap-and-trade systems. In the international case the initial distribution of cap
permits is explicitly distributive, resulting in a war of words about who caused the global-
warming problem and who should bear the burden of remedying it, who is rich and who is
poor, what is fair and what is unfair, and so forth and so on.
    But perhaps a formulation of this generality is biased against cap and trade.              We
might try to imbue the fai ; i g with dimensionality-reducing salient qualities by imagining
“naturally symmetric” focal allocations of fai ; i g. One such seemingly symmetric formula
might be that each agent is assigned the same fractional reduction of emissions from some
agreed-upon baseline year in the spirit of (20) with i = 1=m. The Kyoto Protocol of
1997 adopted just a little of the spirit of this idea for developed countries alone, with the
hope that some variant of it might later be extended to developing countries. The high-
income industrialized countries (Annex I) agreed to “binding”commitments (but without any
enforcement mechanism!) to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in 2012 by an average of about
  13
     Admittedly, this is often done in a way that eases special-interest acceptance, such as being allocated
for free or almost for free based on something like a uniform reduction of previous pollution levels.



                                                    16
5% relative to 1990 levels (although allowing some individually-negotiated variations around
that 5% average). Developing countries were exempt from any “binding” commitments.
Overall, the Kyoto Protocol did not come close to ful…lling its initial aspirations. The
U.S. and Australia did not ratify, Canada and Japan eventually dropped out, and individual
compliance was at best spotty.14 Furthermore, and perhaps most distressingly, non-Annex
I countries have not yet agreed to any actual future “binding” commitments on i going
forward from 2013. The Kyoto experience is subject to multiple interpretations. For me,
it largely testi…es to the great di¢ culty of negotiating binding international quantity caps
on the major emitters. In the language of (21), it has been overwhelmingly problematic to
assign binding quantity-like distributional coe¢ cients fai ; i g on a worldwide basis.
    Other seemingly symmetric quantity formulas might also be examined. For example, one
might entertain the idea of assigning the same worldwide emissions level per capita so that
ai = 0 and i = 1=m in (21). This is a symmetric formula that embodies a certain concept of
worldwide fairness, but a cap-and-trade system based on such an initial distribution of caps
would involve massive transfers from the developed to the developing countries, which would
likely prove politically unacceptable. Besides, even this formula does not address concerns
regarding historical responsibility for the cumulative stock of emissions, which would surely
be raised. Alternatively, as previously mentioned, one might imagine negotiating (or even
voting on) an identical per-capita fractional reduction i = 1=m from some base case of
emissions Ei0 in formula (20). In this situation, I think, everyone would …rst argue about
the fairness of the baseline emissions Ei0 that they were initially assigned.
    I abstain from further speculation. My point is that no matter what quantity-like initial
allocation mechanism I can imagine, an attempt to modify an international cap-and-trade
system by making it one dimensional seems likely to founder for essentially the same reasons
that an unmodi…ed international cap-and-trade system founders. In a quantity-based system
with multiple di¤erent sovereign nations I fear there will be intractable negotiations for
multiple di¤erent distributional assignments, with no force countervailing each nation’s free-
riding desire to secure for itself a sel…shly lenient emissions fraction.15
    Here is what I believe is the essence of the one-price vs. multiple-quantities negotiation
problem as elaborated in this section. A quantity-type system based on a formula like (21)
involves two layers of negotiations. First, the various parties must agree on the various
  14
     The one bright note might be considered the European Union, whose emissions trading system could
perhaps be interpreted as evolving towards an EU-wide cap (declining annually) with member-state shares
increasingly being determined by auctioning permits. I am unsure and somewhat skeptical about the extent
to which this EU model might be extended to the world as a whole. For a generally favorable assessment
of this possibility, see Ellerman (2010).
  15
     Bosetti and Frankel (2012) propose a constructive and imaginative allocation formula for emissions
permits, but it still looks complicated and contentious to me.


                                                  17
                                                          P              P
quantity-like distributional coe¢ cients fai ; i g (with    ai = 0 and        i = 1).    Then,
second, the parties must agree on the single aggregate level of emissions E. By contrast, a
price-based system involves only one layer of negotiation, focused on agreeing to a single one-
dimensional uniform price P . This latter is not an easy task, but it makes sense to me that
it is generally easier to negotiate one price layer than two quantity layers (whose …rst layer
involves assigning multiple quantity-like distributional coe¢ cients fai ; i g). Admittedly
this argument depends upon a particular way of framing the issue, but it seems to me that,
in international negotiations among many sovereign nations, there may be an irreducible
asymmetry between one price instrument vs. multiple quantity instruments. In the next
section I wave away the problems with assigning quantity decomposition fractions among
sovereign entities enumerated in this section, in favor of pushing further the analysis of a
single voted total quantity.


5    Voting on the Total Quantity of Tradeable Permits
     in the WCA
Despite the caveats of the last section of the paper, I begin this section by accepting that,
somehow or other, quantity-like distributional coe¢ cients are given and accepted as fai ; i g
in (21). I then proceed in this section to analyze WCA voting on total emissions E, which
are subsequently decomposed further into individual caps E    bi (E) by the previously-agreed-
upon formula (21). The algebra here is extremely messy, and I proceed quickly to wade
through it by taking many shortcuts. What will emerge is that, compared with voting on
a single price, voting on a single quantity of total emissions is made more complicated and
more remote from social optimality by the distorting in‡uence of agents taking account, in
their WCA voting, of the value of their initial free assignment of caps in a cap-and-trade
system. This distortion of an endowment-income e¤ect is present in a quantity-based voting
system but is absent from the price-based voting system already analyzed.
    Begin with formula (15). If E is the total amount of permits issued, then it will also
represent the total emissions after cap and trade. Expression (15) then gives E(P ) =
 P
( ci mP )= . Invert this expression to obtain
                                              P
                                                   ci       E
                                    P (E) =                     :                         (22)
                                                        m

       ei represent, in this quantity-based system, the amount of the equilibrium after-cap-
   Let E
and-trade actual physical emissions of agent i (expressed as a function of total emissions E).


                                              18
Then Eei (E) = Ei (P (E)) and, from (14), Ei (P (E)) = (ci P (E))= . Combining these two
expressions and then substituting from (22) gives the formula
                                                                      P
                                                ei (E) = ci
                                                E
                                                                           ci
                                                                                 +
                                                                                      E
                                                                                        :                                             (23)
                                                                       m              m

    The most preferred value of total emissions by agent i maximizes over all E the expression

                                Bi (E)              ei (E)) + P (E)[E
                                                Ci (E               bi (E)                       ei (E)];
                                                                                                 E                                    (24)

where the last term P (E)[E bi (E) E  ei (E)] represents the distortionary endowment-income
                            bi (E) E
e¤ect of selling o¤ permits E         ei (E) (alternatively buying permits Eei (E) Ebi (E)) to
other buyers (from other sellers) of tradeable permits.
   Agent i most desires a total quantity of tradeable permits (equals total emissions) E that
maximizes (24). Let this most-desired level by agent i of worldwide total tradeable permits
(equals total emissions) be denoted E i . Then E i satis…es the …rst order condition

 Bi0 (E i )        ei (E i )) E
              Ci0 (E          ei0 (E i ) + P (E i )[E
                                                    bi0 (E i )        ei0 (E i )] + P 0 (E i )[E
                                                                      E                        bi (E i )               ei (E i )] = 0: (25)
                                                                                                                       E

                                                        ei (E i )) = P (E i ), E
    Into (25), substitute values Bi0 (E i ) = bi , Ci0 (E                      e 0 (E i ) = 1=m, P (E i ) =
                                                                                i
 P          i       b 0  i             0    i               b                            ei (E i ) = ci =
( ci       E ) =m, Ei (E ) = i , P (E ) =            =m, Ei (E ) = ai + i E i , E
                                                                   i
P
   ci =m + E i =m. After canceling terms and inverting (25) to solve for E i , tedious algebra
yields the messy closed-form expression
                                                       P                                                    P
                     i        bi (m= )2 +         im       ci = 2 ai m= + mci =                      2
                                                                                                                ci =    2
                   E =                                                                                                      :         (26)
                                                            (2 i m 1)=

    There is a one-to-one mapping between the total quantity of emissions E and the equi-
librium price P (E) corresponding to what is observed in equilibrium after trading the mar-
ketable permits. When agent i is voting for E i , it is ‘as if’agent i is voting for the equilibrium
price P i = P (E i ). Substituting (26) into (22), one obtains, after rearrangement of terms,
the ‘as if’price that agent i votes for is
                                                                             P
                                            imbi + ai +                  i       ci         ci
                                         P =                                                     :                                    (27)
                                                   2 im                      1

   Compare the preferred ‘as if’ price of agent i (obtainable indirectly from the preferred
total quantity of tradeable permits in the WCA), P i given by expression (27), with the
preferred price of agent i when voting directly on a single price in the WCA, Pi given by
expression (18). Expression (27) for P i is far messier and more complicated than expression


                                                                 19
(18) for Pi . It is much harder to argue that voting indirectly on P i might be close to a social
optimum than to argue (as was already done) that voting directly on Pi might be close to a
social optimum. The reason that majority voting on P i is likely further from an optimum
than majority voting on Pi is because of the distortionary endowment-income e¤ects having
to do with the initial assignment of caps in a cap-and-trade system. This can be seen in
expression (27) by examining, for example, the role of ai . The bigger is ai , the bigger is
the ‘as if’price P i desired by agent i. The reason does not have to do with e¢ ciency or
social optimality. The reason is that with bigger ai in the quantity system, agent i wants a
higher price so that the market value of its initial assignment of tradeable permits is worth
more. This distortionary endowment-income e¤ect permeates formula (27) and indicates
the source of the overall ine¢ ciency in the formula. In choosing its preferred ‘as if’price
P i , agent i is reacting too much to its initial endowment and not enough to what is socially
optimal. By contrast, the price Pi preferred in formula (5) of the price-based system avoids
altogether the distortionary in‡uence of the initial allocation of quotas.
     Contingent on everyone accepting as given the assigned distributional coe¢ cients fai ; i g
and formula (21), we have derived agent i’s preferred post-trade ‘as if’ price of emissions
P i in the quantity-voting system given by equation (27), which is generally distorted by an
endowment-income e¤ect. (The other side of the same coin is that it may not be so easy
to get an agreement on formula (21) in the …rst place because agent i will …ght to make
its assignment of ai and i in the permit allocation process as high as possible, in order to
obtain extra income from selling permits (or to lose less income from buying permits)).
      Suppose, simply for the sake of argument, that the world accepts the symmetric principle
of equal per-capita assignment of initial quotas, as given by the speci…cation ai = 0, i = 1=m
in (21) for all i. As was indicated, I do not think this is terribly realistic because the revenues
generated from a cap-and-trade system would ‡ow as visible external transfer payments
across national borders, which might be less easily tolerated by nations required to pay other
nations large sums of taxpayer-…nanced money to buy permits. By contrast, a harmonized
price of emissions that is internally retained does not involve any transfers of payments across
national borders.
     Suspending disbelief, then, suppose that all agents i accept the symmetric formula ai = 0
and i = 1=m. (I have already indicated why there might be resistance to accepting
this formula, but here I want to examine the consequences for P i as given by equation
(27)). Therefore, substitute into (27) the further speci…cation ai = 0 and i = 1=m. This
substitution simpli…es equation (27) into

                                      P i = mbi + (c    ci );                                 (28)


                                                20
            P
where c =      ci =m is interpretable as a measure of worldwide average cost.
     Expression (28) should be compared with the majority-voted uniform price result (18),
where Pi = m bi . As was pointed out, the socially optimal price P given by (8) is m times
                                                               !
the mean value of fbi g, whereas the majority-voted price P given by (19) is m times the
median value of fbi g. Thus, the majority-voted price (19) is close to the socially optimal
                                                         !
price to the extent that the median marginal bene…t b is close to the mean marginal bene…t
b. As has been noted, this seems like a strong result, even though a particular speci…cation
lies behind it.
     By contrast, even after the additional simplifying assumption on the quantity side that
ai = 0 and i = 1=m for all i, the preferred ‘as if’price of agent i (via preferred total emissions
E i ), namely P i in (28), still retains a distortionary endowment-income e¤ect having to do
with the initial assignment of caps in a cap-and-trade system, which shows up as the “extra”
term (c ci ) in (28). In order for (28) to deliver social optimality requires that the mean of
fbi g equals the median of fbi + (c ci )=mg, which is a less likely condition to be met than
the mean of fbi g equaling the median of fbi g.


6     Concluding Remarks
Even while acknowledging that it only involves one layer of negotiations (as opposed to two
on the quantity side), one could ask on the price side what might induce di¤erent countries
to agree to a single harmonized charge for carbon emissions. We have been over this ground
before. It all begins with the recognition that any resolution of the global warming free-rider
problem requires a collective commitment to some binding restriction on the sovereign right
of nations to freely emit as much carbon dioxide as they wish. Why might nations restrict
their own sovereignty by collectively committing to a common price regime for resolving
the global warming externality? Perhaps because enough of them come to realize (or are
made to realize) that the international climate-change public good is su¢ ciently important
to outweigh national rights to pollute the global commons – and that a radical collective
problem may call for a radical collective solution-framework. Without such a realization and
the will to act upon it, progress on resolving the global warming externality will be limited
to voluntary altruism, which seems not nearly enough to overcome the free rider problem.
      At the end of the day, there is no airtight logic in favor of a negotiated price over
negotiated quantities, only a series of partial arguments. One argument is that the revenues
from a carbon price are nationally collected, so that the contentious distributional side is
somewhat hidden and there is at least the appearance of fairness as measured by equality
of marginal e¤ort. A second desirable feature, I have argued, is the natural salience and

                                               21
relatively low transaction costs of negotiating one price as against negotiating many di¤erent
quantities, which, while somewhat imprecise, is in my opinion an important distinction. A
third argument is the self-enforcement mechanism that constitutes the main theme of this
paper, namely the built-in countervailing force of an imposed uniform price of carbon, which
tends to internalize the externality and gives national negotiators an incentive to o¤set their
natural impulse to otherwise bargain for low tax rates for themselves.
    Of necessity, this paper has been laced with subjective judgements. This, unfortunately,
is the nature of the subject. To repeat yet again, I judge it di¢ cult to escape the conclusion
that, in the context of an international treaty that covers all major emitters, it is more
politically acceptable and it comes closer to a social optimum to negotiate one binding price
than multiple binding quantities or quantity-like distributional coe¢ cients. In this context,
it seems that WCA voting on a carbon emissions price is less distortionary from an optimal
outcome than WCA voting on a total quantity of emissions in a cap-and-trade system.
    The model of this paper is so abstract, so over-simpli…ed, and so removed from reality
that it is open to enormous amounts of criticism on many di¤erent levels. There are so many
potential complaints that it would be incongruous to list them all and attempt to address
them one by one. These many potential criticisms notwithstanding, I believe the model
here is exposing a fundamental countervailing-force argument for a majority-voted uniform
price that deserves to be highlighted.
    Because the model is at such a high level of theoretical abstraction, it has blurred the
distinction between a carbon price and a carbon tax. As was previously noted, the important
thing is acquiescence by each nation to a binding minimum price on carbon emissions, not
the particular internal mechanism by which this obligation is met. A system of national
carbon taxes with revenues kept in the taxing country is a relatively simple and transparent
way to achieve harmonized carbon prices. But it is not necessary for the conclusions of
this paper. Nations or regions could meet the obligation of a minimum price on carbon
emissions by whatever internal mechanism they choose – a tax, a cap-and-trade system, a
hybrid system, or whatever else results in an observable price of carbon.16 And any nation
or region could choose to impose a carbon price above the international minimum. The hope
is that even a low positive initial value of a universal minimum carbon price could be useful
for gaining con…dence and building trust in this price-based international architecture.
    The purpose of this paper is primarily theoretical and exploratory. Any proposal to
resolve the global warming externality will face a seemingly overwhelming array of practi-
cal administrative obstacles and will need to overcome powerful vested interests. That is
  16
    A minimum carbon price could be attained in a cap-and-trade system by setting it as a ‡oor, which
could be enforced, e.g., by making it a reserve price on the auctioning of permits.



                                                 22
the nature of the global warming externality problem. The theory of this paper suggests
that negotiating a uniform minimum price on carbon can have several desirable properties,
including, especially, helping to internalize the global warming externality. To fully defend
the relative “practicality” of what I am proposing would probably require a book, not a
paper. In any event, this paper is not primarily about practical considerations of interna-
tional negotiations. I leave that important task mostly to others.17 However, I do want to
mention just a few real-world considerations that have been left out of the model yet seem
especially pertinent.
    A binding international agreement on a uniform minimum carbon price presumably re-
quires some serious compliance mechanism. To begin with, the carbon price must be
observable. For enforcement, perhaps there is no practical alternative to using the inter-
national trading system for applying tari¤-based penalties on imports from non-complying
nations. Nordhaus (2015) advocates such an approach for a price-based system. Cooper
(2010) has argued for an expansive interpretation whereby the internationally agreed charge
on carbon emissions would be considered a cost of doing business, such that failure to pay the
charge would be treated as a subsidy that is subject to countervailing duties under existing
provisions of the World Trade Organization.18
    An e¢ cient carbon price naturally produces more winners than losers by the modi…ed
Pareto criterion. In the case of the global warming externality, which has been charac-
terized as the greatest public goods problem of all time, it seems reasonable to suppose
that there might be many times more winners than losers from imposing a uniform carbon
price. Because countries here get to keep their own carbon-price-generated revenues, then
welfare-compensating transfers, to the extent they are made at all, ought to be relatively
modest second-order deadweight-loss triangles instead of the relatively immodest …rst-order
rectangle transfers associated with tradeable permits.
    Another practical issue I am waving aside is just where in the production chain a carbon
price should be collected. I think the presumption would be that the carbon price should be
collected by the country in which the carbon dioxide is actually released into the atmosphere.
One might try to argue that a carbon price should be collected downstream as close as
possible to the point where the carbon is burned. But this would involve an impractically
large number of collection points. It is much easier to collect the price upstream, at various
chokepoints where the carbon is …rst introduced into the carbon-burning economy.19
  17
     See, e.g., Bodansky (2010) or Barrett (2005).
  18
     See also the discussion of the legality of such sanctions under WTO provisions in Metcalf and Weisbach
(2009).
  19
     This set of issues and its distributional consequences (including references to other literature) is discussed
extensively in Asheim (2012).



                                                        23
    I close by noting again that global warming is an extremely serious as-yet-unresolved ex-
ternality problem. With the failure of a Kyoto-style quantity-based approach, the world has
seemingly given up on a comprehensive global design, settling instead for sporadic national,
sub-national, and regional measures. These partial measures seem far from constituting a
socially e¢ cient response to the global warming externality.    Perhaps, as was previously
suggested, the Kyoto-style quantity-based focus on negotiating emissions caps embodies a
bad design ‡aw. The model of this paper is indicating a way in which negotiating a binding
internationally-harmonized nationally-collected minimum price on carbon emissions might
help to internalize the global warming externality.


References
 [1] Asheim, Geir B. (2012). “A Distributional Argument for Supply-Side Climate Policies.”
     Environ Resource Econ, published online: 11 August 2012.

 [2] Barrett, Scott (2005). Environment and Statecraft: The Strategy of Environmental
     Treaty Making. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 [3] Bodansky, Daniel (2010). The Art and Craft of International Environmental Law. Cam-
     bridge: Harvard University Press.

 [4] Bosetti, Valentina, and Je¤rey Frankel (2012). “Sustainable Cooperation in Global
     Climate Policy: Speci…c Formulas and Emissions Targets.” Mimeo dated August 2012.

 [5] Colman, A. M. (2006). “Thomas C. Shelling’s psychological decision theory: Introduc-
     tion to a special issue.” Journal of Economic Psychology, 27: 603-608.

 [6] Cooper, Richard N. (2010). “The Case for Charges on Greenhouse Gas Emissions.” In
     Joe Aldy and Robert Stavins (eds), Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy: Architec-
     tures for Agreement, Cambridge University Press.

 [7] Cramton, Peter, Axel Ockenfels, and Steven Stoft (2013). “How to Negotiate Ambitious
     Global Emissions Abatement.” Mimeo, 30 May 2013.

 [8] Ellerman, A. Denny (2010). “The EU’s Emissions Trading Scheme: A Prototype Global
     System?” In Joe Aldy and Robert Stavins (eds), Post-Kyoto International Climate
     Policy: Architectures for Agreement, Cambridge University Press.




                                             24
 [9] Goulder, LH, MAC Hafstead, and M Dworsky (2010). “Impacts of alternative emis-
     sions allowance allocation methods under a federal cap-and-trade program.” Journal
     of Environmental Economics and Management, 60(3), 161-181.

[10] Goulder, Lawrence H., and Andrew R. Schein (2013). “Carbon Taxes vs. Cap and
     Trade: A Critical Review.” Climate Change Economics 4(3): 1-28.

[11] Hoel, Michael, and Larry Karp (2002). “Taxes vs. quotas for a stock pollutant.” Re-
     source and Energy Economics 24: 367-384.

[12] Libecap, Gary D. (2013). “Addressing Global Environmental Externalities: Transaction
     Costs Considerations.” Journal of Economic Literature, 52(2): 424-79.

[13] Metcalf, Gilbert E., and David Weisbach (2009). “The Design of a Carbon Tax.”
     Harvard Environmental Law Review 33.2: 499-556.

[14] Nordhaus, William D. (2007). “To tax or not to tax: Alternative approaches to slowing
     global warming.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1(1): 26-44.

[15] Nordhaus, William D. (2013). The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics
     for a Warming World. New Haven: Yale University Press.

[16] Nordhaus, William D. (2015). “Climate Clubs: Designing a Mechanism to Overcome
     Free-riding in International Climate Policy.” Presidential Address delivered to the
     American Economic Association January 4, 2015.

[17] Pizer, William (1999). “Optimal Choice of Policy Instrument and Stringency under
     Uncertainty: the Case of Climate Change.” Resource and Energy Economics, 12: 255-
     287.

[18] Schelling, Thomas C. (1960). The Strategy of Con‡ict. Harvard University Press.

[19] Victor, David (2011). Global Warming Gridlock. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press.

[20] Weitzman, Martin L. (1974). “Prices vs. Quantities.” Review of Economic Studies 41,
     4: 477-491.




                                           25
