NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POWER OF TRANSPARENCY:
INFORMATION, IDENTIFICATION CARDS AND FOOD SUBSIDY PROGRAMS IN INDONESIA
Abhijit Banerjee
Rema Hanna
Jordan C. Kyle
Benjamin A. Olken
Sudarno Sumarto
Working Paper 20923
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20923
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

This project was a collaboration involving many people. We thank Nurzanty Khadijah, Chaerudin
Kodir, Lina Marliani, Purwanto Nugroho, Hector Salazar Salame, and Freida Siregar for their outstanding
work implementing the project and Alyssa Lawther, Gabriel Kreindler, Wayne Sandholtz, He Yang,
Gabriel Zucker for excellent research assistance. We thank Mitra Samya, the Indonesian National
Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction (particularly Bambang Widianto, Suahasil Nazara,
Sri Kusumastuti Rahayu, and Fiona Howell), and SurveyMetre (particularly Bondan Sikoki and Cecep
Sumantri) for their cooperation implementing the project and data collection. This project was financially
supported by the Australian Government through the Poverty Reduction Support Facility. Jordan Kyle
acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under
Grant No. 2009082932. All views expressed in the paper are those of the authors, and do not necessarily
reflect the views any of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the many institutions or individuals
acknowledged here.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20923.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Jordan C. Kyle, Benjamin A. Olken, and Sudarno Sumarto.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Power of Transparency: Information, Identification Cards and Food Subsidy Programs
in Indonesia
Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Jordan C. Kyle, Benjamin A. Olken, and Sudarno Sumarto
NBER Working Paper No. 20923
February 2015
JEL No. D73,I38,O12
ABSTRACT
Can governments improve aid programs by providing information to beneficiaries? In our model,
information can change how much aid citizens receive as they bargain with local officials who implement
national programs. In a large-scale field experiment, we test whether mailing cards with program information
to beneficiaries increases their subsidy from a subsidized rice program. Beneficiaries received 26
percent more subsidy in card villages. Ineligible households received no less, so this represents lower
leakage. The evidence suggests that this effect is driven by citizen bargaining with local officials. Experimentally
adding the official price to the cards increased the subsidy by 21 percent compared to cards without
price information. Additional public information increased higher-order knowledge about eligibility,
leading to a 16 percent increase in subsidy compared to just distributing cards. In short, increased transparency
empowered citizens to reduce leakages and improve program functioning.
Abhijit Banerjee
Department of Economics, E17-201A
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu

Benjamin A. Olken
Department of Economics, E17-212
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
bolken@mit.edu

Rema Hanna
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Rema_Hanna@hks.harvard.edu

Sudarno Sumarto
TNP2K
Jl. Kebon Sirih
Jakarta Indonesia
ssumarto@smeru.or.id

Jordan C. Kyle
Department of Political Science
Columbia University
7th Floor IAB
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
A
randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at:
jordanckyle@gmail.com
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/96

I.

Introduction

Throughout the developing world, governments face the problem of ensuring that rules
and laws that they enact are implemented as conceived. These rules typically need to be
administered by someone who lives closer to the beneficiaries—such as a local politician
or bureaucrat—who has his own interests, ranging from preventing conflict in his
jurisdiction to promoting his career to lining his own pockets. To the extent that the
implementing officials’ interests differ from the government’s intentions, the rules and
policies that citizens experience might differ considerably from those on the books.
Consider, for example, a local official in charge of administering a transfer
program, such as a subsidized food program or a work-fare scheme. There are a myriad
of rules: who is eligible, what benefits they should receive, what they need to do to
receive them, etc. In practice, the local official may have substantial leeway in how these
rules are implemented. Citizens can challenge him, perhaps by appealing to an outside
authority, like the central government, if they believe that they have been cheated.
However, it is hard to effectively do so if the citizens do not fully understand what they
are entitled to under the official rules. The fact that it is costly to complain—with no
guarantee of redress—may further exacerbate this problem.
This sets up a simple bargaining game between the local official and the program
beneficiary, where providing information to beneficiary households could change their
mean beliefs as to what they are entitled to, the spread of said beliefs, or both. How the
bargaining game plays out (i.e. what happens to the share that either eligible or ineligible
households receive) depends upon how information changes beliefs, as well as the initial
conditions and strategic behavior of the village leaders. Our model also allows us to
analyze under what conditions we would expect changes in complaints and protests by
citizens in response to information, allowing us to more directly understand the channels
through which the negotiations between the village officials and citizens occur.
We experimentally test these ideas within Indonesia’s subsidized rice program,
known as “Raskin” (“Rice for the Poor”). The program is designed—in theory—to
provide 15 kg of subsidized rice per month to eligible households. With an annual budget
of US$1.5 billion, and a targeted population of 17.5 million households, Raskin is
Indonesia’s largest targeted transfer program. In practice, local officials appear to have

‐1 -

substantial leeway in implementation, as program outcomes often fail to match the
national rules: our survey reveals that while 79 percent of eligible households bought
subsidized Raskin rice, they seldom received their full entitlement. Some of the rice was
diverted to others, with nearly 63 percent of ineligible households also purchasing Raskin
rice in the same period; other rice simply goes missing (Olken, 2006; World Bank, 2012).
Beneficiaries pay over 40 percent more than the official copay. As a result, on net,
eligible households received only about one-third of the intended subsidy.1
Working with the Government of Indonesia, we designed an experiment to
provide information to eligible households. In 378 villages (randomly selected from
among 572 villages spread over three provinces), the central government mailed “Raskin
identification cards” to eligible households to inform them of their eligibility and the
quantity of rice that they were entitled to. To unbundle the mechanisms through which
different forms of information may affect program outcomes, the government also
experimentally varied how the card program was run along three key dimensions—
whether information about the beneficiaries was also made very public, whether an
additional rule (the copay price) was also listed on the card, and whether cards were sent
to all eligible households or only to a subset.
We then surveyed both eligible and ineligible households in all villages, two
months, eight months, and eighteen months after the cards were mailed. Since the cards
could affect both the amount of rice received and the price, we focus on understanding
the impacts on the total subsidy received, defined as the quantity of rice purchased
multiplied by the difference between the market price of rice and the copay that the
household paid. We also measure individual beliefs about the program, as well as the
protests and complaints to local leaders, to understand whether citizens gained and used
the information and to shed light on the mechanisms that we outline in the model.
The beneficiary card distribution greatly increased the subsidy received by
eligible households. This occurred despite the fact that the card distribution itself was not
1

While these figures seem large, leakages and mis-targeting are common, both in government-run
programs and those that are supported by foreign aid. For example, Niehaus, Atanassova, Bertrand, and
Mullainathan (2013) describe how many ineligible households buy subsidized products through India’s
public distribution system and the price charged is, on average, higher than the stated price. Nunn and Qian
(forthcoming) describe how much of the foreign-supplied food aid goes missing; for example, the UN
World Food Program has released reports that as much as half of their food aid sent to Somalia (about $485
million in 2009) went missing (New York Times, 3/9/10).

‐2 -

fully implemented as the central government intended: eligible households in treatment
villages were only 30 percentage points more likely to have received a card relative to
those in the control villages. Yet, despite this, eligible households in treatment villages
received a 26 percent increase in subsidy relative to equivalent households in control
villages, stemming from both an increase in quantity purchased and a decrease in the
copay price.2 Fewer ineligible households received rice in cards villages, and complaints
and protests from those who could no longer buy rice increased. However, ineligible
households received more conditional on purchase, so there was no reduction in the
aggregate subsidy that they received. The fact that the eligible households received more,
while ineligible households in total received no less, implies that the cards reduced
leakage, increasing the total amount of rice distributed in the villages by 17 percent.
Notably, we do not observe that the intervention “undid” a local fix of a “bad”
rule. The targeting formulas have errors (see, e.g., Alatas et al 2012) and so there could
be rich households that are eligible and poor ones that are not. A local leader may deviate
from the official beneficiary list to provide the subsidy to the ineligible poor. More
citizen information may force him to undo this benevolent deviation. However, in
practice, we do not observe that the poorer, ineligible households lose out; this, combined
with the fact that leakages decrease, suggests that the cards had real effects in ensuring
that the program’s overarching goals of reaching the poor were achieved.
We then examine the different mechanisms through which transparency could
have an effect. First, we explore the effect of providing public information to citizens
rather than just private information. Specifically, in half of the card villages (randomly
selected), the beneficiary list was posted all over the villages and information about the
cards was played on the village mosque loudspeaker (“public information”), in addition
to mailing out the cards (“standard information”). This public information increased
everyone’s knowledge about their eligibility status. Eligible households in the public
information villages received twice as much additional subsidy as they did under the
cards treatment with the standard information only. This treatment appears to have also
promoted second order knowledge, as it not only affected eligible households’ own
2

Note that this is the reduced form effect for all eligible households (regardless of card receipt), so the
implied treatment-on-treated effect would be three times as large, assuming no spillovers to those who did
not receive a card.

‐3 -

knowledge, but it also made villagers of all types more conscious of the fact that others
knew about the official eligibility list. This higher-order knowledge could have had the
potential to make it easier for villagers who were being denied their rights to coordinate
with other villagers in trying to get redress, and indeed, we find more organized protests
in these villages.
Second, to examine whether general information about specific program rules
mattered over and above the sense of a clear individual entitlement generated by the
receipt of the card, in half of the villages chosen at random, the cards were printed with
information about the official copay (Rp. 1,600 per kg), in addition to the quantity of rice
eligible households should receive (15 kg per month). In the remaining villages, the cards
only contained the information about quantity. Adding the price information increased
both card use and the total subsidy that households received. Interestingly, the subsidy
effect was driven by the quantity of rice that eligible households received, which could
occur in a bargaining setup if, for some reason, it is easier for the local officials to
discriminate among households on quantity rather than price.
Third, the government experimented with varying who the cards were sent to: in a
random set of villages, cards were only mailed to the bottom decile of households, as
opposed to mailing them to all beneficiaries. The full beneficiary list that was given to the
village head was identical in both treatments, so the leader’s information about who is
eligible was the same, so only the citizens’ information was varied. Households who
received cards experienced the same increase in subsidy regardless of whether everyone
received cards. Eligible households that were assigned not to receive a card looked no
different than those in the control areas, yet the overall protests are lower in this case than
when all eligible households receive a card. This is consistent with the model: if there are
fewer cards in the village (i.e. fewer informed eligible households), the village head will
choose to reduce the amount given to ineligibles less than if more cards had been given
out, and therefore the number of protests will go down.
The results presented thus far suggest a role for citizen information in enhancing
program performance. One possible alternative interpretation of the findings is that the
local leaders interpreted the intervention as a signal of the fact that the central
government was monitoring them more along this dimension. In this case, our results

‐4 -

would not be driven by citizen empowerment. The fact that citizen protests and
complaints had changed in response to the information argues against this interpretation
since it suggests that citizens increased pressure on local officials as a result of the
program. Moreover, the fact that the card effect persists over time—for as long as 18
months after the distribution—even though by then the local officials would have surely
updated their beliefs about the lack of additional monitoring by the central government,
also suggests that information drives the observed effects.3
However, to test this more directly, we also introduced a treatment that aimed to
vary the perceived level of central government accountability: in half the villages, the
cards had clip-off coupons to be collected by the local leader from those to whom he gave
the rice and remitted to the central government. The theory was that knowing that he has
to remit the coupons to the government might induce the local leader to better implement
the rules. Importantly, this treatment could also shift bargaining power, either by enabling
eligible households to threaten to withhold their coupons unless they get more or by
bolstering the local leader’s ability to block the ineligible households that lack coupons.
We can use our data to differentiate between these alternative mechanisms: we
find that the coupons simply increased village leaders’ bargaining power with respect to
citizens relative to just the cards. Rather than implementing the rules better in response to
central government monitoring, the coupons enabled local leaders to reduce both access
to the rice and the total subsidy for ineligible households, without a corresponding
increase to eligible households—i.e. there was more leakages in areas with the coupons
relative to areas with just the card.
The idea of “transparency” is fundamental in the fight against corruption, so much
so that the largest worldwide, anti-corruption non-profit is called “Transparency
International.” However, despite its importance, to date, there is relatively little empirical
evidence on the impact of transparency.4 We contribute to the literature by showing that
3

The primary results in this paper are from the two and eight month follow-up surveys. After that, the
government implemented other policies that may have also affected the control group. Nevertheless, we
conducted another survey at 18 months after the card distribution. Despite the potential contamination of
the control group, we still find strikingly persistent results of the card treatment at the 18 month point.
4
Notable exceptions include Reinikka and Svensson (2004, 2005), who find that when the Ugandan
government implemented a national advertising campaign, schools closer to a newspaper outlet were more
likely to receive a larger share of the advertised grant; and Ravallion, van de Walle, Dutta, and Murgai
(2013), who find that a 25 minute video on NREGA that was provided in 40 villages in India (randomly

‐5 -

providing information directly to citizens on program rules can directly reduce leakages,
independent of election mechanisms, and do so at a relatively low cost: the cards yield
subsidy returns greater than 6 times their cost, even assuming the effect lasts just one
year. Importantly, we show that the effect of transparency was driven by the information
changing the relative bargaining power of households and local officials, and not from
changes in the local leader’s perceived beliefs about greater central government
accountability. Finally, we also contribute by showing that the form of the information
(e.g. public or private) may matter as well. Taken together, our findings imply that
providing information directly to citizens may be an effective way to improve
government performance relative to interventions that aim to simply provide greater
central government monitoring of local officials, which have proved difficult to sustain
over time (Banerjee, Glennerster and Duflo, 2010; Dhaliwal and Hanna, 2014).
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the setting,
experimental design and data. Section III provides a simple model to underscore how
information could change relative bargaining power. Section IV provides the overall
effect of the cards. Section V explores how varying levels and types of information affect
program outcomes, while Section VI explores the alternative mechanisms through which
transparency may operate. Section VII concludes.
II.

Setting, Experimental Design and Data

A.

Setting

This project explores the impact of proving information to citizens within Indonesia’s
subsidized rice program, known as “Raskin” (Rice for the Poor). Introduced in 1998, by
2012, the program targeted 17.5 million low-income households, allowing them to
purchase 15 kg of rice at a copay price of Rp. 1,600 per kg (US$0.15), about one-fifth of
the market price. The intended subsidy value—about 4 percent of the beneficiary
households’ monthly consumption—is substantial. It is Indonesia’s largest permanent
targeted social assistance program: in 2012, the budget was over US$1.5 billion, and it
distributed 3.41 million tons of subsidized rice (Indonesian Budget, 2012).
Beneficiaries, however, do not necessarily receive all of the intended benefits.

selected out of 150) increased citizen knowledge, but did not impact program outcomes.

‐6 -

Leakages are abundant— a substantial amount of rice never reaches citizens (Olken,
2006; World Bank, 2012). Targeting is also a problem: local officials who administer the
distribution have a high degree of de facto discretion over who can access it.5 For a
variety of reasons (such as political pressures, views of fairness, maintenance of social
accord, and so forth), local officials distribute Raskin more widely than the central
government intended when it designed the program: 63 percent of officially ineligible
households in our control group had purchased Raskin rice at least once during the last
two months. Since these ineligible households are generally richer than eligible ones,
diverting rice to them reduces the program’s redistributive goals. Third, local leaders
often inflate the copay: in the control group, eligible households paid on average 42
percent above the official price.6 On net, the combination of these problems result in
eligible households receiving only a third of their intended subsidy.7
B.

Sample

This project was carried out in 6 districts (2 each in the provinces of Lampung, South
Sumatra, and Central Java). Importantly, the districts are spread out across Indonesia—
specifically, on and off Java—in order to capture important heterogeneity in culture and
institutions (Dearden and Ravallion, 1988). Due to the constrained timeframe for
providing feedback into the national policy, we chose to conduct the experiment in
villages where we had previously worked and thus had household level data that could
serve as a baseline survey.8 Thus, we stratified the treatment assignments in this project
by the previous experiment to ensure balance.
Within these districts, we had originally randomly sampled 600 villages. We
dropped 28 unsafe villages prior to conducting the randomization, for a final sample of
572 villages (40 percent urban and 60 percent rural villages).
C.

Experimental Design

5

Alatas et al (2013a) show that the manipulation of the beneficiary lists by local leaders likely happens
during the distribution of the rice, rather than through the determination of the official eligibility lists.
6
Some of this stems from the fact that local leaders bear real transport costs in collecting and distributing
the rice (e.g. trucks rentals, storage space), but both qualitative research (Smeru, 2008) and our own
estimates (reported in Banerjee, et al, 2014) suggests that higher price often exceeds these real costs.
7
Authors’ calculation from control group of sample.
8
The previous experiment was on an unrelated conditional Cash Transfer Program, known as PKH,
targeted at the very poorest population and administered through a different ministry and funds distribution
program (see Alatas, et al, 2013a, 2013b for a description of the previous experiment).

‐7 -

As shown in Figure 1, we randomly chose 378 of these villages to receive Raskin cards,
with the remaining 194 villages serving as a control. For all villages where cards were
mailed, we experimentally varied the card program along four dimensions: the number of
cards, public information in addition to cards, whether the cards included price
information, and whether the cards included tear-off coupons.
In 194 control villages, the government continued to run the program under the
status quo. The government mailed a soft-copy beneficiary list to districts with
instructions to send one hard copy to the village government. The government also
mailed an informational packet on program rules directly to village governments,
including instructions to publically post the beneficiary list and to distribute rice only to
those on the list. In these villages, households did not receive Raskin identification cards
or any other form of information from the central government.
In the 378 remaining villages, the central government did everything they did in
the control villages, but also mailed out “Raskin cards” and instructions on how to use
them to beneficiary households via the postal service. Figure 2 shows an example of a
card, which contains the household’s identifying information plus instructions that they
are entitled to receive 15 kg of subsidized rice per month. Postmen delivered the cards
directly to households when possible; however, as in most developing countries, the
postal service has a limited ability to do so, particularly in rural areas. As such, only 15
percent of the households that received a card report receiving it directly from a postal
worker; the rest received it from local officials.
We explore four variants of the cards treatment. First, we experimentally varied
the degree to which information was public. In 192 villages (randomly chosen) that
received cards, additional public information, beyond the status quo information, was
provided regarding both the presence of the cards and eligibility. The goal was to not
only increase knowledge of one’s own eligibility status, but to also increase common
knowledge within the village. To this end, a community facilitator hung up additional
posters—announcing the cards and publicizing the beneficiary lists—within different
neighborhoods of the “public” villages. They also played a pre-recorded announcement
about the cards in the local language over the village mosque loudspeaker (a common

‐8 -

advertising technique in Indonesia).9 The facilitator spent about 2 days in each village,
and so the relative cost of this additional information was only about US$1.40 per
beneficiary household.10
Second, in 187 randomly chosen card villages, the government printed the copay
price on the card (see Figure 2). In the remaining villages, it was not printed. This was
done to understand if holding constant the card receipt, increasing information about a
general program rule would increase the subsidy received.
Third, in half the card villages (randomly selected), all eligible households (30
percent of the village) received cards. In the remaining card villages, cards were only
mailed to those in the lowest decile of predicted per capita household consumption (32
percent of eligible households, or 10 percent of the whole village). The other eligible
households were still on the lists and posters provided to the local officials and they were
still eligible to receive Raskin despite not having a card. This allows us to shed light on
what happened when fewer people in the village are informed.
Finally, we used coupons to vary the perceived extent of central government
monitoring of card use. In 189 randomly chosen card villages, the cards included tearaway coupons for each month that the card was valid (September 2012-December 2013),
which were supposed to be remitted to the central government to prove that the village
complied with the beneficiary list. Note, however, that this treatment could also shift
bargaining power between citizens and leaders, either by enabling the eligible to threaten
to withhold their coupons unless they get more, or by bolstering the leader’s ability to
block the ineligible on the grounds of not having a coupon.
D.

Randomization Design, Timing, and Data

Figure 1 shows the number of villages randomly assigned to each treatment. For the
assignments of control, card, and card only to the bottom 10th decile, we stratified by 58
geographic strata (sub-districts) interacted with the previous experimental treatments. For

9

Appendix Figure 1 shows an example of the posters used to announce the cards. There were eight variants
of the poster to reflect the combinations of the sub-treatments: with and without price, with and without
coupons, and distributed to all eligible households or only to the bottom 10 percent.
10
The facilitators had a coordination meeting with the village leaders to gain permission to hang up the
posters. The meetings were attended by few households (an average of 20 out of 1,380 households in a
village) and they were short; the facilitators were instructed to stay on script and not provide program
information. So, it is highly unlikely that information was widely spread directly as a result of the meeting.

‐9 -

all other experimental variations (price, public information, and coupon), we stratified by
district, previous experimental treatments, and cards.
Figure 3 shows the timeline. In July 2012, the central government mailed the
program guidelines and the new list of eligible households to local governments. In
August, the government mailed the cards to eligible households in card treatment
villages. In September and October, the additional public information treatment was
conducted in the villages that were randomly assigned to receive it.
E.

Data Collection

We conducted two primary follow-up surveys: one in October to November 2012, at least
two months after cards were mailed, and a second in March to April 2013, about eight
months afterwards. In both surveys, SurveyMeter, an independent survey organization,
visited randomly selected households and asked them about their experience with Raskin,
as well as other characteristics. We oversampled eligible households to ensure sufficient
power for this group. In the second survey, we also sampled some respondents who had
been surveyed in our previous experiment (Alatas et al 2013b), to take advantage of pretreatment information. Additional sampling details can be found in Appendix 1.
We also conducted a third follow-up survey in December 2013-January 2014, 18
months after the intervention, to be used as the endline survey for another experiment that
we conducted after this one (see Banerjee, et al 2014). In July 2013, prior to the 18month survey but after our second (8 month) survey, the government distributed new
cards nationwide (i.e. in both the control and treatment areas) for all social protection
programs. While the new social protection cards were officially for all programs, the
publicity surrounding the social protection cards was heavily focused on a new temporary
cash transfer program that was rolled out concurrently.11 Thus, we report the results of
this endline separately to shed light on longer term effects of the original Raskin card, but
caveat that these 18 month results may be affected by these other activities.
F.

Summary Statistics and Experimental Validity

Appendix Table 1 provides sample statistics from the control villages to provide a
11

This final endline reveals that 91 percent of eligible households in treatment areas and 93 percent in
control areas received a Social Protection Card mailed out in July 2013. However, while 99 percent of card
recipients report that the Social Protection Card was used for the cash transfer program, just 1 percent
report it was used for Raskin. These percentages are similar in treatment and control group.

‐ 10 -

description of Raskin in the absence of the intervention. On average, 84 percent of
eligible households bought Raskin in the last two months; however, 67 percent of the
ineligible households did so as well. Eligible households typically bought only a third of
their official allotment (5.3 kilograms out of 15) at an average price of Rp. 2,276, over 40
percent higher than the official copay price of Rp. 1,600. Combined, this implies that the
eligible households received an average subsidy of Rp. 28,605, or 32 percent of their
entitlement (Rp. 88,680).12 Seven percent of eligible and 5 percent of ineligible
households report having a card for Raskin in the control group, which may be because a
few local governments had previously issued cards.
Appendix Table 2 provides the randomization check for the main card treatment,
and Appendix Table 3 provides the randomization check for card variants. The ten
variables shown were specified prior to the randomization. Only one out of 10 differences
in Appendix Table 2 and only two out of 40 differences shown in Appendix Table 3 are
significant at the 10 percent level, consistent with chance, suggesting the randomization
was balanced.
III.

Model

A.

Setup

We propose a simple bargaining model to explore possible impacts of information on the
negotiation between the village leader and a Raskin beneficiary over the division of
program benefits. This is important to formally analyze: the prevailing belief is that more
transparency will always increase what citizens receive, but as we show, the impact may
be more nuanced once we take into account the village official’s incentives and how
information changes the distribution of citizens’ beliefs.
Suppose there is a population of potential beneficiaries of mass 1 indexed by i,
who are each entitled to a total value of benefits denoted by
decide how much of these benefits (

∈ 0,

. The local leader must

) to offer to each potential beneficiary, .

The bargaining process is simple: the leader makes a take or leave it offer to each
villager. If the villager accepts, he gets

and the leader keeps

12

. If the villager

The total subsidy is the difference between the prevailing local market price for rice of similar quality
and the copay price multiplied by the quantity purchased.

‐ 11 -

does not accept, he has the option of complaining to an outside authority at cost

.

Complaining can yield higher benefits, but the (risk-neutral) villagers do not exactly
know by how much. However, each villager has a prior

on the likelihood that he is

eligible and, if so, conditional on complaining, he expects to receive

. Both

and
.

vary by individual, but what is relevant is the distribution of the expected value
There are two categories of villagers, eligible and ineligible, in fraction
1

and

, and they differ in beliefs: eligible villagers’ beliefs are independently drawn from

the distribution function

while ineligible villagers’ expectations are drawn from

. The leader knows the distributions

and

, but not the

of the

particular villager with whom he is interacting.
When there is a complaint, the leader may need to compensate the complainant,
as well as incur an additional negotiation cost. On net, the leader gets
complainant is eligible and

otherwise. This nests the possibility that

, namely that the eligible get all of
zero. The leader gets what remains from

when the
0 and

when they complain and the ineligibles get
in each case.

Complaints have a political cost: the higher the number of complaints, the more
likely the leader will be replaced. We capture this by assuming that the probability that he
keeps his job in the next period is 1

1

, where

and

are the

fraction of eligible and ineligible people who complain and F is a positive increasing
function with

1

1. The leader lives forever, but he cannot regain his job once he

loses it. Finally, assume that the leader’s discount factor is
B.

1.

Analysis of Model

Given these assumptions, a villager will complain as long as

, i.e. his beliefs

about expected benefits from complaining are greater or equal to the benefits if he does
not complain. Therefore, the probability that someone who is offered
complain is

will not

. The following lemma provides sufficient conditions under which

the leader will offer the same

to everyone who holds the same beliefs:13

Lemma 1. If either of the following conditions is satisfied, then it is optimal for the leader
to offer the same
to all eligible, and the same
to all ineligible:
When
is strictly convex, and
⋅ or
⋅ is sufficiently convex, it may be optimal for the leader
to offer different ’s to people from the same eligibility group.
13

‐ 12 -

i.

If
and
are uniform distributions, and both include
in their
support, that is,
0 for
, . That is, there exist some people who will
not complain even when offered zero.
If
is weakly concave in total complaints
1
.

ii.

We provide the proof of this result in Appendix 2. Assuming the conditions of the lemma
are satisfied, we can rewrite the leader’s problem as:
max

1

,

1
1
where

1

1

1

is the present discounted value of being a leader. Taking first order conditions
and

with respect to

, and assuming that we are at an interior optimum, yields:
′

1

(1)

1

(2)

′

1

where
′

⋅

⋅ /

measures total complaints and

⋅

⋅ are the reversed hazard functions corresponding to

′

⋅ /

⋅ and

⋅ and

⋅ .

To close the model, we also include the condition that the present discounted value of
being a leader is correctly related to the per-period payoffs:
,

(3)

We study a policy experiment – giving out Raskin cards – that involves a change
in individual’s knowledge about the Raskin program. We assume that the program only
affects the beliefs of the eligible and that ineligibles’ beliefs are unaffected. This is
consistent with the primary treatment, which provides private information to eligible
citizens about their eligibility in the form of cards, but does not necessarily provide any
information to ineligible households. Specifically, assume that in control locations, the
beliefs of the eligible and the ineligible are given, respectively, by uniform distributions,
so that

~Uniform

which implies that
constant

Δ ,

Δ

and
for

~Uniform B

Δ ,

, . Also, assume that

Δ ,
is a

0. With these assumptions, the first-order conditions can be rewritten as:
Δ

(4)
‐ 13 -

Δ

(5)

or
2

Δ

2
C.

(6)

Δ

(7)

The impact of changes in information

We model providing Raskin cards as inducing a shift in people’s beliefs,

⋅ and

⋅ .

This could take several possible forms. For example, receiving Raskin cards could lead to
a reduction in the variance of

⋅ , if people previously had diffuse, but correct-on-

average, priors about program rules. Alternatively, it could lead to an increase in the
mean of

⋅ , if for example government officials misled them about program rules

(such as the true copay price). It is also possible for mean and variance to change
simultaneously; for example, if some eligible households did not know they were
eligible, informing all eligible households they were eligible would increase the mean
and reduce the variance of

⋅ .

To understand each possible effect, we introduce them one by one. We then trace
them out not only on what households receive, but also on whether we would expect each
type of household to complain more or less with these changes.
Tightening beliefs: reducing the variance of

⋅

Consider first the effect of a small decrease in the variance of
1

in Δ . Recall that

⋅ , i.e. a small reduction

is the fraction of the eligible that complain, and

is the fraction of the ineligible that complain. We can then show the following result:
Result 1: Starting from an equilibrium where
, so that a majority of eligible
households were not complaining absent the intervention, then
0,
0,
0 and,

0, i.e. decreasing the variance of eligible households’ beliefs increases

transfers to both eligible and ineligible, and both groups complain less. Otherwise,
starting from an equilibrium where
,
and
are of ambiguous sign and
0 and

0, i.e., it is ambiguous what happens to the eligible, but the ineligible

receive less and complain more.
Proof: See appendix.

‐ 14 -

The surprising aspect of this result is that increasing eligible households’
information in the sense of making their beliefs more precise does not necessarily mean
they will receive more benefits. There are two offsetting effects: On the one hand,
reducing the variance of eligibles’ beliefs means that the leader can bargain with them
more efficiently. When Δ declines, the density of eligible households that are at the
threshold of rejecting the village head’s offer increases. This means that the village head
obtains a greater reduction in complaints for a given increase in
marginal return of

. This increases the

from the village head’s perspective, so he will increase his offers to

the eligible, giving rise to the intuitive effect that the precision of eligibles’ information
increases their transfers. This effect is always present as long as we are at an interior
solution.
The potential offsetting effect comes from the fact that a decline in Δ may lead
to a direct, first-order reduction in the future value of being in office

, holding

constant, by changing the fraction of people who are rejecting offers and complaining.
Recall that people complain if

. Since

is the mean of

, if

,

then reducing Δ has a first-order impact of making more people complain, since it
. The increased complaints will

reduces the number of people for whom

lower the future value of being in office, , which in turn reduces offers to both eligible
and ineligible households (equations 6 and 7). Whether this effect dominates the
previous, opposite effect for the eligible is ambiguous, but the effect on the ineligible is
unambiguously negative.
Of course, if

then the reverse is true—a reduction in Δ has a first-

order impact of making fewer people complain, since it reduces the number of people for
whom

. In this case, V increases, reinforcing the incentive effect described

above for the eligible and also making it more attractive to give more to the ineligible.
Empirically, complaints in the control areas by eligible households appear relatively
small: we observe at least one complaint by those buying rice in less than 50 percent of
the villages, and when there is at least one complaint, we observe only 3 percent of
households total making any form of complaint. This suggests that this latter case where
is more likely to be relevant.
More optimistic beliefs: raising the mean of

⋅
‐ 15 -

A second possible effect of providing information to the eligible is to raise the mean
belief of the eligible (

), keeping the variance unchanged. Again, as information is only

provided to the eligible, we assume that the beliefs of the ineligible do not change. The
following result summarizes the impact:
Result 2:

has ambiguous sign, so increasing the mean beliefs of the eligible does not

necessarily increase the benefits they receive. However,
The intuition is as follows: increasing
households who complain, holding

0,

0 and

0.

increases the fraction of eligible

constant. This decreases the future value of being

a leader, so the leader offers less to ineligibles, i.e.

decreases and complaints

increase. For eligibles, there are again two offsetting effects: there are fewer eligible
people accepting the offer, which reduces the cost of sweetening the offer to them
slightly, but the future value of being in office has declined, which will lead the official to
reduce

. Which of these effects dominates is theoretically ambiguous.

Shifting both mean and variance simultaneously
If some households were misinformed, then informing all eligible households of their
eligibility could both increase the mean and decrease the variance of beliefs
simultaneously. In this case, it is possible to observe a pattern that is inconsistent with
either of the previous two results (unless it is true that more than half the eligible
population complains in control areas). The following result illustrates this possibility:
increases and Δ goes down at the same time. Then it is
Result 3: Suppose that
possible to find parameter values such that benefits go up for eligible villagers and they
increases and
decreases), but the reverse is true for ineligible
protest less (
villagers (
decreases and
increases), even when the fraction of the eligible
complaining in treatment is less than half.
This result says that it is possible that providing information to the eligible
improves their outcomes and decreases their complaints, but worsens outcomes for
ineligibles and increases their complaints, which cannot happen with a change in either
or Δ alone (except when more than half of the eligible complained in control areas).
To illustrate this possibility, Figure 4 shows the results of varying both the
variance and mean beliefs of the eligible from a numerical simulation of the model.14

14

We choose the following parameter values: The eligible comprise

‐ 16 -

25% of the population. The total

This example starts from an equilibrium where less than half of eligible and ineligibles
are complaining. Each figure plots the proportional change in the outcome variable
(eligible/ineligible benefits/complaints, and the value of being a leader) due to a change
in

(X axis) and a change in Δ (Y axis). Consistent with Result 1, Figure 4 shows that

a marginal tightening of the beliefs of the eligible (lower Δ on the Y axis, holding
constant) increases the benefit level and decreases complaints for both eligible and
ineligible. More optimistic beliefs for the eligible (higher

on the X axis) increase

benefits for the eligible and decrease those for the ineligible, while complaints go up for
both groups, as in Result 2.
With the exception of the effect on benefits for the eligible, the effects of
tightening the variance of beliefs and increasing the mean go in opposite directions. Thus,
the combined effect (the lower right quadrant of each subplot) depends on which margin
is changed more. The triangular region delimited by a white line, shown in each subplot
in Figure 4, is the set of changes in Δ and

such that after the change the eligible

receive higher benefits and complain less, while the opposite happens for ineligible, i.e.
the possibility result described in Result 3.
In short, the results suggest that the impacts of information are not, ex-ante,
obvious – while they may improve outcomes, we cannot a priori rule out the perverse
possibility that they may worsen them, even for those directly informed, if they decrease
the future value of holding office for the local official making the decisions.
IV.

Overall Impact of Cards

A.

Did Households Receive the Cards?

We begin by examining whether households in the card treatment villages received the
cards, and whether this intervention translated to increased knowledge of eligibility
status. Table 1 provides the results. Unless otherwise noted, we estimate:

where

represents a stratum,

represents a type of household sampled,

represents a

Raskin benefit is normalized to
90, the beliefs of eligible are given by
60 and Δ
30, and
30 and Δ
30. The cost to complain is
10. The leader’s
those of ineligible are given by
30 and
60. The probability that he continues
payoffs when eligible and ineligible complain are
1
is the total
as the leader in the next period is given by 1
1
/2, where
number of complaints. The leader’s discount factor is
0.8.

‐ 17 -

survey round,

represents a village, and

represents a household. Since the results are

similar across survey rounds, we pool them for most of the analysis; we provide the
disaggregated analysis in Section VI. We include sample dummies interacted with the
survey round dummy, as well as stratum fixed effects.15 Each column comes from a
separate OLS regression of the respective outcome on the treatment, with standard errors
clustered by village. In Columns 1-3, the sample is eligible households (those who were
on the official central government list), while in columns 4-6 the sample is ineligible
households (randomly selected households who were not on that list).16
Eligible households in the treatment group were 30 percentage points more likely
to receive the cards than those in the control villages (Column 1 in Table 1). Households
may not receive cards if they get lost in the mail system, addresses are difficult to assess,
village leaders block delivery to either particular households or the entire village, etc.
Nonetheless, it is a statistically significant and economically meaningful increase in the
number of cards. By comparison, ineligible households in the treatment group were only
3 percentage points more likely to receive cards (Column 4). Ineligible households may
receive cards for a variety of reasons—corruption, reallocations at the village level of
slots from poor to rich, imperfect matching of the survey data to government rolls, and so
forth—but the overall level is dramatically lower than those who were eligible.
In villages where the cards were mailed out, card use increased: eligible
households were 15 percentage points more likely to use a card to purchase Raskin rice.
Note that even if one did not use it, the act of getting a card may still be important.
Qualitatively, some households we interviewed explained that they were told to simply
store the card with their important documents rather than use it.
We then ask whether the card treatment increased people’s beliefs about their

15

Appendix Table 4 replicates the specifications in Table 1, with varying levels of controls; the results are
near identical with either no or additional controls. Appendix Table 5 shows that the eligible households in
Java were more likely to receive the card than those off Java. However, even off Java, where we expect
weaker institutions, there is a strong and positive effect on card receipt for eligible households (Column 1).
16
For some randomly selected card villages, the cards were mailed only to households in the bottom decile.
For these villages, only households that were mailed a card are included in the eligible sample; those who
are eligible for the Raskin program, but who were not mailed a card, are dropped from the main analysis
(we explore their outcomes in Section V). We reweight the regressions so that, on average, the weighted
fraction of households from the two types of eligible households (bottom decile and other eligible) are
identical in treatment and control areas in each of the 58 geographic strata.

‐ 18 -

eligibility.17 Eligible households were 9 percentage points, or 30 percent over the control
mean, more likely to correctly know their eligibility status in the treatment group than the
control (Column 3). Similarly, the ineligible were 5 percentage points, or 14 percent over
the control mean, more likely to know their status in the treatment villages (Column 6).18
This suggests that the cards increased information, and in particular, increased eligible
households’ beliefs about what they were entitled to. From the perspective of the model,
we do not know if the change in beliefs was just an increase in the mean beliefs of what
they were entitled to (i.e. raising

in the model), or also a reduction in the variance; we

will explore the implications of this below when we examine the results.
B.

Impacts of Card on Rice Purchases and Price

Table 2 explores the impact of the cards on the purchase of Raskin rice in the two months
prior to the survey, quantity, price paid, and the overall subsidy received. The sample
structure and regressions are the same as in Table 1.19 The quantity and subsidy variables
are coded as zero if no purchase was made and thus capture both intensive and extensive
effects. Price, however, is conditional on purchase, since it is unobserved for households
that do not purchase the rice.
The card treatment substantially increases the eligible household’s subsidy
received. While eligible households were no more likely to buy Raskin in the last two
months (Column 1 in Table 2), we observe large changes in both quantity and price:
eligible households in card villages bought 1.25 kg more rice and paid a copay price of
Rp. 57 less than control villages (Columns 2-3). This translates to a Rp. 7,455—or about
a 26 percent—increase in subsidy received (Column 4).20
17

The mean for this variable is low for both eligible and ineligibles; this is because many households of
both types answer “don’t know,” which we code as not knowing their status.
18
All of the increase in ineligibles’ knowledge comes from public information villages, with no change in
ineligibles’ information in standard information villages, consistent with the model.
19
Appendix Table 6 shows that the results are near identical regardless of adding or removing controls.
Appendix Table 7 shows a larger gain in subsidy for eligible household in Java than off-Java, consistent
with treatment households in Java being more likely to receive cards (Appendix Table 5).
20
One might be concerned it is hard to distinguish a 1.2kg difference in rice—although this difference is
proportionally quite large—and therefore the fact that households say that they purchase more rice in
treatment villages is based on a misperception. This would be true, for example, if leaders responded to the
cards by telling everyone that rice sacks contained 6.5kg of rice, while still giving them only 5.3kg. Thus,
we tested whether households could accurately assess the quantity of rice (Appendix Table 8). We asked 18
eligible households in two different sample villages to guess the weights of 4 packets of rice (in random
order) that weighed 4, 6, 7, and 8 kg. Respondents assessed packet weight with remarkable accuracy,
guessing an average of 3.9, 5.5, 7.9, and 8.7 kg respectively. Most importantly, respondents consistently

‐ 19 -

Ineligibles were 6 percentage points less likely to purchase Raskin in the last two
months (Column 5). However, there is no significant difference in the total amount of
rice purchased by ineligibles (Column 6), since the quantity conditional on purchase also
rose for the ineligibles that were able to buy after the treatment (Appendix Table 9).
Thus, on net, there was no change in subsidy received by ineligible households (Column
8).
Since the cards increased the quantity received by eligible households, but did not
decrease the quantity received by ineligibles, this implies that on net, the cards resulted in
a substantial reduction in leakages. Weighting the eligible and ineligibles by their
respective shares in the village, we estimate that the cards increase the total amount of
rice distributed by 17 percent—thus, there was a 36 percent reduction in “lost” rice.
C.

Impact of Cards on Protests and Complaints

The theory suggests that an important mechanism through which transparency could
matter is through complaints or the threat thereof. The level of complaints could change
on the equilibrium path for several reasons in the model, and as discussed above, the net
impact of an increase in information on the complaints voiced by eligible and ineligible
households depends on whether the information represents a decrease in variance of
beliefs (i.e. decreased Δ ), an increase in the mean of beliefs (i.e. increased

), or both.

In Table 3, we report on the experience of the village head in his interactions with
citizens. We investigate the whether there were citizen “protests” and whether there were
any of four different types of “complaints”: complaints from those who receive rice,
complaints from those who did not receive rice, complaints about beneficiary selection
process, and complaints about the distribution process.21
assessed the relative packet weights accurately. In a regression, where each respondent represents 4
observations (for each packet guess) and standard errors clustered by respondent, dummies for actual
packet weight are highly significant (p-value=0.000), as are the estimated differences in weights between
packets of size 6 and 7kg and between 6 and 8kg (p-value=0.000), showing that eligible households can
accurately assess differences of the size of the observed treatment effects.
21
Protests generally refer to simultaneous protests by multiple people, whereas complaints are individual.
Complaints about the beneficiary selection process are comprised of the following specific types of
complaints: “Process of data collection and selection for program beneficiaries was not transparent,”
“There was practice of corruption/collusion/nepotism in determining beneficiaries,” “The allocation was
not fair,” “Aid was given to those who were not suitable to the program,” “Household that used to be
eligible for Raskin is no longer eligible,” and “The latest Raskin Beneficiary list was not accurate”;
complaints about the distribution process include: “The amount of aid received was not matched,” “Raskin
came late,” “The fee was not matched with the regulation,” “The new Raskin quota did not meet the

‐ 20 -

The likelihood of complaints is altered by the cards treatment. Specifically,
protests increase substantially in card villages (Column 1). Complaints by those who do
not receive Raskin increase by 8 percentage points—about a 36 percent rise over the
control group mean—in the treatment areas, while those who purchase Raskin rice
complain less. The treatment spurs more complaints about the beneficiary listing, and
fewer complaints about the distribution process.22
In short, the results are consistent with the treatment both increasing the mean
beliefs and reducing its variance: eligible households receive more benefits and complain
less, while fewer ineligibles receive benefits and they complain more. More generally,
protests and complaints are affected by the cards treatment, suggesting that they are an
important part of how citizens bargain with the village head, as suggested by the model.
D.

Multitasking

One concern with transparency programs is they focus attention on those aspects of the
program that can be made transparent, at the cost of other aspects that are equally
important. In this setting, the program objective is to distribute rice to the poor. However,
the government’s official eligibility list is based on assets, which are a good, but
imperfect, measure of poverty. One could imagine a benevolent village head
redistributing from eligible to ineligible households to correct errors and ensure that the
poor, ineligible households are taken care of. The cards intervention could prevent him
from making these types of desirable transfers.
In Table 4, we test whether the card treatment shifted resources away from poor
households, as measured by their per capita consumption measured prior to the
experiment. We interact the treatment with baseline log per capita consumption
(

and estimate:

The first 4 columns of Table 4 show that, for eligible households, we find no
evidence that the gain in subsidy received is concentrated among the rich; if anything, the
desired amount,” “Location of Raskin pick up point was not pleasant,” and “Raskin quality was poor.”
22
Interestingly, the increase in complaints about the targeting and beneficiary list tend to occur right after
the intervention, while the decrease in complaints about distribution occur after households have had time
to updated their beliefs on the distribution process (Appendix Table 10).

‐ 21 -

treatment effect is smaller for those with higher income, albeit not statistically significant
(Column 4). Similarly, the remaining columns show no evidence that poorer, ineligible
households are hurt as a result of the cards.
V.

Varying Level and Types of Information

Providing information potentially affects the bargaining between households and village
officials in multiple ways. The information printed on the cards, as well as the way the
cards are publicized, can affect both what individuals know and what is common
knowledge about program rules and eligibility. The cards can make a difference only to
those who receive them, or could change the outcomes for all citizens. Thus, we varied
three different dimensions of how the cards were implemented to shed light on these kind
of questions. In this section, we explore each of these issues in turn.
A.

Public Information

In half of the card villages (randomly selected), the government conducted the “standard”
procedures: local leaders received the beneficiary list and were told to hang it in a visible
place in the village. In the remaining ones (“public information”), a facilitator ensured
that three copies of the poster announcing the cards and beneficiary list were hung in
each hamlet in the village; they also played a pre-recorded message about the cards on
the mosque loudspeaker. This public information campaign may have had two types of
effects: it could have increased households’ information and it could have increased
households’ higher-order beliefs about what other households knew.
Table 5A begins by examining the impact on whether households had seen the
beneficiary list. In Panel A, for each of four key demographic groups (eligible, noneligible, village officials, and informal leaders), we regress a dummy variable that
indicates whether the respondent reports having seen the beneficiary list on dummies
variables for the cards with standard information and the cards with the public
information campaign. The “standard” card treatment did not significantly increase
reports of having seen the list across any of the demographic categories. In contrast, the
“public information” treatment greatly increased access: the number of eligible
households who had seen it nearly tripled relative to no cards (from 7 to 21 percent in
Column 1) and was 12 percentage points higher than in the standard approach. Ineligibles
were 12 percentage points more likely to see it in the public versus the standard approach
‐ 22 -

(Column 2), and village leaders were 14 percentage points more likely (Column 3).23
The public information increased knowledge of one’s own eligibility status (Table
5A, Panel B). With no cards, 30 percent of eligible households can correctly identify their
status; those in villages with just cards are 5 percentage points more likely to correctly
identify their status relative to no cards (Column 1 of Panel B). With the additional public
information, they are 8 percentage points more likely to do so relative to just the card
alone—this is a 43 percent increase in knowledge relative to no cards and about a 23
percent increase relative to the standard card approach. With just the cards, ineligibles
were no more likely to know their status than under no cards, but they were 9 percentage
points (or 25 percent) more likely to know it under public information (Column 2).
The second way the public treatment could operate was by changing people’s
beliefs about others’ access to information (i.e. higher order beliefs).24 This may be
important if challenges to authority feature strategic complementarities: a village head
may be able to retaliate against a lone individual, but it may be harder to retaliate against
a group. In the language of the model, the per-person cost

may be decreasing in the

number of people who complain. A villager deciding whether to challenge a village head
may therefore be more likely to do so if he can coordinate with others. However, doing
this requires not just knowledge about what you are entitled to, but also confidence that
everyone else knows more or less what they are entitled to as well (Chwe 2001).
To test whether higher order beliefs changed, in Table 5B, Panel A, we ask all
survey respondents how likely members of each of the four demographic groups have
seen the list, where 0 corresponds to “have not seen the list” and 3 corresponds to “most
have seen it.” Individuals under public information were more likely to believe that
others had seen the list, whereas individuals under standard information were no more
likely to report that any type of individual had seen it. However, despite the fact that

23

We coded anyone who reported not knowing whether they had seen the list as not having seen it. In
Appendix Table 11, we drop those who reported “do not know” and find near identical results.
24
Specifically, we test for whether respondents of type X believe that respondents of type Y have seen the
list of beneficiaries, for all X and Y of eligible households, ineligible households, formal village leaders,
and informal leaders. This is technically a second-order belief (i.e. do you believe that Y knows), whereas
full common knowledge encompasses all higher-order beliefs (i.e. do you believe that Y knows that you
know, and so on), but is the highest-order belief that we were practically able to elicit during a survey.
Given that the treatment involved posting the list publicly, and we see results on second-order beliefs, it is
likely that we moved towards full common knowledge as well.

‐ 23 -

more people have seen the list, with everyone believing that everyone has more
information, respondents were no more likely to correctly identify other people’s status in
public information than under the control, and in fact, were more likely to get it wrong in
public relative to standard information (Panel B of Table 5B).25
With respect to the model, one can interpret the public information treatment as
potentially affecting three things. First, the information set of eligible households
improved (i.e. either

increased, Δ decreased, or both). Second, the information set of

ineligible households improved (i.e.

decreased, Δ

decreased, or both). Third, if

common knowledge reduced the cost of complaining (e.g. because it is easier to
coordinate), then

went down. We show in Appendix 2 (Result 4) that under plausible

assumptions, improving everyone’s information and reducing

should lead to an

increase in the amount received by the eligible and a reduction in their complaints. The
impact on ineligible is theoretically ambiguous. In Appendix 3, we provide a numerical
example where everyone’s information improves,

goes down, and as a consequence,

eligible receive more, complain less, and the opposite happens for the ineligible.
Tables 6A and 6B examine the impact of the additional information on program
outcomes. Eligible households were both more likely to receive their card and use them
under public information, with no change for ineligible households (Table 6A). The
magnitude of these differences for the eligible is large: they were 24 percent more likely
to have received a card and 33 percent more likely to use it than under the standard
socialization. Addresses in rural areas are difficult to find, and so the post-office relies on
local leaders for help in locating households; the fact that beneficiaries were more likely
to receive the card in the public information treatment suggests that without public
knowledge, village leaders were able to block cards to maintain their rents, but were less
able to do so once information about the cards was publically provided.
The public information nearly doubled the subsidy that eligible households
received relative to the standard information card villages (Table 6B). This difference
was driven by both an increase in quantity (Column 2) and a decrease in price (Column
3). Again, there is no difference in quantity for ineligibles, which implies that the gain is
less about program resources being diverted from ineligible to eligible, but rather due to a
25

As Appendix Table 12 shows, there is no difference between eligible and ineligible households.

‐ 24 -

decrease in the theft of rice. Although as discussed above, the impact on complaints and
protests is theoretically ambiguous, we also observe more protests and complaints about
the beneficiary list from those who do not receive the rice (Appendix Table 13).
One question is whether the public information worked by simply increasing the
number of cards distributed, or if it had broader effects beyond the receipt of the cards.
To try to distinguish between these two scenarios, we estimate the implied instrumental
variables effect of receiving a card in the standard villages and compare this effect to that
in the public (see Appendix Table 14).26 If the effect of the public treatment was simply
through increased card receipt, the IV effect should be the similar across both sets of
villages. However, this is not the case: the IV estimate of receiving the card on the
subsidy is Rp. 32,623 in public, while it is Rp. 17,213 in the standard treatment (p-value
of difference is 0.03). This implies that the public information had impacts beyond just
handing out more cards.
On net, these results suggest that public information, through its combined effect
on what people know about their own rights and on higher-order knowledge, may be an
important component of transparency.
B.

Increased General-Purpose Information

The cards contained both individual-specific components – who is eligible for the
program – as well as general information (the quantity of rice that eligible households can
purchase). Thus, to isolate the role of general-purpose information, we randomly varied
whether the copay price (Rp. 1,600 per kg) was printed on the card across villages. In all
villages, the official program rules distributed to village leaders contained the official
copay, so this is purely an intervention affecting the information received by villagers.
The results are provided in Table 7.27 Eligible households in the villages where
the official price was printed on the card received a much larger increase in subsidy than
in villages where it was not. The difference is primarily through quantity, rather than
price.28 Specifically, eligible households receive Rp. 6,365 more subsidy per month with
26

The corresponding first stage and reduced form regressions are presented in Appendix Table 15.
Appendix Table 16 shows while printing the price did not affect receipt of cards, it did increase the
probability cards were used. We also tested the effect of the cards in the standard information versus public
information treatments, since the public information may had an effect on people’s perception of price
(Appendix Table 17). We find that the effect of printing the price on cards is similar in across both.
28
One potential reason for the quantity increase is if households thought the price is lower, thus
27

‐ 25 -

the printed price than without; of this Rp. 6,365 increase in subsidy, about 95 percent of
the change was due to increase in quantity received (which increased by 1.13 kg
compared to cards without price) while only about 5 percent of the change was due to a
reduction in the copay price (which fell by Rp. 33 compared to cards without price).29
From the perspective of bargaining theory, officials and villagers would care only
about the total subsidy

that villagers receive (the product of the price discount and the

quantity), not whether it comes from lower prices or higher quantities. Price information
should increase the total subsidy, but the margin through which it does so is arbitrary and
depends on which approach is more cost-effective for the local leaders. Increasing
quantities may be more cost effective if it allows leaders to better discriminate between
eligibles and ineligibles, i.e. there may be more pressure for a uniform price than for
equal quantities. Importantly, though, the fact that it affects the quantity dimension is
consistent with the bargaining story rather than one of perceived greater central
government accountability: if one thought that by printing the price the government was
signaling a higher degree of auditing on price, one would expect effects only on price.
C.

Varying who receives a card

In the model, the outcome is dependent not only on your information, but also on the
information of others. This is because others’ information affects their bargaining with
the village head, which in turn affects the future value of the his job and thus his choices
about how much he chooses to placate different types of households.
To examine these issues, we experimentally varied whether cards were mailed out
to all eligible households or just to those in the bottom decile (about 32 percent of eligible
households). In all villages, the government mailed the complete eligibility list to the
local leaders with instructions that all eligible households were allowed to purchase their
Raskin allotment.
representing a demand effect. This seems very unlikely, however, since the Raskin price (even with
markups) is already so far below market price that most households would want to buy as much as they
could. Moreover, the quantity effects are sufficiently large that the demand for rice would need to be very
elastic to explain these effects, which seems unlikely for an important staple.
29
Since price is only available conditional on buying Raskin, the sample of people reporting prices may
change in response to the treatment. Thus, we also report regressions on the minimum and maximum price
reported by any of our respondents in the village. Appendix Table 18 suggests that, relative to pure
controls, the cards with printed price reduce the maximum printed price in the village by about Rp. 117, or
about 12 percent of the control group levels of price markups above the official Rp. 1,600 copay price.

‐ 26 -

To examine the impacts, we split our sample of “eligible” households into two
groups, those in the bottom 10 percent (who receive cards in all card treatment villages)
and other eligible households (who do not receive cards where cards are mailed only to
the bottom 10, but receive cards when they are mailed to all eligible households). We
regress each outcome on indicator variables for “cards to the bottom decile” and “cards to
all,” and thus the coefficients reflect differences from the “no card” villages. Table 8
provides these findings for each of the three categories of households.30
Providing cards to just the bottom decile did not change the allocation to these
households relative to villages in which all households received cards: there was no
difference in propensity to buy, amount purchased, price or subsidy for those in the
bottom percentile across the two types of villages (Columns 1-4 of Table 8).
However, the outcomes for the other eligible households greatly differed based on
whether or not they resided in “cards to all” villages, despite the fact that they were on
the beneficiary list in both types of villages. The other eligible households in the “cards to
all” received an increase in subsidy that was just as large (Columns 4 vs 8 of Table 8).
Other eligible households that resided in villages where only the bottom decile received a
card, by comparison, did not experience any gains (Column 6-8 of Table 8). This
suggests that providing cards to the other eligible households directly increased their
information, compared to when cards were provided only to bottom 10 households.
Appendix Table 20 examines the impacts on protests and complaints. The results
suggest that overall protests were significantly lower in the villages where only cards
were given to the bottom 10 rather than when cards were given to all (Column 1) and
complaints about the beneficiary list were also qualitatively lower (Column 4, although
the p-value of the difference is 0.24). This is consistent with the model’s predictions that
as a greater number of eligibles are informed, complaints by ineligibles will rise.
VI.

Citizen Information or Central Government Accountability?

The results, thus far, show that providing information to citizens can enhance program
performance. In our model, this occurs since information changes the bargaining position
30

Appendix Table 19 shows the impact on card receipt, use, and knowledge. Card receipt and knowledge is
identical for bottom 10 households in both types of villages but only increases for other eligible in “cards to
all” villages.

‐ 27 -

of citizens relative to the local officials. However, imbedded in all transparency programs
is also a signal to the local officials that their superiors believe that the aspects for which
they have imposed greater transparency matter more. Here, the fact that the central
government provided information to citizens on their eligibility status and rights may
have signaled to local leaders that the central government found these aspects important
and would be monitoring them along these dimensions.
The evidence, thus far, suggests that the observed effect was likely primarily
driven by a change in bargaining power between citizens and the local leaders rather than
perceived change in monitoring by the local government. For example, we observe more
protests and more complaints when citizens are unable to buy rice, suggesting that
citizens engage with the local leaders. Moreover, we find that when the central
government additionally publicizes the true price, the local leaders give citizens more rice
rather than a lower price—in other words, they are not responding along the dimension
that their superior signals about, but rather are attempting to meet citizens’ demands
along what may be the cheapest dimension for them to alter.
Nonetheless, we investigate a number of ways to try to distinguish between these
alternative theories. First, we explore the effect over time. We estimate the treatment
effect of cards by survey round, i.e. at the two, eight and eighteenth month mark of the
program.31 This is important because after the cards were mailed out, the government did
not conduct any follow-up monitoring. As time goes on, local leaders would presumably
learn that the level of monitoring from the central government was unaltered. If the effect
was purely driven by a belief that the cards signaled greater monitoring, we would expect
that the effect would dissipate as the village leaders updated their beliefs.
As shown in Table 9, despite fluctuations of the program functioning over time
(e.g. in both quantity and price), the estimates suggest that the card impact is remarkably
persistent. The difference in subsidy for the eligibles, while larger in the first period
(7,470 in the first round as compared to 4,538 in the second), is not statistically different
across the two survey rounds. Remarkably, the treatment effect on the subsidy remains
positive, large in magnitude, and significant at the 1 percent level 18 months after the

31

We sampled slightly different sets of households in each survey round. We restrict analysis to a
comparable sample and weight respondents in the 2nd and 3rd rounds to match the proportions in the first.

‐ 28 -

intervention, even though in the meanwhile the government had carried out a program
that provided additional information on beneficiary status across both the treatment and
control villages. Similarly, the findings for ineligibles are also similar over time.
To try to test this more directly, we also introduced a treatment that aimed to
directly vary the perceived level of central government monitoring: in half the villages,
the cards had clip-off coupons to be collected by the local leader from those to whom he
gave the rice and remitted to the central government monthly.32 Knowing that he has to
remit the coupons may induce the local leader to adhere to the rules. Importantly, this
treatment may also have shifted bargaining power, either by enabling the eligible to
threaten to withhold their coupons unless they get more or by increasing the local leader’s
ability to block the ineligible by demanding coupons that he knows they lack.
Table 10 explores the effect of the coupons.33 Coupons were collected in roughly
half of the cases that the card was used (Column 3 of Appendix Table 21). Although the
point estimates are positive, the coupons did not have a statistically significant or large
impact on the subsidy received by eligible households (Column 4 of Table 10). Instead,
they reduced the probability of purchase and subsidy received by ineligible households
(Columns 5 and 8 of Table 10). If local officials were worried about the central
government, one would have expected an effect for eligible households for whom they
had to remit coupons. Rather, the coupons just seemed to have strengthened the hand of
the village heads vis-à-vis the ineligible in the bargaining process.
VII. Conclusion
Despite widely-held beliefs about the importance of transparency for improving
governance, there has been surprisingly little rigorous evidence on its effects on service
delivery. In this paper, we tested the role of information by providing identification cards
to eligible beneficiaries of a subsidized food program in Indonesia. Importantly, we
varied four aspects of the card program to test the mechanisms through which
information may impact social service delivery, i.e. we varied the content, to whom they
were distributed, how public the information was, and whether they had a component that
32

In practice, the government did not do anything based on coupons, consistent with the reality of many
top-down monitoring programs in developing countries, but neither local officials or villagers knew this ex
ante.
33
Appendix Table 21 shows no impact on receipt and use of cards.

‐ 29 -

signaled the central government was monitoring.
The cards mattered: on average, beneficiaries in villages randomly chosen to
receive the cards received about 26 percent more subsidy than those in the control group.
The evidence points to a mechanism through which information increased citizens’
bargaining power vis-à-vis village officials. In particular, adding a single line to the cards
with the copay price information printed on it dramatically increased the impact of the
cards on the amount of subsidy received – but it did so primarily by increasing the
quantity of rice received as opposed to lowering the copay price paid, suggesting that it
improved recipients’ ability to bargain with village heads rather than leading village
heads to comply exactly with program rules. Moreover, publicly posting the information
about the cards and the beneficiary list also further increased the effectiveness of the
cards, again suggesting an important role for information.
At some level, the idea that additional information can empower citizens to more
effectively demand the fulfillment of their rights seems surprising for well-established
and long-lived programs like Raskin. After all, shouldn’t people already have the
information? One might have thought that it should not be that hard to learn the rules,
particularly general ones like how many kilos you are entitled to and at what price.
Given that providing this information has significant material benefits, the next
question is why. There are a number of possible answers: perhaps people simply do not
know that there are rules—they assume that it is all left to the discretion of the village
leadership. Perhaps they know that there are rules, but they have the wrong version of the
rules (which then raises the question, why does political competition not fix that?).
Perhaps they know that there are rules, but assume that the rules constantly change,
which is certainly true of some government programs. If so, this introduces a potential
cost of trying to reform government programs. Understanding the actual reasons behind
the lack of information in the status quo is both interesting and important, and an area we
hope to address in future research.
References
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, and Julia Tobias. 2012.
"Targeting the Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia." American
Economic Review, 102(4): 1206-40.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, Ririn Purnamasari, and
‐ 30 -

Matthew Wai-poi. 2013a. "Elite Capture or Elite Benevolence? Local Elites and
Targeted Welfare Programs in Indonesia,” mimeo, MIT.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, Ririn Purnamasari, and
Matthew Wai-poi. 2013b. “Ordeal Mechanisms In Targeting: Theory And Evidence
From A Field Experiment In Indonesia,” NBER Working Paper Number 19127.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, and Rachel Glennerster 2008, “Putting a Band-Aid on a
Corpse: Incentives for Nurses in the Indian Public Health Care System,” Journal of
the European Economic Association, 6(2-3): 487–500.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, Jordan Kyle, Benjamin A. Olken, and Sudarno Sumarto.
2014. “Private Sector Competition for the Delivery of Public Services: Evidence from
a Randomized Experiment in Indonesia,” mimeo, MIT.
Chwe, Michael, 2001. Rational Ritual: Culture, Coordination, and Common Knowledge,
Princeton University Press.
Dearden, Lorraine and Martin Ravallion. 1988. "Social Security in a "Moral Economy":
An Empirical Analysis for Java," Review of Economics and Statistics, 70(1): 36-44.
Dhaliwal, Iqbal, and Rema Hanna. 2014. “Deal with the Devil: The Successes and
Limitations of Bureaucratic Reform in India.” NBER Working Paper Number 20482.
Government of Indonesia. 2012. "Nota Keuangan dan Rancangan Anggaran Pendapatan
dan Belanja Negara Perubahan tahun anggaran 2012 [Financial Note and Revised
Budget 2012]." http://www.perpustakaan.depkeu.go.id/
FOLDERDOKUMEN/Th.%202012%20perubahan.pdf
Niehaus, Paul, Antonia Atanassova, Marianne Bertrand, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2013.
"Targeting with Agents." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(1): 20638.
Nunn Nathan, and Nancy Qian. Forthcoming. “U.S. Food Aid and Civil Conflict.”
American Economic Review.
Olken, Benjamin A. 2006. “Corruption and the Costs of Redistribution,” Journal of
Public Economics, 90(4-5): 853-870.
Olken, Benjamin A. 2009. “Corruption Perceptions vs. Corruption Reality,” Journal of
Public Economics, 93(7-8): 950-964.
Ravallion, Martin, Dominique van de Walle, Puja Dutta, and Rinku Murgai. 2013.
“Testing Information Constrains on India’s Largest Antipoverty Programs,” World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper #6598.
Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson. 2004. “Local Capture: Evidence from a Central
Government Program in Uganda,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2): 679705.
Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson. 2005. “Fighting Corruption to Improve Schooling:
Evidence from a Newspaper Campaign in Uganda,” Journal of the European
Economics Association, 3(2-3): 259-367.
Smeru Research Institute. 2008. "The Effectiveness of the Raskin Program." Jakarta,
Indonesia. http://www.smeru.or.id/report/research/raskin2007/raskin2007_eng.pdf.
World Bank. 2012. “Raskin Subsidized Rice Delivery: Social Assistance Program and
Public Expenditure Review.” Memo, Jakarta, Indonesia.
Zwane, Alix, et al. 2011. “Being Surveyed can Change Later Behavior and Related
Parameter Estimates,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(5):
1821-1826.

‐ 31 -

Table 1: Effect of Card Treatment on Card Receipt and Use
Eligible Households

Card Treatment

Received
Card
(1)
0.30***
(0.02)
5,693
0.07

Observations
Control Group Mean

Used Card
(2)
0.15***
(0.02)

Knows Own
Status
(3)
0.09***
(0.02)

Received
Card
(4)
0.03**
(0.01)

5,693
0.06

5,691
0.30

3,619
0.05

Ineligible Households
Knows Own
Used Card
Status
(5)
(6)
0.04***
0.05**
(0.01)
(0.02)
3,619
0.04

3,619
0.36

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of belonging to the card treatment group on card outcomes and knowledge by eligibility status. Each column in this table
comes from a separate OLS regression of respective outcome on the treatment, strata fixed effects, and survey sample dummies. Data are pooled from the first and second
follow-up surveys. Eligible households that did not receive a card under the bottom ten treatment are dropped from the sample and we re-weight the treatment group by subdistrict so that the ratio of all three income groups is the same. Standard errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 2: Effect of Card Treatment on Rice Purchases and Price
Eligible Households

Card Treatment
Observations
Control Group Mean

Ineligible Households

Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(1)
0.02
(0.01)

Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
(2)
1.25***
(0.24)

Price (Rp.)
(3)
-57***
(18)

5,693
0.79

5,692
5.29

4,881
2,276

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(4)
7,455***
(1,328)

Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(5)
-0.06***
(0.02)

Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
(6)
0.07
(0.19)

Price (Rp.)
(7)
-35
(24)

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(8)
526
(1,035)

5,692
28,605

3,619
0.63

3,619
3.46

2,283
2,251

3,619
18,754

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of belonging to the card treatment group on rice purchases by eligibility status. Each column in this table comes from a separate OLS regression of
respective outcome on the treatment, strata fixed effects, and survey sample dummies. Data are pooled from the first and second follow-up survey. Eligible households that did not receive a card
under the bottom 10 treatment are dropped from the sample and we re-weight the treatment groups by sub-district so that the ratio of all three income groups is the same. For each household, the
variables for amount purchased, price and subsidy are averages over the past four months; the current month is dropped if the interview occurred before the 25th day of the month (as the Raskin rice is
distributed after that day). The amount and subsidy are set equal to zero if the household does not purchase any Raskin rice, whereas the price is calculated among purchasing households. Standard
errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

- 32 -

Table 3: Effect of Card Treatment on Protests and Complaints

Card Treatment
Observations
Control Group Mean

“Protests”
(1)
0.07***
(0.02)
1,143
0.11

Indicator for whether village leaders reports any…
“Complaints” by those
“Complaints” by those
who do not receive
“Complaints” about
who receive rice
rice
list of beneficiaries
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.09***
0.08***
0.08***
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
1,144
1,144
1,144
0.43
0.22
0.18

“Complaints” about
distribution process
(5)
-0.06**
(0.03)
1,144
0.41

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of belonging to the card treatment group on village leaders’ reports of protests or complaints related to the Raskin program in the 12 months
preceding the survey. Each column in this table comes from a separate OLS regression of respective outcome on the treatment, strata fixed effects, and survey wave indicator. Data are pooled from
village leader module of the first and second follow-up surveys. Standard errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 4: Effect of Card Treatment on Rice Purchases and Price, by Consumption

Card Treatment
Log Consumption
Treatment x
Log Consumption
Observations
Control Group Mean

Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(1)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)
1,266
0.82

Eligible Households
Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
Price (Rp.)
(2)
(3)
0.52*
-54*
(0.30)
(28)
0.18
-18
(0.21)
(19)
-0.32
33
(0.29)
(24)
1,266
5.09

1,148
2,313

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(4)
3,175*
(1,622)
950
(1,078)
-1,938
(1,573)

Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(5)
-0.09***
(0.03)
-0.11***
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)

1,266
26,653

1,925
0.62

Ineligible Households
Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
Price (Rp.)
(6)
(7)
0.01
-42
(0.17)
(37)
-0.59***
-17
(0.12)
(21)
-0.03
32
(0.15)
(27)
1,925
2.99

1,235
2,305

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(8)
205
(909)
-3,107***
(651)
-176
(798)
1,925
15,663

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of belonging to the card treatment group on rice purchases by eligibility status, interacted with the z-score of pre-treatment log consumption. Each
column comes from a separate OLS regression and includes strata fixed effects and survey sample. The sample is a group of households in the second follow-up for whom we have baseline
consumption data. Eligible households that did not receive a card under the bottom ten treatment are dropped from the sample and we re-weight the treatment groups by sub-district so that the ratio of
all three income groups is the same. For each household, the variables for amount purchased, price and subsidy are averages over the past four months; the current month is dropped if the interview
occurred before the 25th day of the month (as the Raskin rice is distributed after that day). The amount and subsidy are set equal to zero if the household does not purchase any Raskin rice, whereas
the price is calculated among purchasing households. Standard errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

- 33 -

Table 5A: Effect of Public Information Treatment on Seeing the Eligibility List and
Knowledge about Own Status

Public Information
Standard Information
Difference:
Public - Standard
Observations
Control Group Mean
Public Information
Standard Information
Difference:
Public - Standard
Observations
Control Group Mean

Eligible
Ineligible
Village officials
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Respondent has seen the list
0.14***
0.11***
0.23***
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.07)
0.02
-0.01
0.09
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.07)
0.12***
0.12***
0.14*
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.08)
5,685
3,619
496
0.07
0.06
0.36
Panel B: Respondent correctly identifies own status
0.13***
0.09***
0.25***
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.06)
0.05*
0.01
0.17**
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.07)
0.08***
(0.03)
5,683
0.30

0.07***
(0.03)
3,619
0.36

0.09
(0.07)
496
0.44

Informal
Leaders
(4)
0.11
(0.07)
0.04
(0.07)
0.07
(0.07)
385
0.12
0.08
(0.09)
0.07
(0.09)
0.01
(0.10)
385
0.48

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of the public information treatments on seeing the beneficiary list and
correctly identifying own beneficiary status. Each regression is estimated by OLS and includes strata fixed effects and
survey sample dummies. In Panel A, the sample is the stated category in the column and the outcome is a dummy indicating
whether the individual has seen the eligibility list. “Do not know” answers are coded as zero (not seen). In Panel B, the
sample is restricted to each column header. The outcome is whether the respondent household correctly identifies its own
status. “Do not know” answers are coded as zero. Data are pooled from the first and second follow-up survey. Standard
errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

- 34 -

Table 5B: Testing for High Order Beliefs
Informal
Eligible
Ineligible
Village officials
Leaders
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Respondent believes that the stated category of individuals has seen the list
Public Information
0.37***
0.27***
0.25***
0.26***
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.06)
(0.05)
Standard Information
0.06
0.01
0.02
0.05
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.06)
(0.05)
Difference:
Public - Standard
0.32***
0.27***
0.22***
0.21***
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.06)
(0.05)
Observations
Control Group Mean

9,304
0.31

9,304
0.15

9,304
1.04

Panel B: Respondent correctly identifies status of other households
Public Information
-0.01
0.01
0.03
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.03)
Standard Information
0.02
0.04***
-0.01
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.04)
Difference:
Public - Standard
-0.02*
-0.03*
0.04
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.04)
Observations
64,540
34,757
4,155
Control Group Mean
0.66
0.32
0.60

9,304
0.47
-0.04
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
-0.08*
(0.04)
4,215
0.63

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of the public information treatments on beliefs about others seeing the
eligibility list and ability to identify others’ beneficiary status. Panel A includes all survey respondents. The outcome varies
from 0 to 3, where 0 corresponds to “have not seen the list” and 3 corresponds to “most have seen the list”; “Do not know”
answers are coded as zero. In Panel B, the respondents include all individuals (regardless of income group). The outcome is
whether the individual correctly identifies other households in their village within each of the categories listed in the
columns. “Do not know” answers are coded as zero. Data are pooled from the first and second follow-up survey. Standard
errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

- 35 -

Table 6A: Effect of Public Information Treatment on Card Receipt and Use

Public Information
Standard Information
Difference:
Public - Standard
Observations
Control Group Mean

Eligible Households
Received
Card
Used Card
(1)
(2)
0.34***
0.18***
(0.02)
(0.02)
0.26***
0.12***
(0.03)
(0.02)

Ineligible Households
Received
Card
Used Card
(3)
(4)
0.02
0.03**
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.04***
0.05***
(0.01)
(0.02)

0.08***
(0.03)

0.06**
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.02)

5,685
0.07

5,685
0.06

3,619
0.05

3,619
0.04

Note: Each column in this table comes from a separate OLS regression of respective outcome on the two treatments,
strata fixed effects, and survey sample dummies, from the first and second follow-up survey. Eligible households
randomized under the bottom ten treatment not to receive cards are dropped from the sample and we re-weight the
treatment groups by sub-district so that the ratio of all three income groups is the same. Standard errors are clustered by
village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

- 36 -

Table 6B: Effect of Public Information Treatment on Rice Purchases and Price

Public Information
Standard Information

Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(1)
0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)

Eligible Households
Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
Price (Rp.)
(2)
(3)
1.69***
-69***
(0.29)
(21)
0.76**
-45**
(0.30)
(21)

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(4)
9,959***
(1,627)
4,672***
(1,679)

Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(5)
-0.07***
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.03)

Ineligible Households
Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
Price (Rp.)
(6)
(7)
0.16
-54**
(0.23)
(27)
-0.00
-15
(0.24)
(27)

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(8)
1,074
(1,245)
73
(1,292)

Public - Standard

0.01
(0.02)

0.93***
(0.36)

-24
(23)

5,287***
(1,996)

-0.03
(0.03)

0.16
(0.27)

-39
(28)

1,001
(1,455)

Observations
Control Group Mean

5,685
0.79

5,684
5.29

4,873
2,276

5,684
28,605

3,619
0.63

3,619
3.46

2,283
2,251

3,619
18,754

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of public information treatment groups on rice purchases, by eligibility status, as compared to the control group. Each column in
this table comes from a separate OLS regression of respective outcome on the two treatments, strata fixed effects, and survey sample dummies. We also provide the difference in
the two card treatments. Eligible households that did not receive a card under the bottom ten treatment are dropped from the sample and we re-weight the treatment groups by subdistrict so that the ratio of all three income groups is the same. For each household, the variables for amount purchased, price and subsidy are averages over the past four months;
the current month is dropped if the interview occurred before the 25th day of the month (as the Raskin rice is distributed after that day). The amount and subsidy are set equal to
zero if the household does not purchase any Raskin rice, whereas the price is calculated among purchasing households. Data are pooled from the first and second follow-up
survey. Standard errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

- 37 -

Table 7: Effect of Printing Price on Cards on Rice Purchases and Price

Cards with Printed Price
Cards without Price
Difference:
Price - No Price
Observations
Control Group Mean

Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(1)
0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)

Eligible Households
Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
Price (Rp.)
(2)
(3)
1.30***
-65***
(0.35)
(25)
0.18
-32
(0.33)
(24)

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(4)
7,773***
(1,976)
1,407
(1,834)

Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(5)
-0.05*
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.03)

Ineligible Households
Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
Price (Rp.)
(6)
(7)
0.03
-26
(0.27)
(31)
0.06
-0
(0.27)
(30)

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(8)
364
(1,455)
196
(1,470)

0.00
(0.02)

1.13***
(0.34)

-33
(26)

6,365***
(1,925)

-0.02
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.24)

-26
(28)

168
(1,319)

5,688
0.79

5,687
5.29

4,877
2,276

5,687
28,605

3,615
0.63

3,615
3.46

2,281
2,251

3,615
18,754

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of belonging to the Price and No Price treatment groups on rice purchases by eligibility status. Each column in this table comes
from a separate OLS regression of respective outcome on the two treatments, strata fixed effects, survey sample dummies, and a dummy for whether the village was also in the
public information treatment. We also provide the difference in the two card treatments. Data are pooled from the first and second follow-up survey. Eligible households that did
not receive a card under the bottom ten treatment are dropped from the sample and we re-weight the treatment groups by sub-district so that the ratio of all three income groups is
the same. For each household, the variables for amount purchased, price and subsidy are averages over the past four months; the current month is dropped if the interview
occurred before the 25th day of the month (as the Raskin rice is distributed after that day). The amount and subsidy are set equal to zero if the household does not purchase any
Raskin rice, whereas the price is calculated among purchasing households. Standard errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

- 38 -

Table 8: Effect of Distributing Cards Only to the Bottom 10 Percent on Rice Purchases and Price
Bottom 10 Households

Cards to Bottom
10
Cards to All
Difference:
Bottom 10 – All
Observations
Control Group
Mean

Bought
in the
Last 2
Months
(1)

Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
(2)

Price
(Rp.)
(3)

0.03
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)

0.75**
(0.34)
0.75*
(0.39)

0.02
(0.02)

Other Eligible Households

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(4)

Bought
in the
Last 2
Months
(5)

Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
(6)

Price
(Rp.)
(7)

-46**
(23)
-44*
(25)

4,536**
(1,907)
4,694**
(2,208)

0.03
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)

0.14
(0.34)
0.80**
(0.34)

0.00
(0.35)

-1
(22)

-158
(1,979)

0.03*
(0.02)

3,683

3,683

3,189

3,683

0.80

5.37

2,280

29,015

Ineligible Households

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(8)

Bought
in the
Last 2
Months
(9)

Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
(10)

Price
(Rp.)
(11)

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(12)

-10
(30)
-56*
(30)

1,049
(1,923)
4,997***
(1,931)

-0.02
(0.03)
-0.06**
(0.03)

0.03
(0.25)
0.03
(0.27)

-15
(28)
-7
(31)

231
(1,374)
248
(1,482)

-0.67**
(0.31)

46*
(26)

-3,948**
(1,765)

0.04
(0.03)

0.00
(0.22)

-8
(25)

-17
(1,219)

2,968

2,967

2,507

2,967

3,619

3,619

2,283

3,619

0.78

5.09

2,263

27,566

0.63

3.45

2,251

18,692

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of belonging to the Bottom Ten and All Cards treatment groups on rice purchases, by eligibility status, as compared to the control
group. Each column in this table comes from a separate OLS regression of respective outcome on the two treatments, strata fixed effects, survey sample dummies, and a dummy for
whether the village was also in the public information treatment. We also provide the difference in the two card treatments. For each household, the variables for amount purchased,
price and subsidy are averages over the past four months; the current month is dropped if the interview occurred before the 25th day of the month (as the Raskin rice is distributed
after that day). The amount and subsidy are set equal to zero if the household does not purchase any Raskin rice, whereas the price is calculated among purchasing households. Data
are pooled from the first and second follow-up survey. Standard errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

- 39 -

Table 9: Effect of Card Treatment on Rice Purchases and Price, By Survey Round
Eligible Households
Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(1)

Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
(2)

Card Treatment

0.03
(0.02)

1.25***
(0.35)

Observations
Control Group Mean

2,225
0.79

2,225
5.76

Card Treatment

-0.01
(0.02)

0.71***
(0.27)

Observations
Control Group Mean

1,778
0.80

1,778
4.98

Card Treatment

-0.01
(0.02)

0.74***
(0.27)

Observations
Control Group Mean

2,944
0.86

P-Value of Difference 1 – 2
P-Value of Difference 1 – 3
P-Value of Difference 2 – 3
P-Value of Joint Equality Test

0.14
0.06
0.92
0.16

Ineligible Households

Amount
Bought in
Purchased
the Last 2
(Kg)
Months
Price (Rp.)
Subsidy (Rp.)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Survey Round 1 (Approximately 2 months)
-23
7,470***
-0.07*
-0.13
(23.17)
(1,974.78)
(0.04)
(0.48)

Price (Rp.)
(7)

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(8)

-16
(37.49)

-683
(2,669.30)

519
2,218.22

897
22,943.87

Panel B: Survey Round 2 (Approximately 8 months)
-88***
4,538***
-0.09***
-0.08
(26.38)
(1,503.03)
(0.03)
(0.17)

-23
(33.75)

-385
(917.57)

1,576
2,299.13

1,756
2.92

1,115
2,294.63

1,756
15,338.40

Panel C: Survey Round 3 (Approximately 18 months)
-45**
4,398***
-0.07**
-0.04
(18.62)
(1,439.84)
(0.03)
(0.24)

-20
(30.41)

-121
(1,201.60)

2,943
6.33

2,764
2,262.55

2,943
32,154.76

1,714
0.68

1,714
4.08

1,196
2,290.81

1,714
20,540.02

0.15
0.13
0.89
0.28

0.03
0.36
0.10
0.10

0.16
0.09
0.92
0.23

0.65
0.95
0.45
0.75

0.93
0.85
0.86
0.97

0.87
0.91
0.94
0.99

0.91
0.81
0.83
0.95

1,801
2,264.17

2,225
32,013.19

1,778
26,197.73

897
0.64

1,756
0.62

897
4.11

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of belonging to the card treatment group on rice purchases and use by eligibility status, separately for each of the survey’s three rounds. Each
column in each panel of this table comes from a separate OLS regression of respective outcome on the treatment, strata fixed effects, and survey sample dummies. We also provide the p-value of the
difference between survey waves. Only households sampled using comparable sampling frames in each survey wave are included in each regression. Eligible households that did not receive a card
under the bottom ten treatment are dropped from the sample and we re-weight the treatment groups by sub-district so that the ratio of all three income groups is the same. For each household, the
variables for amount purchased, price and subsidy are averages over the past four months; the current month is dropped if the interview occurred before the 25th day of the month (as the Raskin rice is
distributed after that day). The amount and subsidy are set equal to zero if the household does not purchase any Raskin rice, whereas the price is calculated among purchasing households. Standard
errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

- 40 -

Table 10: Effect of Distributing Cards with Coupons on Rice Purchases and Price
Eligible Households

Cards with Coupons
Cards without Coupons
Difference:
Coupons – No Coupons
Observations
Control Group Mean

Ineligible Households
Subsidy
(Rp.)
(4)
4,907***
(1,845)
4,594**
(1,996)

Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(5)
-0.07**
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.03)

Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
(6)
-0.22
(0.24)
0.26
(0.30)

Price (Rp.)
(7)
11
(29)
-45
(32)

Subsidy
(Rp.)
(8)
-1,210
(1,288)
1,661
(1,609)

24
(27)

313
(1,840)

-0.06**
(0.03)

-0.48*
(0.25)

56*
(29)

-2,872**
(1,349)

4,881
2,276

5,692
28,605

3,619
0.63

3,619
3.46

2,283
2,251

3,619
18,754

Bought in
the Last 2
Months
(1)
0.03
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)

Amount
Purchased
(Kg)
(2)
0.78**
(0.33)
0.75**
(0.36)

Price (Rp.)
(3)
-39*
(22)
-63**
(28)

0.03*
(0.02)

0.03
(0.33)

5,693
0.79

5,692
5.29

Note: This table provides the reduced form effect of belonging to the Coupon and No Coupon treatment groups on rice purchases by eligibility status. Each column in this table
comes from a separate OLS regression of respective outcome on the two treatments, strata fixed effects, survey sample dummies, and a dummy for whether the village was also in
the public information treatment. Data are pooled from the first and second follow-up survey. Eligible households that did not receive a card under the bottom ten treatment are
dropped from the sample and we re-weight the treatment groups by sub-district so that the ratio of all three income groups is the same. For each household, the variables for
amount purchased, price and subsidy are averages over the past four months; the current month is dropped if the interview occurred before the 25th day of the month (as the Raskin
rice is distributed after that day). The amount and subsidy are set equal to zero if the household does not purchase any Raskin rice, whereas the price is calculated among
purchasing households. Standard errors are clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

- 41 -

Figure 1: Experimental Design

No Cards
Cards to All
Cards to Bottom 10
Total Villages

Total
194
190
188
572

Cards Subtreatments
Information Type
Printed Price
Standard
Public
Yes
No
94
92
186

96
96
192

95
92
187

95
96
191

Coupons
Yes
No
95
94
189

95
94
189

Note: This table lists the total number of villages randomly assigned to each of the treatments.

Figure 2: Raskin Cards

Note: Figure 2A shows Raskin cards with the printed price and no coupons. Figure 2B shows Raskin cards
with the printed price and the coupons. Figure 2C and 2D show the Raskin cards without the price printed,
without and with the coupons respectively.

- 42 -

Figure 3: Project Timeline
Jul

Aug

2012
Sep Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

2013
Feb Mar

Apr

Government Mails Listing to Local Officials
Government Mails Cards
Public Information Treatment Conducted
First Follow-Up
Second Follow-Up
Figure 4: Effects of Changes in Beliefs of the Eligible on Benefit Levels and Complaints

Notes: Each figure plots the proportional change in the outcome variable due to changes in the level of beliefs
(X axis) and tightness of beliefs Δ (Y axis). The outcome
variable is eligible benefits and complaints in the first column, ineligible benefits and complaints in the second column, and the value of being a leader in the third column. To
compute the optimal benefit levels chosen by the leader for given parameter values, we perform a grid search with 2000 values for
∈ 0, and 2000 values for
∈ 0, .
We compute the optimum at increments of 0.2 for both Δ and .

- 43 -

