                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 PATIENT RESPONSES TO INCENTIVES IN CONSUMER-DIRECTED HEALTH PLANS:
                  EVIDENCE FROM PHARMACEUTICALS

                                           Peter J. Huckfeldt
                                           Amelia Haviland
                                            Ateev Mehrotra
                                           Zachary Wagner
                                             Neeraj Sood

                                         Working Paper 20927
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20927


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2015




This study was funded in part by a grant from the National Institute of Aging (NIA) and the NIH Common
Fund for Health Economics (Grant R01-AG043850) and a grant from the California Health Care Foundation.
The authors thank Teague Ruder for programming support and seminar participants at the American
Society of Health Economics biennial meetings, the International Health Economics Association annual
meetings, RAND, the University of Southern California, the University of Minnesota, Vanderbilt University,
Emory University, and McGill University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Peter J. Huckfeldt, Amelia Haviland, Ateev Mehrotra, Zachary Wagner, and Neeraj Sood.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Patient Responses to Incentives in Consumer-directed Health Plans: Evidence from Pharmaceuticals
Peter J. Huckfeldt, Amelia Haviland, Ateev Mehrotra, Zachary Wagner, and Neeraj Sood
NBER Working Paper No. 20927
February 2015
JEL No. I1,I13

                                             ABSTRACT

Prior studies suggest that consumer-directed health plans (CDHPs) -characterized by high deductibles
and health care accounts- reduce health costs, but there is concern that enrollees indiscriminately reduce
use of low-value services (e.g., unnecessary emergency department use) and high-value services (e.g.,
preventive care). We investigate how CDHP enrollees change use of pharmaceuticals for chronic diseases.
We compare two large firms where nearly all employees were switched to CDHPs to firms with conventional
health insurance plans. In the first firm’s CDHP, pharmaceuticals were subject to the deductible, while
in the second firm pharmaceuticals were exempt. Employees in the first firm shifted the timing of
drug purchases to periods with lower cost sharing and were more likely to use lower-cost drugs, but
the largest effect of the CDHP was to reduce utilization. Employees in the second firm also reduced
utilization, but did not shift the timing or use of low cost drugs.


Peter J. Huckfeldt                                  Zachary Wagner
Division of Health Policy and Management            University of California Berkeley
School of Public Health                             zwagner@berkeley.edu
University of Minnesota
420 Delaware Street Southeast Mmc88                 Neeraj Sood
Minneapolis, MN 55455                               Schaeffer Center for Health Policy
huckfeld@umn.edu                                     and Economics
                                                    3335 S. Figueroa Street, Unit A
Amelia Haviland                                     Los Angeles, CA 90089-7273
Carnegie Mellon University                          and NBER
Pittsburgh, PA                                      nsood@healthpolicy.usc.edu
amelia@andrew.cmu.edu

Ateev Mehrotra
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Ave. Boston, MA 02115
mehrotra@rand.org
1. Introduction

        It remains unclear what has driven the recent drop in the growth rate of health care costs.

One proposed explanation is increased cost sharing for workers with employer sponsored health

plans (Cutler and Sahni 2013; Haviland et al. 2012). The percentage of workers with health

insurance coverage enrolled in Consumer-Directed Health Plans (CDHPs), defined here by an

annual single deductible of $1,000 or more and a tax-advantaged personal medical account, has

increased from 4 percent in 2006 to 20 percent in 2013 (KFF and HRET 2013)1. The intent of

CDHPs is to make consumers more conscious of the price and quality of services and thereby

use fewer “lower value” services (e.g., unnecessary emergency department visits), but have no

impact or increase use of “higher value” services (e.g. preventive care or prescription drug use

for chronic illnesses).

        Prior research finds, with some exceptions, reductions in total costs in the years after

initial enrollment in CDHPs or high deductible plans (e.g., Buntin et al. (2011), Lo Sasso et al

(2010)). However, there is more disagreement on whether such reductions represent the intended

response: price shopping for high value care and selective reduction of low-value care versus

indiscriminate reductions in all health care. Bundorf (2012) comprehensively reviews the

literature on CDHPs and high deductible plans and finds that utilization reductions are focused

primarily in outpatient spending and pharmaceutical care (e.g., Lo Sasso et al. (2010), Parente,

Feldman, and Chen (2008)). It is unclear, however, whether reductions in outpatient and drug

spending are driven by reductions in needed or unnecessary care. The literature finds mixed

evidence on use of preventive services exempt from the deductible (for example, Buntin et al.

(2011) and Charlton et al. (2011) find reductions, while Wharam et al. (2008) do not). Recent
1
  IRS regulations setting the minimum deductible eligible for tax-advantaged personal medical account
contributions has increased over time; it was $1,000 for a single/ $2,000 for a family in 2004 and
increased to $1,250/$2,500 by 2013.

                                                  2
research on prescription drugs finds evidence of reduced adherence among enrollees with

chronic diseases after a firm adopts a CDHP, but does not consider the full range of enrollee

responses such as generic use and shifting the timing of purchase (Fronstin, Sepulveda, and

Robebuck 2013).

         We build on this prior literature by investigating how CDHPs influence the use of

prescription drugs for chronic diseases. Pharmaceuticals provide a useful context for testing

responses to CDHPs because they are used frequently, whether a drug is “generic” provides a

clear signal of cost (often absent for other health care services), and finally, pharmaceutical costs

are both non-trivial but also do not immediately surpass the deductible. As a result, beneficiaries

using pharmaceutical therapies for a chronic condition will repeatedly face higher out-of-pocket

prices, providing greater opportunity to gain familiarity with benefit structure and change

behavior. In addition, adherence to drugs treating chronic illnesses is a critical public health

issue.

         The first contribution of this paper to the literature is using an identification strategy that

plausibly estimates the causal impact of CDHP adoption. One challenge in estimating the effects

of CDHP enrollment on prescription drug use is that employees who elect to enroll in a CDHP

may differ from other employees in observed and unobserved characteristics that may also

influence health care utilization. We exploit a natural experiment and compare three groups: (1)

employees in a large firm that shifted all health coverage to CDHPs in 2005 and where

pharmaceuticals were subject to the deductible (i.e., beneficiaries paid the total cost of

pharmaceuticals up through the deductible); (2) employees in another large firm that shifted all

health coverage to CDHPs in 2005, but where pharmaceuticals were exempt from the deductible

and thus beneficiaries just paid standard copayment rates; and (3) employees in 19 other large



                                                    3
firms that only offered traditional plans throughout the study period. The inclusion of the second

firm with a pharmaceutical exemption allows us to investigate whether employees change

utilization of pharmaceuticals even without a change in pharmaceutical cost structure. Such a

change might be driven by misunderstanding of benefit structure or increased cost sharing for

physician visits. Because the CDHP firms shifted virtually all employees to CDHPs, we are able

to mitigate selection bias from take-up. In addition, because we compare enrollees before and

after the shift to CDHPs, we can control for all time-invariant beneficiary characteristics (at the

firm level) that may influence health care utilization.

       The second contribution of this paper is to examine a comprehensive set of potential

responses to the incentives present in CDHPs, to understand whether enrollees demonstrate

forward-looking behavior versus responses with potentially adverse health impacts. An intended

and forward-looking response to CDHP benefit structure could include switching to drugs that

are cheaper but equally effective; a key example of this could include shifting to generic drugs.

Shifting to a less effective generic drug, however, could have adverse long-term impacts. We

compare responses among health plan enrollees using drug classes treating high cholesterol,

hypertension, and diabetes, where the relative efficacy of generic or low cost alternatives varies

across condition categories. An unintended but forward-looking response may be to shift the

timing of drug purchase to the periods with low cost sharing. Specifically, consumers could stock

up on drugs prior to the switch to the CDHP or upon reaching the deductible. We investigate

each of these timing responses. An additional unintended and non-forward looking response

with potentially adverse health impacts is reducing medication adherence, which may reduce

current out-of-pocket spending, but increase later health care costs from complications of chronic

diseases.



                                                 4
       The third contribution of this paper is to quantify the relative magnitudes of each

behavioral response. Specifically, we compare total and out-of-pocket spending on prescription

drugs with CDHP cost sharing and post-CDHP observed behavior relative to CDHP cost sharing

and pre-CDHP behavior (i.e., no behavior change) along each response margin: reduced drug

utilization, the timing of drug purchases, and use of generic or lower-cost drugs.

       Overall, we find evidence that employees in the CDHP with pharmaceuticals subject to

the deductible use more low cost drugs and shift the timing of drug purchases to periods with

lower cost sharing. The majority of the response, however, is to reduce overall drug utilization.

These results imply that enrollees possess some awareness of benefit design and availability of

low cost drugs, but also suggest that enrollees either discount or are not cognizant of the adverse

consequences of poor adherence. Employees in the CDHP with pharmaceuticals exempt from the

deductible also exhibit decreased utilization relative to firms with conventional coverage. The

presence of a utilization response may suggest a lack of understanding of plan design or reflect

secondary effects where increased cost sharing leads to fewer physician visits where drugs are

prescribed. The persistence of the response into the second year of the plan (presumably a

sufficient time period for enrollees to understand plan design) may suggest this response is due

to cost sharing for physician visits.

       The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the firms and health plans in the

study and potential behavioral responses to CDHP incentives. In Sections 3 and 4, we describe

our empirical approach and data. Section 5 describes results, and Section 6 concludes.




                                                5
2. Study framework

2.1. Firms and health plans in study

       We examine the prescription drug utilization of employees in 2 treatment firms and 19

control firms, where the firms were chosen for the types of health plans offered over the sample

period. Health plan characteristics over the sample period are displayed in Table 1.

CDHP firm 1: prescription drugs subject to the deductible

       The first treatment firm, “CDHP firm 1” in the first panel of Table 1, offered a PPO plan

in 2004 in which prescription drugs copayments fell into three tiers ($10 for generic drugs, $20

for brand drugs on the formulary, and $35 for non-formulary brand drugs, in each case for a 30-

day supply) and none of the employees were enrolled in a CDHP (defined by a high deductible

and health care account). In 2005, nearly all employees shifted to a CDHP with a single

deductible of $1,000, a family deductible of $2,000, and employer-provided health

reimbursement accounts (HRAs), in which employees received $500 (for single policy holders)

or $1,000 (for families) tax-free each year to defray out-of-pocket health costs. Unspent funds in

HRAs rollover across years, but enrollees lose the funds if they leave the employer. Prescription

drugs were subject to the deductible (i.e., require 100 percent cost sharing before reaching the

deductible) and required 20 percent coinsurance upon reaching the deductible. The percentage of

employees enrolled in a high deductible plan (defined in this time period as a deductible of at

least $1,000) fell to 73 percent in 2006, but the remainder enrolled in a plan with moderately

high deductibles of $750 for singles and $1,500 for families (and we keep them in the sample).

CDHP firm 2: prescription drugs exempt from the deductible

       The second treatment firm, displayed in the second panel of Table 1, also used tiered

copayments for pharmaceuticals in 2004 and only three percent of employees were enrolled in a



                                                6
high deductible health plan and held a health reimbursement account. Starting in 2005, nearly all

employees switched to high deductible plans usually paired with health reimbursement accounts,

with a small percentage enrolling in health savings accounts (HSAs) (similar to HRAs but

portable across employers). Employees chose between plans with a deductible of $1,000/$2,000,

$1,200/$2,400, or $1,500/$3,000 for single policyholders/families. In addition, the employer

provided $400 for single policyholders or $1,200 for families in a HRA. In contrast to the first

firm, drugs were exempt from the deductible and employees continued to pay the same tiered

copayments after the CDHP was implemented in 2005. Plan parameters were similar in 2006,

although the tiered drug copayments were slightly higher in nominal terms.

Firms with traditional health plans never offering CDHPs

        We selected 19 large firms that only offered traditional health plans during the 2004-2006

plan years to serve as comparison firms; the data and selection process are described in more

detail in Section 5. The third panel of Table 1 summarizes the plan structure for the comparison

firms. Most of the firms used copayments for prescriptions drugs (rather than coinsurance);

among such firms, median copayments for a 30-day supply indicate a tiered copayment structure

with overall levels of cost sharing below that in the CDHP firms in the pre-period. By

construction, virtually none of the health plans in the control firms included high deductibles

(>$1,000 for single policyholders) or personal medical accounts2.

2.2. Potential responses to CDHP enrollment, by drug class

        We examine three margins by which new enrollees in CDHPs may change utilization of

health care. First, enrollees may shift the timing of health care utilization to periods of lower cost

sharing. One example is the period immediately prior to the switch from typical coverage with
2
 Among enrollees in the control firms, 23 individuals had a high deductible plan (6 in 2005 and 17 in
2006) and 38 had a health savings account (without a high deductible plan) in 2006. These cases are rare
and anomalous, so we kept these firms and did not drop the enrollees from the sample.

                                                   7
no or a low deductible to a CDHP. Another period is after the enrollee reaches the yearly

deductible (if they do so). Specifically, if there is uncertainty about reaching the deductible in the

next year, enrollees may reduce total out-of-pocket spending by “stocking up” on health care

after reaching the deductible. Second, new enrollees may respond to CDHP incentives by

reducing their use of drugs. Third, enrollees may switch to cheaper drugs, such as generic drugs

or lower cost drug classes.

       We examine changes in utilization of prescription drugs, focusing on classes providing

prevention of disease and disease complications among patients with three conditions: (1) high

cholesterol, (2) hypertension, and (3) type 2 diabetes. The full list of drugs is given in Appendix

Table A.10. There are a number of advantages for considering utilization of drugs used for long-

term chronic conditions to identify enrollee responses to CDHP incentives. Because enrollees fill

their prescriptions repeatedly, there is an opportunity to learn the incentive structure of CDHPs

through repeated encounters with the plan design. Pharmaceuticals also contain clear cost signals

through brand name versus generic status, facilitating price shopping. Pharmaceuticals can be

considered a “durable” good in the medium term, in that consumers are able to purchase drugs a

number of months prior to taking them. Finally, we included drugs in the sample that have been

found cost-effective based on conventional thresholds, supporting the assertion that

discontinuation of therapy is suboptimal behavior. The relationship between cost and quality

across specific drugs within a health condition category, however, differs across the three

categories, as we describe below. We use these differences to contrast drug classes where

generic or low cost drugs are more or less effective relative to brand name or higher cost drugs.




                                                  8
Statins

           Statins are cholesterol-lowering drugs that have been shown to be a cost-effective means

of preventing cardiovascular disease for patients with a range of cardiovascular risk factors

(Ward et al. 2007). During the first years of our sample period (2004 and 2005), the only generic

statin available was lovastatin. Lovastatin is less effective than other statins, especially compared

to simvastatin and atorvastatin (Lipitor) (Jones et al. 1998). In 2006, generic simvastatin became

available and studying the take-up of generic simvastatin among CDHP members provides an

additional natural experiment.

           In the analysis of statin utilization, we examine responses to CDHP incentives in the

timing of statin purchases (timing margin), overall statin use (utilization margin), and the use of

generic versus brand name statins (low cost drug margin). Because there is a positive

relationship between cost and quality (i.e., brand name statins were better quality than generic

statins, particularly in 2005), we may expect less of a response along the low cost drug margin

for statins compared to the other drug categories for employees in CDHP firm 1 (where

prescription drugs are subject to the deductible).

Antihypertensive drugs

           In this drug category, we focus on two drug classes. Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme

(ACE) inhibitors and Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers (ARBs) were recommended second-line

drugs during the study period treating hypertension when first-line drugs alone are ineffective

(which is often the case) (Chobanian et al. 2003) 3. ARBs are a newer drug class that were on

patent during the sample period and thus were significantly more expensive than ACE inhibitors

which were mostly generic during the sample period; however, ACE inhibitors have been shown



3
    In the latest guidelines these drugs are first line.

                                                           9
equally effective as ARBs4 (Matchar et al. 2008). We investigate responses to CDHP incentives

in the timing of antihypertensive purchase (timing margin), overall use of antihypertensive drugs

(utilization margin), and the use of ACE inhibitors relative to ARBs (low cost drug margin). In

contrast to statins, there is no relationship between cost and quality between ARBs and ACE

inhibitors as they are equally effective. As a result, we may expect to see a larger response for

antihypertensive drugs along the low cost drug margin compared to statins.

Drugs for type 2 diabetes

        We investigate three types of drugs that improve blood sugar control for patients with

type 2 diabetes: sulfonylureas, biguanides (metformin), and thiazolidinediones (also known as

glitazones). Sulfonylureas and metformin are commonly used first-line pharmaceutical

treatments, have been shown to be cost-effective (e.g., Clark et al. (2001)) and were off patent

and inexpensive during the sample period. In contrast, glitazones were patented and more

expensive and have no clear benefit over sulfonylureas and metformin as an additional agent or

taken independently (Bolen et al. 2007). Moreover, prior to the sample period, glitazone use was

linked to increased risk of heart failure (Delea et al. 2003) and later rosiglitazone was found to be

associated with a higher risk of other adverse cardiovascular outcomes (Nissen and Wolski

2007). Therefore, in contrast to statins and anti-hypertensive drugs, we expect greater a response

along the low cost drug margin relative to antihypertensives and statins because (1) use of

metformin and sulfonylureas alone is similarly effective as when paired with glitazones (or

taking glitazones alone), and (2) the more expensive glitazones have a higher risk of

cardiovascular complications.

        In the analysis of type 2 diabetes drugs, we investigate responses to CDHP incentives in


4
 The only clear indication for ARBs is in the ~10 percent of patients who take ACE inhibitors and
develop a cough.

                                                   10
shifts in the timing of purchase (the timing margin), the overall use of type 2 diabetes drugs

(utilization margin), and use of metformin and sulfonylureas alone versus use of glitazones (low

cost drug margin).

Potential responses in CDHP firm 2 (pharmaceuticals exempt from the deductible)

       Employees in CDHP firm 2, where pharmaceuticals are exempt from the deductible, face

no change in prescription drug cost sharing, which by itself could imply little effect of CDHP

adoption on prescription drug use. CDHP firm 2 employees do pay higher out-of-pocket costs for

other services, however, including physician visits. If employees reduce physician visits, they

may be less likely to obtain prescriptions or receive counseling from physicians to adhere to

medications and thus reduce utilization. Alternatively, if employees in CDHP firm 2 do not

understand the structure of benefit design, they may behave as though prescription drugs were

subject to the deductible. While it is difficult to distinguish between these two types of

responses, the misunderstanding of benefit design may diminish over time, while reductions in

access through higher cost sharing for physician visits may persist. In addition, we may expect to

see stronger responses along the utilization or timing margins relative to the low cost drug

margin if responses are driven by higher cost sharing for physician visits.



3. Empirical approach

       In this section, we describe our research design, our approach for performing inference,

and finally we describe a decomposition exercise that calculates the relative magnitudes of

different response margins.




                                                 11
3.1. Research design

       A key challenge in estimating the effects of CDHPs is that enrollment is not randomly

assigned. As a result, individuals that elect to enroll in CDHPs may differ from traditional plan

enrollees in observable and unobserved ways. We exploit a unique natural experiment of two

large firms shifting nearly all employees to CDHPs in 2005. We employ a differences-in-

differences approach, comparing changes in outcomes from 2004 to 2005 and 2006 among

employees in the firms shifting to CDHPs relative to employees in 19 firms not adopting

CDHPs. We focus on employees and dependents using one of the drugs in the three categories

described above in 2004 that were continuously enrolled in health plans in 2004 and 2005 for the

one-year sample or 2004 through 2006 for the second-year sample. Because we examine a

constant cohort of enrollees, we estimate regressions at the firm-month level, estimating an

initial regression specification such as that in equation (1),

       !!" ! !!!! ! !! ! ! !"#$ !"#$!""!! !!"#$! ! !!"                        (1)

where y is the average outcome for firm f and month t, α is a constant, δf (where f=1, 2,…,20) is

a vector of firm fixed effects, βt (where t=1,2,.., T) are year-month fixed effects, and

!!"#!""!! !!"#$! is an indicator variable for being a CDHP firm times an indicator variable

for the year 2005. ! !"#$ is the coefficient of interest and expresses the relative change in

outcome in the CDHP firm post CDHP implementation relative to the change in outcome in

firms only offering traditional plans. Equation (1) controls for general time trends (using the

year-month fixed effects) and time-invariant firm characteristics (using the vector of firm fixed

effects). We estimate equation (1) separately for CDHP firm 1 (where prescription drugs are

subject to the deductible) and CDHP firm 2 (where prescription drugs are exempt from the

deductible). For the two year sample, we estimate alternate versions of equation (1) that include


                                                  12
an additional interaction term !!"#!""!! !!"#$! to identify second year effects of the CDHP.

We estimate an additional specification including bimonthly interactions to trace the dynamic

effects of CDHP implementation over the course from the anticipation effects prior to the CDHP

through the end of the first year of the CDHP.

       Our identifying assumption is that the comparison firms exhibit the counterfactual

utilization trend of each CDHP firm in the absence of CDHP adoption. We test this assumption

by comparing the utilization trends of the CDHP firm and comparison firms prior to CDHP

adoption.

3.2. Inference

       Because the source of variation is at the firm level and we are separately investigating the

two firms implementing CDHPs, each estimation is effectively a case study because there is only

one treated unit for each analysis. Conventional approaches to inference, for example using

cluster-robust standard errors, assume a larger number of treated units, and thus are likely to

provide incorrect standard errors (Conley and Taber 2011). Instead, we perform inference using

a permutation test, for example, as applied recently by Buchmueller et al. (2011). We perform

the following process separately for each CDHP firm. First, we estimate the main specification

with the CDHP firm assigned the “treatment” in equation (1). Next, we estimate equation (1) 19

more times, sequentially assigning each control firm “treatment” status and assigning the CDHP

firm “control” status. We then rank ! !"#$ relative to the 19 placebo θs and reject the null

hypothesis if the ranking is extreme. We use one-sided hypothesis tests in order to identify which

“tail” leads to rejection of the null hypothesis. For example, equation (2) displays the null

hypothesis for use of generic drugs after CDHP implementation.

!! !!! !"#$ ! !                       (2)


                                                 13
Thus, we would reject the null hypothesis for large values of !! !"#$ , which would be expressed

as a high ranking (e.g., 1 out of 20). The implied p-value is the distance of the ranking of !! !"#$

from the most extreme ranking opposite the null hypothesis, multiplied by 0.05. For example, in

the generic drug use example, if the estimate of !! !"#$ is ranked 1 out of 20 relative to the

placebo θs, then the p-value would be 0.05, if 2 out of 20 then the p-value is 0.10, and so on. We

interpret the most extreme ranking as being statistically significant and the second most extreme

ranking as being borderline statistically significant.

3.3. Decomposition exercise

       The inferences about equation 1 parameters indicate the presence of different types of

enrollee responses to CDHP incentives. They do not, however, indicate the relative magnitudes

of these responses. We perform a post-estimation decomposition exercise that calculates the

relative magnitudes of responses for CDHP firm 1 (prescription drugs exempt from the

deductible) in 2005. Specifically, we separately examine the reductions in out-of-pocket and total

expenditures generated by enrollees’ responses to CDHP incentives, relative to what out-of-

pocket and total expenditures would be with no change in behavior from 2004 but subject to

2005 CDHP cost sharing. Absent a change in behavior, out-of-pocket expenses would be higher

in 2005 as enrollees faced higher cost sharing in 2005. In contrast, total expenditures could

increase or decrease depending on changes in discounts or negotiated prices from 2004 to 2005.

From this benchmark, we consider out-of-pocket and total savings each month associated with

each estimated behavioral response: (1) shifting of purchase to periods with low cost sharing, (2)

changes in overall drug use, (3) use of generics or low cost drugs (depending on the drug

category)




                                                  14
       We consider two time periods: t=0 is the time period prior to CDHP in 2004 and t=1 is

the time period after CDHP implementation in 2005. Average monthly expenditures in 2005 are

indicated in equation 3,

!! ! ! ! !! !! !!! !!! ! ! !! !! !!! !!! ! ! ! !! !! ! !! !!!! !!! ! ! !! !! ! !! !!!! !!!    (3)

where ! ! indicates monthly out-of-pocket or total expenditures in time period t, !! indicates the

fraction of day supply that is generic in time period t, !!! indicates the out-of-pocket or total

price for generics per day supply in time period t, !!! indicates the out-of-pocket or total price

for branded drugs per day supply in time period t, !! represents the fraction of day supply when

t=1 that comes from stocking drugs from time t=0, and Q t represents the average monthly days

used in time period t.

       The first term in equation 3 indicates expenditures per month for generic drugs purchased

in period t=1, the second term indicates expenditures per month for generic drugs purchased in

period t=0 but used in period t=1, the third term indicates expenditures per month for branded

drugs purchased in period t=1, and the fourth term indicates expenditures per month for generic

drugs purchased in period t=0 but used in period t=1.

Changes in out-of-pocket and total expenditures from timing of purchase

       First, we examine out-of-pocket or total expenditures in 2005 with observed “stocking”

behavior relative to expenditures without stocking behavior. Equation 4 displays the change in

expenditures from stocking behavior.

!! ! ! !!! ! ! !! ! !! ! ! !! ! !! !!! ! !!! !!!! !! ! !! ! ! !!! ! !!! !! !!! !!             (4)

Savings will increase (or be more negative) with: the fraction of days stocked from the pre-

CDHP period (s1), a larger increase in out-of-pocket spending for branded drugs between period

0 and period 1, a larger difference in out-of-pocket spending for generic drugs between periods 0


                                                  15
and 1, and a larger monthly days used in period 1. In order to calculate equation (4), we again

compute prices and utilization information using drug claims from the CDHP firm with

prescription drugs subject to the deductible from 2005. We calculate s1 using the difference in

estimated regression coefficients from equation (1) between when the outcome is “days supply

purchased” and “days used”, as in equation (5):

       !! ! !!!!!!!"#$%!"# ! !!"#$%&'(!!"#$ !!!"                (5)

Each coefficient estimate gives the effect of the CDHP on days supply purchased or days used

per month relative to the pre-CDHP period; the difference indicates the amount stocked times

two5, which we divide by 30 to convert to a monthly proportion.

Changes in total and out-of-pocket expenditures from days used

       We compute changes in expenditure from changes in overall utilization, holding generic

use and stocking behavior to period t=1 levels, as in equation (6).

!! ! ! !!! ! ! !! ! !! ! ! !! !

      ! !!!! ! ! !! !! !!! ! !! !! !!!! ! ! ! !! ! ! !! !!! ! !! ! ! !! !!! !             (6)

In this case, savings are accrued when out-of-pocket prices for generic or brand name drugs are

higher in t=0 or t=1. To compute equation (6), we obtain ∆Q using the estimate of θDaysUsed from

equation (1) and s1 as described above; again, the other parameters are from the claims data for

the main treatment firm in 2004 and 2005.




5
 Suppose CDHP enrollees stock s days supply in the period prior to CDHP enrollment. Then the amount
used is, DaysUsed(t=1)=DaysPurchased(t=1)+DaysStocked(t=0). In addition,
DaysUsed(t=0)=DaysPurchased(t=0)-DaysStocked(t=0).
Thus, DaysUsed(t=1)-DaysUsed(t=0)=DaysPurchased(t=1)-DaysPurchased(t=0)+2s. In other words, the
difference in the DaysPurchased and DaysUsed coefficients is twice the day supply stocked.


                                                  16
Changes in out-of-pocket and total expenditures from increased use of generics

       Finally, equation 7 calculates the change in out-of-pocket or total expenditures from

changes in generic (or low cost drug) use holding decisions about stocking (!! ) and day supply

(Q) constant at the value observed in time period t=1. Negative numbers indicate greater savings.

!! ! ! !!! ! ! !! ! !! ! ! !! !

       =!!! ! ! !! !!!! !!! ! !! !!! !!! ! ! ! !! !!! !! ! !! !!! !!! !                     (7)

Savings are related to positive changes in generic or low cost drug use and with higher prices for

branded drugs relative to generic prices. Reductions are smaller with higher prices for generic

drugs. In order to calculate equation (7), we obtain prices, the generic fraction, and days used per

month using claims data for CDHP firm 1. The change in generic drug use is from the estimated

regression coefficient from equation (1) when the outcome is generic or low cost drug use.



4. Data

4.1. Data sources and sample

       The data for the study include 100 percent of pharmaceutical claims and insurance

enrollment information from 2004-2006 for employees (and dependents) of two firms that

shifted virtually all employees to a CDHP in 2005 and 19 other firms that did not offer CDHPs

during the 2004-2006 health plan years. These firms were drawn from a 63-firm panel

constructed for an earlier study. Of these 63 firms, 35 offered a CDHP between 2003 and 2007

and the remaining 28 were chosen from the Truven Health MarketScan Research Database to

match the geographic location, firm size, and industry characteristics of a larger set of employers

offering CDHPs or high deductible health plans between 2003 and 2007; this process is

described in more detail in Buntin et al. (2011). We selected the two CDHP firms from the 35


                                                 17
CDHP offering firms specifically because they shifted virtually all employees to a CDHP in

2004 (relative to other firms where CDHP enrollment was optional). We excluded 9 of the 28

matched control firms because they either offered a CDHP or high deductible plan during the

sample period, or in one case because of missing pharmaceutical claims data.

        Our base sample includes employees or dependents in the 21 firms that used a statin,

antihypertensive, or diabetes drug in the first nine months of 2004 and were enrolled in health

coverage through the same employer for 12 months in 2005 for the sample measuring one-year

effects or in both 2005 and 2006 for the sample measuring two-year effects. (We use the first

nine- months of 2004 to measure pre-CDHP use, because CDHP anticipation effects may occur

in the quarter prior to CDHP adoption.) Because we focus on health plan enrollees already using

chronic drugs in 2004, we do not look at initiation of drug therapies and any reduction in

utilization can be interpreted as reduced adherence or discontinuation of therapy.

        Table 2 displays changes in sample size for the base cohort and the sample size (and

retention relative to the base cohort) as enrollment restrictions are imposed. Column 1 shows the

base sample that counts the number of individuals with a drug claim in January through

September 2004. Adding the restriction of 12 months of enrollment in 2005 (i.e., the first year

sample), the retention rate relative to the base sample is 58 to 62 percent (across drug samples) in

CDHP firm 1, 67 to 69 percent in CDHP firm 2, and 75 to 77 percent in the firms with traditional

plans, implying higher turnover in CDHP firm 1. Once requiring 12 months of enrollment in

2005 and 2006 (the sample for the two-year effects), the retention rate falls to 46 to 50 percent

for CDHP firm 1, 43 to 45 percent for CDHP firm 2, and 63 to 66 percent for firms with

traditional plans.




                                                 18
       If the higher attrition in CDHP firms 1 and 2 is in response to the mandatory shifting to

the CDHP (for example, employees shift to their spouses’ employer plans), the remaining sample

may differ and exhibit differential responses than those that left the sample. We explore the

extent to which attrition may be in response to CDHP adoption in the results section. First, we

test for differential characteristics between attritting enrollees and those continuously enrolled.

Next, we examine attrition in CDHP firms 1 and 2 for other years to examine whether these

firms exhibit higher turnover independently from CDHP adoption (for example, CDHP firm 1 is

in the retail sector, and thus may exhibit higher turnover). Finally, we re-estimate the main

analysis with a sample of enrollees using drugs later in 2004 and less likely to leave the sample

in 2005.

4.2. Study measures

       The four main study measures are constructed at the enrollee by month level for each

drug category: (1) days supply purchased, (2) total drug spending, (3) drug out-of-pocket

spending, and (4) fraction of days supply purchased that are generic or low cost drugs. First, we

examine changes in days supply, spending, and low cost percentage by month of purchase. As

described above, CDHP enrollees may “stock” drugs, purchasing drugs during periods of low

cost sharing but then actually using the drugs later when cost sharing is higher. Not accounting

for the difference between the timing of purchase and use may lead to biased estimated effects of

CDHPs. For example, if patients stock up on drugs the month before CDHP implementation and

then do not purchase drugs the first months after CDHP implementation, it may inaccurately

appear that adherence has fallen. Reflecting this, we construct adjusted versions of the study

measures that are based on an approximated month of use rather than the month of purchase. To

approximate a month of use, we perform the following procedure.



                                                 19
       For each enrollee and month, we construct a “stock” of days supply and a “flow” of new

days supply (separately for each drug category), where the “stock” includes days supply for a

particular drug category that carried over from the prior month and the “flow” are new drugs

purchased. If the stock and flow of days supply surpass 30 when summed, we assume that an

enrollee will first take the stock drugs before using the new flow drugs. Any amount of days

supply surpassing 30 will carry over to the next month as stock. Associated with the stock is a

total price, an out-of-pocket price, and a generic (or low cost) fraction that are weighted averages

of prices and generic status of the remaining stock and flow from the prior month. For example,

if an enrollee purchased a 40-day supply in month t of a generic statin and a 20-day supply in

month t+1 of a brand name statin, the adjusted days supply would be 30-days for each month,

and the generic fraction would be 100 percent in month t and 33 percent in month t+1. An

assumption implicit in this method is that enrollees will take all of the supply that they

purchased, which likely overstates adherence.

       An additional complicating factor is that individuals with type 2 diabetes often take more

than one drug in the included classes. In order to distinguish between individuals prescribed two

30-day supplies within a drug category from stocking behavior or switching drugs, we identify

individuals as requiring 60-days supply per month if we observe two unique drug products

obtained within a month across two months in 2004. Then, we use a similar rule to create

adjusted measures of days supply used per month as above, except that we only consider

stocking if an individual obtained more than 60-days supply in one month.

4.3. Description of sample

       Table 3 describes the firms, health plan enrollees, and drug utilization in our sample. The

first panel displays characteristics of the beneficiaries in our sample in 2004 (i.e. using the drugs



                                                 20
in the three categories described above) by treatment category. Notable differences across firms

include that CDHP firm 1 enrollees are more likely to be from zip codes with more black

residents and CDHP firm 1 and CDHP firm 2 enrollees are more likely to be female than the

control firms. In sensitivity analyses in the results section, we explore the influence of these

differences on the results by re-estimating the main analysis with a reweighting of the control

firms to resemble CDHP firms 1 and 2 (separately).

       The second panel displays characteristics of monthly pharmaceutical utilization across

firms in 2004. Average days supply is significantly below 30 for each drug category and firm

category, implying that patients are non-adherent at baseline. Average monthly spending is

similar across treatment and control firms, but the CDHP firms exhibit higher out-of-pocket

spending in the pre-period, which is consistent with the CDHP firms setting higher copayment

tiers than the control firms in Table 1.



5. Results


5.1. Descriptive results

       Figure 1 plots actual out-of-pocket expenditures per day supply over the sample period

for CDHP firms 1 (solid line) and 2 (dotted line) and the control firms (dashed line) for the

sample of enrollees using drugs in January through September 2004 and enrolled in plans for 12

months in both 2005 and 2006, separately by drug category. Panel (a) plots out-of-pocket

expenditures for statins and shows that trends and levels are roughly similar across the three

treatment groups in the pre-period. Out-of-pocket expenditures per day supply spike for CDHP

firm 1 with the CDHP implementation in January 2005 before gradually falling over the course

of the year as enrollees reached the deductible and spike again at the beginning of the 2006.


                                                 21
Some of the out-of-pocket expenditures early in the year are likely paid by health reimbursement

accounts. In contrast, out-of-pocket expenditures for CDHP firm 2 and the comparison firms

with traditional health plans stay approximately constant over the entire sample period. Panels

(b) and (c) show similar patterns for antihypertensive and diabetes drugs, although the spikes for

CDHP firm 1 are less pronounced, reflecting the greater availability of generics for these classes

during the sample period.

       Figure 2 displays days supply purchased in each month over the sample period for each

treatment group by drug category. The results are generally consistent across drug categories: the

solid line, representing CDHP firm 1, implies a large increase in purchases in the months prior to

CDHP adoption in January 2005 followed by a large reduction in purchases in the months

following adoption in early 2005, with a similar if somewhat attenuated pattern at the end of

2005 going into 2006. CDHP firm 2 exhibits the same pattern as CDHP firm 1 but with smaller

magnitude at the end and beginning of each year. In contrast, days purchased are relatively

smooth for the comparison firms. In addition, the overall level of purchases falls for CDHP firm

1 relative to CDHP firm 2 and the comparison firms. Comparing Figures 1 and 2 suggests that

enrollees in CDHP firm 1 respond to cost sharing incentives by stocking up on drugs in the

months prior to CDHP implementation and at the end of the plan year in 2005, and by reducing

overall utilization. Notably, CDHP firm 1 enrollees reduce purchase of drugs early in 2005 when

medical expenses could be defrayed by a full HRA (HRA balances per month shown in

Appendix Figure A.1); this may suggest that enrollees consider HRA funds as income rather than

health coverage. Appendix Figure A.2 shows an increase in days supply purchased in the month

when CDHP firm 1 enrollees reach the deductible.




                                                22
        Figure 3 plots estimated days used per month for CDHP firms 1 and 2 and firms with

conventional plans and shows relative reductions in use for CDHP firm 1 even when smoothing

stocking of drugs over the year for each drug category.

        Figure 4 plots the percentage of days supply used each month that are a lower price drug

(generic statins for statins in panel (a), ACE inhibitors for antihypertensives in panel (b), and

sulfonylureas and metformin for diabetes in panel (c)). Panel (a) shows similar trends across

treatment groups in use of lovastatin, the only generic statin, from 2004 to 2005; however, when

generic simvastatin becomes available in mid-2006, CDHP firm 1 enrollees are quicker and more

likely to adopt generic drugs relative to CDHP firm 2 enrollees or firms with conventional plans.

In panel (b), CDHP firm 1 employees are more likely to continue to use of ACE inhibitors than

comparison firms and in panel (c) the proportion of days used that is sulfonylureas and

metformin-only therapies increases, while low price drug utilization remains relatively constant

for CDHP firm 2 and the comparison firms.

        The descriptive evidence suggests that enrollees in CDHP firm 1, where prescriptions

were subject to the deductible, respond to incentives along all three margins: by switching to

generics or low class drugs when they were available and effective, by shifting the timing of

purchase to periods of lower cost sharing, and by reducing overall utilization. In contrast, CDHP

firm 2 enrollees’ behavior is closer to that of enrollees in traditional plans. Finally, the similarity

of the trends across CDHP firms 1 and 2 in 2004 prior to the anticipation period supports the

identification assumption, that the comparison firms display the utilization behavior that would

have occurred in CDHP firms 1 and 2 without CDHP adoption.




                                                  23
5.2. Year 1 CDHP effects

        Next, we formally estimate the effects of CDHP adoption on enrollees’ pharmaceutical

utilization. Table 4 displays estimates of year 1 CDHP effects for CDHP firm 1: panel A shows

estimates for statins, panel B for antihypertensive drugs, and panel C for diabetes drugs. Each

cell displays the estimate of θ from equation (1), corresponding to the differential change in the

outcome for CDHP firm 1 relative to the comparison firms. Under the estimate in parentheses is

the ranking of the coefficient relative to the placebo estimates from the 19 comparison firms,

where a ranking of “1” indicates that CDHP firm 1 is most extreme relative to the one-sided null

hypothesis and thus statistically significant.

        Panel A, column 1 shows that total spending (including plan payments and out of pocket

spending) for statins fall by $12.33 per month for CDHP firm 1 relative to the comparison firms,

and this is the most negative estimate among those in the permutation tests. Column 2 shows

estimates for adjusted spending, approximating the month of use rather than timing of purchase

to allow for stocking behavior. In this case, the reduction in spending falls to $7.76, but it is still

statistically significant. Columns 3 and 4 show changes in days supply based on month of

purchase and approximate month of use. CDHP firm 1 enrollees purchase over three days less

supply of statins per month in 2005 relative to traditional plan enrollees and this is statistically

significant. Examining approximate days supply used in column 4, enrollees use 1.85 fewer days

of statins per month and this estimate is also statistically significant. The difference in the CDHP

effect on days supply purchased versus approximated month of use implies that enrollees stocked

drugs from the pre-CDHP period when cost sharing was lower. Columns 5 and 6 display changes

in use of generic statins, based on month of purchase and approximate month of use, and show

no differential change in generic use relative to the comparison firms.



                                                   24
        Table 4, panel B displays year 1 effects for antihypertensive drugs and CDHP firm 1.

Columns 1 and 2 show smaller reductions in antihypertensive payments, but columns 3 and 4

show similar reductions in days supply relative to statins. In contrast to statins, CDHP firm 1

enrollees increase their purchase and use of low-price drugs (defined as ACE inhibitors versus

ARBs) by one percentage point relative to traditional plan enrollees, but only the use coefficient

is statistically significant. In Table 4 panel C, CDHP firm 1 enrollees reduce payments and days

supply (based on month of purchase and month of use) for diabetes drugs; again the differential

suggests stocking behavior. Columns 5 and 6 show increased purchase and use of the low-price

class (metformin and sulfonylureas, relative to glitazones with or without metformin and

sulfonylureas) of five and three percentage points respectively. In each case, the estimates are

statistically significant.

        In summary, Table 4 suggests for statins, where the low cost alternative (lovastatin) was

inferior in efficacy to branded drugs like Lipitor, enrollees respond to higher cost sharing by

shifting the timing of purchase and reducing total utilization, but not by shifting to lower cost

drugs. Year 1 CDHP effects on antihypertensive and diabetes drug utilization for CDHP firm 1

are similar to statins in terms of stocking and reductions in utilization. In contrast to statins, we

find increased use of the low price classes for CDHP firm 1 for both antihypertensive and

diabetes drugs. This finding may reflect that the low cost classes for antihypertensive and

diabetes drugs are equally or more effective than the higher cost drugs.

        Table 5 displays estimated year 1 effects for CDHP firm 2, where prescriptions were

exempt from the deductible. Across drug categories, CDHP firm 2 exhibits reductions in total

spending, based on month of purchase or approximate month of use. However, the reductions are

smaller in magnitude than CDHP firm 1 and usually in the middle of the distribution of



                                                  25
comparison firms and thus not statistically significant. In columns 3 and 4, CDHP firm 2 exhibits

reductions in day supply, based on month of purchase or approximate month of use, that are

more extreme than the comparison firms for antihypertensive and diabetes drugs, though also

smaller in magnitude than CDHP firm 1 (results are statistically significant for 3 of 4 estimates

and marginally significant for the fourth). CDHP firm 2 does not increase use of low cost drugs

for any of the drug classes. The reductions in days supply in year 1, without a commensurate

change in generic use, may imply a “gatekeeper” effect from higher cost sharing for physician

visits rather than a misunderstanding of plan design, as there is no change in copayment tiers or

cost sharing for generic or branded drugs after CDHP adoption for CDHP firm 2 (as shown in

Table 1).

5.3. Year 2 CDHP effects

        Table 6 displays estimated CDHP effects in years 1 and 2 for CDHP firm 1, with a

sample restricted to employees who used the included drug categories in 2004 and were

continuously enrolled in both 2005 and 2006. Here we only examine utilization based on

approximated timing of use rather than month of purchase. Panel A displays results for statins.

Column 1 shows that the point estimate for days used in 2005 is negative and similar in

magnitude to the one-year sample. By 2006 the effect is smaller, but still the second largest

among firms in the sample (and thus marginally significant). In column 2, use of low cost drugs

(in this case, generic statins) does not change for CDHP firm 1 in 2005 relative to the

comparison firms, but increases by three percentage points relative to the comparison firms in

2006, but neither point estimate is statistically significant. This estimated increase reflects the

availability of generic simvastatin in mid-2006; however, the increase for CDHP firm 1 is only

the fifth largest relative to the comparison firms. Columns 3 and 4 show persistent and



                                                  26
statistically significant or borderline significant reductions in days supply used for

antihypertensive drugs and increased use of lower cost ACE inhibitors relative to ARBs. Column

5 shows a smaller reduction in days used for diabetes in 2006 that is only marginally statistically

significant. Column 6 shows that the increased percentage of days supply of diabetes drugs that

was lower cost remained statistically significant in 2006.

       Table 7 displays results for CDHP firm 2. For each class, first year point estimates for the

two-year sample are attenuated relative to CDHP firm 1 and statistically insignificant (with the

exception of days used for the diabetes sample). In contrast, the second year point estimates

imply statistically significant reductions in days used that are larger in magnitude for statins and

diabetes drugs than those for CDHP firm 1. The change in proportion of days used that is generic

relative to the comparison firms is statistically insignificant. These results could reflect either

misunderstanding of benefit design (i.e., drugs are not subject to the deductible) or a reduction in

access to drugs due to higher cost sharing for physician visits. The results in Table 7 may suggest

the reduced access mechanism rather than misunderstanding benefit design for two reasons.

First, if the reduction is due to misunderstanding benefit design, it may be less likely to persist

into the second year of the plan. Second, we find no change in the proportion of days used that

are low cost (as mentioned above). The lack of a change in low cost drugs is consistent with

beneficiaries understanding that cost sharing did not change for these drugs.

5.4. Year 1 event study

       Next, we investigate in more detail the dynamics of drug purchase and use in the first

year of the CDHP in CDHP firm 1. Table 8 displays estimates similar to equation (1) for days

supply purchased and used, except instead of including a single “POST 2005 × CDHP”




                                                  27
interaction term, we include separate bimonthly interaction terms from the two months prior to

CDHP implementation through the end of the first year.

       In column 1, there is spike in days supply purchased of 4.24 days per month for statins in

the two months prior to CDHP implementation and a subsequent dip in purchases of 4.23 days

per month (both of which are statistically significant). Days purchased in CDHP firm 1 then

converge with the comparison firms by months 9-10 of 2005, presumably as enrollees reach the

deductible and out-of-pocket spending falls. Column 2 shows a smaller spike in days used in the

two months prior to CDHP implementation relative to the comparison firms (2.03 days used

versus 4.24 days supply purchased and statistically significant) and a smaller reduction in days

supply used compared to days supply purchased in the first two months of 2005 (-1.10 versus -

4.23 and marginally significant) which again continues until months 9-10 of 2005. Columns 3-6

show similar patterns for antihypertensive and diabetes drugs. The difference in coefficient

estimates between models using month of purchase versus month of use, contrasted with cost

sharing over the sample period, implies that enrollees purchased drugs in periods of high cost

sharing for use during periods of low cost sharing. In contrast, Table A.2 displays estimates for

CDHP firm 2 and shows little evidence of differences in timing of purchases.

5.5. Decomposition of effects

       In Table 9, we contrast the size of effects in CDHP firm 1 along the timing, overall

utilization, and low cost drug margins for each drug category using a post-estimation

decomposition exercise described in section 3.3, separately for out-of-pocket and total spending.

Specifically, we compare spending from 2005 utilization behavior with 2005 levels of cost

sharing relative to 2004 utilization behavior with 2005 levels of cost sharing. These estimates




                                                28
combine observed utilization and prices in 2004 and 2005 in CDHP firm 1 with behavior

changes from estimating equation 1 for each outcome.

        The top panel displays decomposition results for out-of-pocket spending.

The first row shows out-of-pocket savings per month stemming from changes in the timing of

purchase of drugs. For statins, changing the timing of purchases represented 10 percent of total

savings across the three response margins. The timing percentages for antihypertensive and

diabetes drugs were >1 percent and 10 percent, respectively. The timing effects are small in part

because they are averaged across 2005 while the savings only accrue in the early part of the year,

effectively diluting the effect.

        The majority of out-of-pocket savings for each drug class originates from reductions in

overall utilization, representing 90 percent and 93 percent of total savings for statins and

antihypertensive drugs respectively, and 58 percent of total savings for diabetes drugs. Low cost

drug use results in no out-of-pocket savings for statins, as we found no change in generic statin

use. For antihypertensive drugs, we find that 7 percent of total savings came from increased use

of ACE inhibitors (driven by the modest increase in ACE inhibitor use). For diabetes drugs, we

estimate a more substantial increase in use of low cost drugs (sulfonylureas and metformin)

compared to the comparison firms, comprising 33 percent of total savings from across the three

response margins. Total monthly out-of-pocket savings across the three margins are the largest

for statins ($4.31), followed by diabetes ($2.04) and antihypertensive drugs ($1.61), representing

10 to 20 percent of monthly out-of-pocket spending on the drug class in 2004, implying that

utilization responses do lead to substantial savings for employees in CDHP firm 1.

        The second panel displays decomposition results for total spending. Because the switch

to CDHP did not have a direct effect on the total price of the drug, the timing margin results in



                                                 29
no total savings, and in fact led to increased total expenditures, as total prices were lower for

these drug classes in 2005 (which could occur because of competition from generics or larger

discounts for CDHP firm 1). Thus, stocking actually increased total expenditures. Reduction in

utilization was again responsible for the majority of total spending for each class (ranging from

66 percent for diabetes drugs to 101 percent for statins), with low cost drug use leading to no

savings for statins, but 7 and 37 percent of reductions in total monthly expenditures for

antihypertensive and diabetes drugs.

5.6. Sensitivity analyses

       We identified two empirical patterns in our analysis that could threaten the validity of our

results. First, we find higher attrition in the year of CDHP adoption for CDHP firm 1, and to a

lesser extent CDHP firm 2, than the control firms with traditional plans. Second, we find

differences in the characteristics of enrollees in CDHP firms 1 and 2 relative to the firms with

traditional plans. In this section, we explore these issues.

Differential attrition

       As shown in Table 2, the percentage of plan enrollees using the included drug categories

in January through September 2004 that are enrolled in a plan offered by the firm for 12 months

in 2005 (and 12 months in both 2005 and 2006) is lower for CDHP firm 1 than CDHP firm 2,

and retention rates for CDHP firm 1 and 2 are both lower than the control firms. If enrollees

selectively drop employer-provided coverage from CDHP firms 1 and 2 because of the switch to

a CDHP (for example, to take-up a spouse’s coverage), then our estimates may reflect the

behavior just of enrollees choosing to stay, who may differ systematically than those dropping

coverage.




                                                  30
       In Appendix Table A.2, we examine the characteristics of enrollees using the included

drug categories in January through September 2004, but without 12 months of enrollment in

2005 and 2006 versus enrollees using the included drug categories in January through September

2004 with 12 months of enrollment in both 2005 and 2006. Gender and age are sometimes

misassigned within family for individuals enrolled in CDHP firms 1 and 2 just during 2004, so

we focus on zip code level characteristics and the number of major diagnostic categories (25

mutually exclusive categories that are identified based on ICD-9 codes on outpatient and

inpatient visit claims and pertain to a single organ system). Enrollees in CDHP firm 1 present in

just 2004 had fewer MDCs (3.7) than those enrolled continuously through 2006 (4.4). We find a

similar pattern of results in CDHP firm 2 and control firms, with enrollees present in just 2004

exhibiting fewer MDCs than those present continuously through 2006. For CDHP firms 1 and 2,

enrollees dropping coverage after 2004 exhibit similar zip-code level demographic

characteristics as those continuously enrolled (with the exceptions of the percentage graduating

from high school for CDHP firm 1 and the percentage white for CDHP firm 2). Differences in

characteristics by continuous enrollment are more often statistically significant for control firms,

but this are largely due to higher sample sizes; the average characteristics are similar. In

summary, this evidence implies that enrollees dropping coverage in CDHP firms 1 and 2 are

similar on many characteristics to enrollees continuously enrolled, and the levels and patterns by

sample tenure for health status are similar across all firms.

       Next, we examine whether retention rates for CDHP firm 1 and 2 were consistently lower

than the control firms, or if the lower retention rates only occurred with the introduction of the

CDHP in 2005. Table A.3 displays the retention rate for each drug category, treatment group,

and year. The retention rate for each year is defined as the percentage of individuals with a drug



                                                 31
claim between January and September of a year that are continuously enrolled in the firm’s

health coverage in the following year (i.e., consistent with our inclusion criteria). Column (1) for

2004 displays the same retention estimates from column (2) in Table 2. Columns (2) and (3)

show that retention rates for CDHP firm 1 were slightly higher in 2005 relative to 2004 and

lower in 2006 relative to 2004. Retention rates for CDHP firm 2 were lower in 2005 relative to

2004 and slightly higher in 2006 relative to 2004. Retention rates were similar across all years

for the control firms. The results in Table A.3 suggest that CDHP firms 1 and 2 consistently

exhibit lower retention, and thus the higher turnover rates from 2004 to 2005 may not have been

in response to the introduction of the CDHP. As described above, CDHP firm 1 is in the retail

sector and this may contribute to higher turnover.

       Finally, we focus on enrollees in CDHP firm 1 and the control firms that used a drug in

July through September 2004 rather than January through September 2004. Table A.4 shows that

this restriction reduces the sample size, but increases the retention rate by five to eight

percentage points across drug categories in CDHP firm 1 and by four percentage points in the

control firms. In Table A.5, we re-estimate the main regressions to examine whether the less-

selected sample exhibits different responses, and find very similar estimates across each response

margin to Table 4.

Differences in firm composition

       As shown in the summary statistics in Table 3, the zip code level demographic

characteristics of CDHP firms 1 and 2, in particular, differ from the control firms. We examine

the sensitivity of the results to these differences by reweighting the control firms to better

resemble CDHP firms 1 and 2 using an inverse propensity score weighting approach. As our

analysis is estimated at the firm level, we individually match each control firm separately to



                                                  32
CDHP firms 1 and 2. We estimate logit regressions that include zip code level median household

income, unemployment rate, percentage high school graduate, percentage college graduate,

percentage black, percentage Hispanic, and percentage white. For each individual in the control

firm sample, we assign a predicted odds-ratio of being in CDHP firm 1 or 2. This “weighting by

the odds” approach leads to an estimate of the average treatment effect on the treated (Harder,

Stuart, and Anthony 2010; Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder 2003). We then recalculate firm-level

monthly averages using the predicted odds-ratio as a sample weight and re-run the one-year

analyses.

       Table A.6 displays the results of the matching exercise for CDHP firm 1 for each drug

category sample. The first column displays average characteristics for CDHP firm 1, the second

and third columns display the average of unweighted firm-level means across the 19 control

firms and the number of firms with a standardized difference under 0.25 for the characteristic of

interest relative to CDHP firm 1, and the fourth and fifth columns show the average of weighted

firm-level means across the 19 control firms and the number of firms with a standardized

difference less than 0.25 using the weighted means relative to CDHP firm 1 (where the 0.25 is a

commonly used benchmark for the maximum allowable standardized difference (Harder et al.

2010)). The weighting procedure substantially improves the balance of CDHP firm 1 relative to

the control firms, with 16 to 19 of control firms exhibiting standardized differences less than

0.25 across characteristics for the statins sample, 16 to 18 for antihypertensive drugs, and 14 to

17 for diabetes. Table A.7 displays the year 1 effects for CDHP firm 1 with the reweighted

control firms. The estimates are very similar to Table 4, with the notable exception that the use

of low cost drugs becomes statistically insignificant for the antihypertensive and diabetes drug

samples. Table A.8 displays the results of the matching procedure for CDHP firm 2 and shows



                                                 33
similar improvements in balance. Table A.9 displays year 1 effects for CDHP firm 2 with

reweighted control firms and shows similar results to Table 5, except that the days supply effects

for diabetes drugs become insignificant or marginally significant.



6. Conclusion

       We investigate the effects of CDHPs on use of pharmaceuticals that treat and prevent

chronic diseases including high cholesterol, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes. We compare

changes in utilization among employees in two firms that shift all of their employees to CDHPs

relative to employees in firms that offered no CDHP; in one firm (CDHP firm 1)

pharmaceuticals are subject to the deductible and in the other pharmaceuticals are exempt from

the deductible (CDHP firm 2). We find that enrollees in CDHP firm 1 change utilization of

pharmaceuticals along each hypothesized margin: enrollees shift the timing of purchase to

periods with lower cost sharing, increase the use of lower cost drugs (but only when such drugs

were equally or more effective), and reduce overall pharmaceutical utilization. The majority of

the response, however, is focused on the reduction in overall utilization. In addition, most of

these effects persist into the second year of the CDHP. In CDHP firm 2, we observe insignificant

changes in utilization for statins, but statically significant or marginally significant reductions in

utilization of antihypertensive drugs and diabetes drugs. We observe no effect, however, on the

percentage of days supply purchased or used that were low cost. The utilization effects for

CDHP firm 2 are larger and statistically significant for all drug categories in the second year of

the CDHP. We interpret the persistence of these effects, combined with the absence of a change

in use of low cost drugs, as suggestive evidence of a “gatekeeper” effect, where higher cost

sharing for physician visits result in reductions in pharmaceutical use. Moreover, some of the



                                                  34
reduction in utilization in CDHP firm 1 could also be driven by a reduction in access to

physician visits, a phenomenon observed in the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Leibowitz,

Manning, and Newhouse 1985).

       The shifts in timing and increased use of lower cost drugs in CDHP firm 1 are both

forward-looking and strategic responses to the incentives in CDHPs, implying both awareness of

benefit design and effective lobbying of physicians to shift to lower cost alternatives. In addition,

the timing margin implies that enrollees consider medium-term rather than static prices in

making utilization decisions, consistent with Aron-Dine et al. (2012). In contrast, given the cost-

effectiveness of the drugs in the sample and the consequences for poor adherence, the reduction

in overall utilization implies either a high discount rate or an incomplete understanding of the

consequences of poor drug adherence. For example, Chandra et al. (2010) find that reductions in

drug adherence after an increase in cost sharing in a supplemental retiree health plan led to

increased hospital costs. This response may imply the need for additional deductible exemptions

for drugs treating chronic disease, such as in “Value Based Insurance Design” (Fendrick and

Chernew 2006). Finally, while the timing response implies sophisticated understanding of

benefit design on the part of enrollees, it is also not the intent of CDHP adoption and highlights

the perverse incentives created by nonlinear insurance contracts.




                                                 35
Aron-Dine, A., L. Einav, A. Finkelstein, and M. Cullen. 2012. “Moral hazard in health
insurance: how important is forward looking behavior? .” NBER Working Paper 17802.

Bolen, S., L. Feldman, J. Vassy, and et al. 2007. “Systematic Review: Comparative Effectiveness
and Safety of Oral Medications for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.” Annals of Internal Medicine 147:
386-99.

Buchmueller, T. C., J. DiNardo, and R. G. Valleta. 2011. “The Effect of an Employer Health
Insurance Mandate on Health Insurance Coverage and the Demand for Labor: Evidence from
Hawaii.” American Economic Journal- Economic Policy 3: 25-51.

Bundorf, M. K. 2012. “Consumer-directed health plans: Do they deliver?” Research Synthesis
Report. The Synthesis Project. Princeton, N.J.: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

Buntin, M. B., A. Haviland, R. McDevitt, and N. Sood. 2011. “Health care spending and
preventive care in high-deductible and consumer-directed health plans.” American Journal of
Managed Care 17(3): 222-30.

Chandra, A., J. Gruber, and R. McKnight. 2010. “Patient Cost-Sharing and Hospitalization
Offsets in the Elderly.” American Economic Review 100(1): 193-213.

Charlton, M. E., B. T. Levy, R. R. High, J. E. Schneider, and J. M. Brooks. 2011. “Effects of
Health Savings Account Eligible Plans on Utilization and Expenditures.” American Journal of
Managed Care.

Chobanian, A. V., G. L. Bakris, H. R. Black, and et al. 2003. “The Seventh Report of the Joint
National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Pressure.” JAMA 289(19): 2560-72.

Clarke, P., A. Gray, A. Adler, R. Stevens, and et al. 2001. “Cost-effectiveness analysis of
intensive blood-glucose control with metformin in overweight patients with Type II diabetes
(UKPDS No. 51).” Diabtologia 44: 298-304.

Conley, T. G. and C. R. Taber. 2011. “Inference with "differences in differences" with a small
number of policy changes.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 93(1): 113-25.

Cutler, D. M. and N. R. Sahni. 2013. “If Slow Rate of Health Care Spending Growth Persists,
Projects May Be Off By $770 Billion.” Health Affairs 32(5): 841-50.

Delea, T. E., J. S. Edelsberg, M. Hagiwara, G. Oster, and L. S. Phillips. 2003. “Use of
thiazolidinediones and risk of heart failure in people with type 2 diabetes: a retrospective cohort
study.” Diabetes Care 26(11): 2983-9.

Fendrick, A. M. and M. E. Chernew. 2006. “Value-based insurance design: a "clinically
sensitive" approach to preserve quality of care and contain costs.” American Journal of Managed
Care 12(1): 18-20.

                                                 36
Fronstin, P., M.-J. Sepulveda, and M. C. Robebuck. 2013. “Medical Utilization and Adherence
in a Health Savings Account-Eligible Plan.” American Journal of Managed Care 19(12): e400-
e07.

Harder, V. S., E. A. Stuart, and J. C. Anthony. 2010. “Propensity score techniques and
assessment of measured covariate balance to test causal associations in psychological research.”
Psychol Methods 15(3): 234-39.

Haviland, A., M. S. Marquis, R. D. McDevitt, and N. Sood. 2012. “Growth of Consumer-
Directed Health Plans to One-Half of All Employer-Sponsored Insurance Could Save $57 Billion
Annually.” Health Affairs 31(5): 1009-15.

Hirano, K., G. W. Imbens, and G. Ridder. 2003. “Efficient estimation of average treatment
effects using the estimated propensity score.” Econmetrica 71(4): 1161-89.

Jones, P., S. Kafonek, I. Laurora, and D. Hunninghake. 1998. “Comparative Dose Efficacy Study
of Atorvastatin Versus Simvastatin, Pravastatin, and Fluvastatin in Patients With
Hypercholesterolemia (The Curves Study).” American Journal of Cardiology 81: 582-87.

KFF and HRET. 2013. “Employer Health Benefits: 2013 Summary of Findings.” The Kaiser
Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust.

Leibowitz, A., W. G. Manning, and J. P. Newhouse. 1985. “The demand for prescription drugs
as a function of cost-sharing.” Social Science and Medicine 21(10): 1063-69.

Lo Sasso, A., L. A. Helmchen, and R. Kaestner. 2010. “The Effects of Consumer-Directed
Health Plans on Health Care Spending.” The Journal of Risk and Insurance 77(1): 85-103.

Matchar, D. B., D. C. McCrory, L. A. Orlando, M. R. Patel, U. D. Patel, M. B. Patwardhan, B.
Powers, G. P. Samsa, and R. N. Gray. 2008. “Systematic Review: Comparative Effectiveness of
Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers for Treating
Essential Hypertension.” Annals of Internal Medicine 148: 16-29.

Nissen, S. E. and K. Wolski. 2007. “Effect of rosiglitazone on the risk of myocardial infarction
and death from cardiovascular causes.” The New England Journal of Medicine 356(24): 2457-71.

Parente, S. T., R. Feldman, and S. Chen. 2008. “Effects of a consumer driven health plan on
pharmaceutical spending and utilization.” Health Services Research 43(5 Pt 1): 1542-56.

Ward, S., M. L. Jones, A. Pandor, M. Holmes, R. Ara, A. Ryan, W. Yeo, and N. Payne. 2007. “A
systematic review and economic evaluation of statins for the prevention of coronary events.”
Health Technology Assessment 11(14).

Wharam, J. F., A. A. Galbraith, K. P. Kleinman, S. B. Soumerai, D. Ross-Degnan, and B. E.
Landon. 2008. “Cancer screening before and after switching to a high-deductible health plan.”
Annals of Internal Medicine 148(9): 647-55.



                                               37
                              Figure 1: Out-of-pocket expenditures per day supply

                                (a) Statins                                                       (b) Antihypertensives
    3.5




                                                                             3.5
    3




                                                                             3
    2.5




                                                                             2.5
       2




                                                                                2
  $/day




                                                                           $/day
1.5




                                                                         1.5
    1




                                                                             1
    .5




                                                                             .5
    0




                                                                             0
           Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06              Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06

                             CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible                                    CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                             CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible                                   CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible
                             Control firms with conventional plans                                    Control firms with conventional plans



                           (c) Diabetes drugs
    3.5
    3
    2.52
  $/day
1.5 1
    .5
    0




           Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06

                             CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                             CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible
                             Control firms with conventional plans



Note: Figures display average out-of-pocket expenditures per day supply purchased by
                                    CDHP-status.
                                              Figure 2: Days supply purchased

                              (a) Statins                                                     (b) Antihypertensives
   35




                                                                          35
   30




                                                                          30
   25




                                                                          25
    20




                                                                           20
 Days




                                                                        Days
15




                                                                       15
   10




                                                                          10
   5




                                                                          5
   0




                                                                          0
         Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06            Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06

                           CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible                                  CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                           CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible                                 CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible
                           Control firms with conventional plans                                  Control firms with conventional plans



                         (c) Diabetes drugs
   35
   30
   25
    20
 Days
15 10
   5
   0




         Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06

                           CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                           CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible
                           Control firms with conventional plans



                Note: Figures display average days supply purchased by CDHP-status.
                                               Figure 3: Days used per month

                              (a) Statins                                                     (b) Antihypertensives
   35




                                                                          35
   30




                                                                          30
   25




                                                                          25
    20




                                                                           20
 Days




                                                                        Days
15




                                                                       15
   10




                                                                          10
   5




                                                                          5
   0




                                                                          0
         Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06            Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06

                           CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible                                  CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                           CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible                                 CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible
                           Control firms with conventional plans                                  Control firms with conventional plans



                         (c) Diabetes drugs
   35
   30
   25
    20
 Days
15 10
   5
   0




         Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06

                           CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                           CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible
                           Control firms with conventional plans



          Note: Figures display average estimated days used per month by CDHP-status.
                                                                  Figure 4: Lower price drugs used

                                                  (a) Statins                                                                 (b) Antihypertensives




                                                                                                    100
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50




                                                                                                    90
    % of prescriptions




                                                                                           % of prescriptions
                                                                                           60     7050    80
              5




                                                                                                    40
              0




                             Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06                        Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06

                                               CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible                                              CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                                               CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible                                             CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible
                                               Control firms with conventional plans                                              Control firms with conventional plans



                                             (c) Diabetes drugs
              100
              90
% of prescriptions
60     70      80
              50
              40




                             Jul04 Oct04 Jan05 Apr05 Jul05 Oct05 Jan06 Apr06 Jul06 Oct06

                                               CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                                               CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible
                                               Control firms with conventional plans



                             Note: Figures display percentage of days used that are low-cost by CDHP-status.
                  Table 1: Health plan characteristics over the sample period

                                                        (1)                (2)                   (3)
                                                   Calendar year      Calendar year         Calendar year
                                                       2004               2005                  2006
    CDHP firm 1: RX subject to deductible
                        RX cost sharing1
                                   Generic              $10             100%/20%              100%/20%
                         Brand (formulary)              $20             100%/20%              100%/20%
                     Brand (non-formulary)              $35             100%/20%              100%/20%

                       Average family deductible        $54               $1,998               $1,906
                      High deductible percentage        2%                99.9%                 73%
                             Health care account        0%             99.9% HRA             100% HRA
    Employer account contribution (single/family)       $0             $500/$1000            $500/$1000
    CDHP firm 2: RX exempt from deductible
                              RX cost sharing
                                          Generic       $10                $10                   $10
                                Brand formulary         $25                $25                   $27
                            Brand non-formulary         $45                $45                   $50

                       Average family deductible     $138         $2,176                      $3,167
                      High deductible percentage      3%          99.6%                       100 %
                             Health care account   3% HRA    92% HRA, 5% HSA             91% HRA, 4% HSA
    Employer account contribution (single/family) $400/$1200    $400/$1200                  $400/$1200
    Control firms with conventional plans never offering CDHP
                             RX cost sharing
                           Median generic copay       $5            $5                           $5
                Median brand (formulary) copay        $16          $16                           $16
            Median brand (non-formulary) copay        $35          $30                           $32

                          Average family deduct        $113                $143                 $202
                      High deductible percentage        0%                  0%                   0%
                            Health care account         0%                  0%               < 1% HSA

1   For CDHP firm 1, RX cost sharing is 100% prior to the deductible and 20% after the deductible.
   Table 2: Number of unique individuals using therapeutic classes and retention rates

                                  (1)                           (2)                            (3)
                     Used class in Jan-Sept 2004   Used class in Jan-Sept 2004,   Used class in Jan-Sept 2004,
                                                     continuous enroll 2005       continuous enroll 2005-2006
 CDHP firm 1: RX subject to deductible
 Statins                 1,118                                 694                            560
                                                              (62%)                          (50%)

 Antihypertensives              1,195                          727                            580
                                                              (61%)                          (49%)

 Diabetes drugs                  685                           399                            318
                                                              (58%)                          (46%)

 CDHP firm 2: RX exempt from deductible
 Statins                3,143                                 2,159                          1,425
                                                              (69%)                          (45%)

 Antihypertensives              3,353                         2,267                          1,469
                                                              (68%)                          (44%)

 Diabetes drugs                 1,404                          937                            602
                                                              (67%)                          (43%)

 Control firms with conventional plans never offering CDHP
 Statins                   177,695                    136,481                               116,612
                                                       (77%)                                 (66%)

 Antihypertensives             163,444                       124,597                        106,205
                                                              (76%)                          (65%)

 Diabetes drugs                 62,344                        46,562                         39,034
                                                              (75%)                          (63%)

Note: Table displays number of enrollees and retention rate relative to number of enrollees using
class in January through September 2004.
                                Table 3: Summary statistics

                                                        (1)                (2)              (3)
                                                   CDHP firm 1         CDHP firm 2   Firms w/o CDHP
                                                RX subject to deduct    RX exempt        2004-06
 Beneficiary characteristics
             Number of US states/territories            37                 47              51

           Zip code level measures, 2004
                      Household income ($)             50,785            53,769          48,768
                        Unemployment (%)                 4.6               4.4             4.8
                      High school grad (%)               56                55              59
                                 Black (%)               14                 8              10
                                White (%)                67                79              80

     Enrollee-level characteristics, 2004
                                        Age             51                 47             51
                                 Female (%)             52                 53             43
     Number of Major Diagnostic Categories              4.2                4.2            4.4
 Pharmaceutical utilization in 2004
                                    Statins
        Days supply purchased (per month)                21                22              22
      Generic percentage of days supply (%)              5                  4              3
                   Total cost per month ($)              66                60              62
      Out-of-pocket costs per day supply ($)            0.70              0.84            0.59

                         Antihypertensives
          Days supply purchased (per month)              24                23              24
 Low-cost class percentage of days supply (%)            60                62              57
                     Total cost per month ($)            28                26              28
      Out-of-pocket costs per day supply ($)            0.53              0.61            0.42

                                    Diabetes
          Days supply purchased (per month)              24                22              24
 Low-cost class percentage of days supply (%)            74                75              73
                     Total cost per month ($)            46                40              44
      Out-of-pocket costs per day supply ($)            0.45              0.49            0.37


Note: Enrollee-level characteristics for CDHP firm 1 (other than number of Major Diagnostic
Categories) only available for beneficiaries continuously enrolled from 2004-2006.
            Table 4: Year 1 effects for CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible

                            Total spending        Days supply        Low cost proportion
                              (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)
                           Purchased Used       Purchased Used       Purchased    Used
         A. Statins
         CDHP × 2005         -12.33     -7.76     -3.23      -1.85     0.00       -0.00
                               (1)       (1)       (1)        (1)       (8)       (18)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        59.50      57.89     20.72     20.20      0.04        0.04

         B. Antihypertensive drugs
         CDHP × 2005     -4.27    -2.69           -3.07      -1.67     0.01        0.01
                          (1)      (1)             (1)        (1)       (3)         (1)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        27.20      25.96     22.72     21.82      0.56        0.56

         C. Diabetes drugs
         CDHP × 2005     -9.23          -5.30     -3.10      -1.44     0.05        0.03
                           (1)           (1)       (1)        (1)       (1)         (1)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        44.70      38.27     24.20     21.12      0.73        0.73

Data include firm-month observations from July 2004-December 2005. Ranking of effect out of 20 from
permutation tests in parentheses.
           Table 5: Year 1 effects for CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible

                            Total spending        Days supply        Low cost proportion
                              (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)
                           Purchased Used       Purchased Used       Purchased    Used
         A. Statins
         CDHP × 2005         -2.17      -1.30     -0.93      -0.62     0.00        0.00
                              (3)        (6)       (3)        (3)       (5)         (5)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        59.52      57.93     20.81     20.29      0.04        0.04

         B. Antihypertensive drugs
         CDHP × 2005     -0.65    -0.51           -0.82      -0.63     0.00        0.00
                          (5)      (6)             (1)        (2)       (8)         (7)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        27.25      26.02     22.77     21.89      0.56        0.56

         C. Diabetes drugs
         CDHP × 2005     -2.15          -0.98     -1.53      -0.87     -0.02      -0.01
                           (4)           (2)       (1)        (1)       (20)       (20)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        44.68      38.22     24.17     21.09      0.73        0.73


Data include firm-month observations from July 2004-December 2005. Ranking of effect out of 20 from
permutation tests in parentheses.
 Table 6: Year 1 and 2 CDHP effects (adjusted to allow pre-purchase of drugs) for CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible

                                           A. Statins              B. Antihypertensives                 C. Diabetes
                                      (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)                (5)          (6)
                                   Days used Low cost prop        Days used Low cost prop        Days used Low cost prop
                 CDHP × 2005         -1.56         -0.01            -1.48       0.02               -1.62         0.03
                                      (1)           (19)             (1)         (2)                (1)          (1)

                 CDHP × 2006          -1.41           0.03           -1.85           0.03           -0.98           0.04
                                       (2)             (5)            (1)             (1)            (2)            (1)

                 Observations          600            600             600            600             600            600
                 Dep var mean         19.89           0.07           21.43           0.56           20.98           0.73

Data include firm-month observations from July 2004-December 2006. Ranking of effect out of 20 from permutation tests in parentheses.
Table 7: Year 1 and 2 CDHP effects (adjusted to allow pre-purchase of drugs) for CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible

                                           A. Statins              B. Antihypertensives                 C. Diabetes
                                      (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)                (5)           (6)
                                   Days used Low cost prop        Days used Low cost prop        Days used Low cost prop
                 CDHP × 2005         -0.64          0.01            -0.47       0.00               -1.15        -0.01
                                      (2)            (4)             (3)         (6)                (1)          (18)

                 CDHP × 2006          -1.87           -0.04          -1.47           -0.00          -2.52           -0.01
                                       (1)             (18)           (1)             (11)           (1)             (18)

                 Observations          600            600             600            600             600            600
                 Dep var mean         19.96           0.06           21.48           0.55           20.91           0.72

Data include firm-month observations from July 2004-December 2006. Ranking of effect out of 20 from permutation tests in parentheses.
Table 8: Bimonthly CDHP effects on day supply in 2005 for CDHP firm 1, RX subject to
                                    deductible

                                 Statins          Antihypertensives         Diabetes
                                (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)     (6)
                             Purchased Used       Purchased  Used        Purchased Used
       Two months prior        4.24      2.03       2.27      0.53         0.95    1.01
                                (1)       (1)        (1)      (1)           (2)     (1)

       Months post 1-2         -4.23      -1.10     -5.88       -2.04      -5.80      -1.62
                                (2)        (2)       (1)         (1)        (1)        (1)

       Months post 3-4         -2.68      -2.18     -1.92       -2.11      -3.83      -1.80
                                (1)        (1)       (1)         (1)        (1)        (1)

       Months post 5-6         -2.06      -1.64     -1.68       -1.17      -2.77      -1.17
                                (1)        (2)       (1)         (2)        (1)        (1)

       Months post 7-8         -1.51      -1.52     -1.90       -1.19      -1.51      -0.83
                                (1)        (1)       (1)         (1)        (3)        (2)

       Months post 9-10        -1.11      -0.90     -2.61       -1.64      -3.35      -1.26
                                (2)        (3)       (1)         (1)        (2)        (1)

       Months post 11-12       0.71      0.32       0.12        -0.78       0.59       0.04
                               (19)      (11)       (12)         (3)       (17)       (11)
       Observations             360       360        360         360        360        360
       Dep var mean            20.72     20.20      22.72       21.82      24.20      21.12

Data include firm-month observations from July 2004-December 2005. Ranking of effect out of 20 from
permutation tests in parentheses.
  Table 9: Decomposition of CDHP firm 1 effects: changes in expenditures in Year 1
                          relative to no behavior change

                                                         (1)            (2)             (3)
                                                       Statins    Antihypertensives   Diabetes
1. Decomposition of changes in monthly out-of-pocket spending
      Timing of purchase as % of total savings          10%             <1%             10%

    Reduction in utilization as % of total savings       90%            93%             58%

       Low cost drug use as % of total savings            0%             7%             33%
        Total savings across margins ($)                -$4.31         -$1.61          -$2.04

    As percentage of monthly OOP on drug class           20%            10%             15%
2. Decomposition of changes in monthly total spending
      Timing of purchase as % of total savings           -1%            -2%             -3%

    Reduction in utilization as % of total savings      101%            95%             66%

       Low cost drug use as % of total savings            0%             7%             37%
        Total savings across margins ($)                -$10.83        -$3.13          -$5.64

As percentage of total monthly spending on drug class    11%             9%             10%
    Figure A.1: Spending towards deductible and health reimbursement account (HRA)
                    balances by month for enrollees in sample, 2005

                                          (a) HRA balance by month                                         (b) Percentage of enrollees with zero HRA balance
              1000




                                                                                                                         100
              800




                                                                                                                                     80
                                                                                                           Percentage of enrollees (%)
         600




                                                                                                                           60
 Dollars ($)
400




                                                                                                                  40
              200




                                                                                                          20
              0




                                                                                                                         0
                              Jan   Feb   Mar   Apr   May   June   Jul   Aug   Sept   Oct   Nov   Dec                                     Jan   Feb   Mar   Apr   May   June   Jul   Aug   Sept   Oct    Nov   Dec

                                                 CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible                                                                       CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                                                 CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible                                                                      CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible



                                                                                                        (d) Percentage of enrollees with zero HRA balance, but
                        (c) Percentage of enrollees reaching deductible                                 have not reached deductible
              80




                                                                                                                         80
Percentage of enrollees (%)




                                                                                                          Percentage of enrollees (%)
                       60




                                                                                                                                 60
           40




                                                                                                                     40
 20




                                                                                                           20
              0




                                                                                                                         0




                              Jan   Feb   Mar   Apr   May   June   Jul   Aug   Sept   Oct   Nov   Dec                                     Jan   Feb   Mar   Apr   May   June   Jul   Aug   Sept   Oct    Nov   Dec

                                                 CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible                                                                      CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                                                 CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible                                                                     CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from the deductible
               Figure A.2: Days supply purchased, relative to reaching deductible in 2005

                              (a) Statins                                                     (b) Antihypertensives
   30




                                                                              30
   25




                                                                              25
   20




                                                                              20
Days




                                                                            Days
 15




                                                                             15
   10




                                                                              10
   5




                                                                              5
   0




         <-4      -3   -2       -1         0        1         2    3   4+     0    <-4   -3   -2       -1         0        1         2    3   4+
                        Months relative to reaching deductible                                 Months relative to reaching deductible

                          CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible                                  CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                          CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible                                 CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible



                        (c) Diabetes drugs
   40
   35
   30
 20 25
Days
   15
   10
   5
   0




         <-4      -3   -2       -1         0        1         2    3   4+
                        Months relative to reaching deductible

                          CDHP firm 1, RX subject to deductible
                          CDHP firm 2, RX exempt from deductible
Table A.1: Bimonthly CDHP effects on day supply in 2005 for CDHP firm 2, RX exempt
                                 from deductible

                                Statins          Antihypertensives           Diabetes
                              (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)           (5)      (6)
                           Purchased Used        Purchased  Used         Purchased Used
      2 months prior         0.47       0.25       1.06      0.29          0.25     0.37
                              (5)       (8)         (2)      (4)            (6)      (4)

      Months post 1-2         -1.19      -0.44      -0.77       -0.12      -0.68       0.06
                               (3)        (4)        (5)         (7)        (5)        (10)

      Months post 3-4         -0.77      -0.64      -0.10       -0.61      -0.50      -0.48
                               (3)        (3)        (10)        (2)        (3)        (2)

      Months post 5-6         -0.75      -0.57      -0.58       -0.64      -2.47      -0.94
                               (5)        (3)        (4)         (2)        (1)        (1)

      Months post 7-8         -0.92      -0.64      -0.47       -0.70      -1.10      -0.72
                               (3)        (3)        (7)         (3)        (6)        (2)

      Months post 9-10        -0.49      -0.43      -1.23       -0.52      -2.10      -1.10
                               (6)        (4)        (2)         (3)        (2)        (1)

      Months post 11-12       -0.53      -0.48      0.34        -0.63       -1.84      -1.29
                               (5)        (4)       (16)         (4)         (2)        (1)
      Observations           360.00     360.00     360.00      360.00      360.00     360.00
      Dep var mean           20.81      20.29       22.77       21.88      24.17      21.09

Data include firm-month observations from July 2004-December 2005. Ranking of effect out of 20 from
permutation tests in parentheses.
  Table A.2: Characteristics of plan enrollees using drug classes in 2004 by length of
                                     enrollment

                                                         (1)                 (2)             (3)
                                                  Used classes 2004   Used classes 2004,   P-value
                                                   no continuous          enrolled          of diff
                                                  enroll 2005-2006       2005-2006
CDHP firm 1: RX subject to deductible
Number of major diagnostic categories                    3.7                 4.4            0.000
Zip code level measures
Median HH income ($)                                    49,424             50,539           0.180
Black (%)                                                 14                 14             0.974
White (%)                                                 69                 68             0.159
Unemployed %                                              5                   5             0.517
High school grad (%)                                      57                 56             0.028
College graduate (%)                                      27                 27             0.412
Number of enrollees                                      813                984
CDHP firm 2: RX exempt from deductible
Number of major diagnostic categories                    3.7                 4.2            0.000
Zip code level measures
Median HH income ($)                                    52,532             53,742           0.028
Black (%)                                                 10                  9             0.118
White (%)                                                 75                 79             0.000
Unemployed (%)                                            5                   4             0.635
High school grad (%)                                      55                 55             0.556
College grad (%)                                          31                 31             0.453
Number of enrollees                                     1,925              2,619
Control firms only offering conventional plans
Number of major diagnostic categories                    3.9                 4.5            0.000
Zip code level measures
Median HH income ($)                                    48,894             48,898           0.963
Black (%)                                                 9                  10             0.037
White (%)                                                 78                 81             0.000
Unemployed (%)                                            5                   5             0.000
High school grad (%)                                      58                 59             0.000
College grad (%)                                          25                 25             0.000
Number of enrollees                                     68,198             190,280
Table A.3: Retention rates: percentage of sample using drug class in year that is
              continuously enrolled in plan in subsequent year

                                   (1)   (2)         (3)
                                  2004 2005         2006
                CDHP firm 1: RX subject to deductible
                Statins           62% 67%           61%
                Antihypertensives 61% 66%           59%
                Diabetes          58% 66%           55%
                CDHP firm 2: RX exempt from deductible
                Statins           69% 55%           71%
                Antihypertensives 68% 55%           70%
                Diabetes          67% 54%           70%
                Control firms only offering conventional plans
                Statins           77% 77%           76%
                Antihypertensives 76% 77%           75%
                Diabetes          75% 75%           74%
Table A.4: Sample sizes and retention rates by period with drug use in 2004

                           Sample size         Retention rate for year 1 sample
                  Jan-Sept 2004 Jul-Sept 2004 Jan-Sept 2004      Jul-Sept 2004
CDHP firm 1: RX subject to deductible
Statin                1,118            866         62%                67%
Antihypertensives     1,195            944         61%                67%
Diabetes               685             533         58%                66%
Control firms only offering conventional plans
Statin               177,695         139,984       77%                81%
Antihypertensives    163,444         132,172       76%                80%
Diabetes             62,344          50,710        75%                79%
   Table A.5: Year 1 effects for CDHP firm 1, enrollees using drug in July- Sept 2004

                            Total spending        Days supply        Low cost proportion
                              (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)
                           Purchased Used       Purchased Used       Purchased    Used
         A. Statins
         CDHP × 2005         -12.18     -8.88     -2.91      -2.04     0.00       -0.00
                               (1)       (1)       (2)        (1)       (4)       (12)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        76.29      65.19     26.91     22.80      0.03        0.03

         B. Antihypertensive drugs
         CDHP × 2005     -4.22    -2.85           -2.90      -1.75     0.01        0.01
                          (1)      (1)             (1)        (1)       (3)         (2)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        30.01      28.46     25.05     23.91      0.56        0.56

         C. Diabetes drugs
         CDHP × 2005     -9.30          -6.04     -2.78      -1.55     0.06        0.04
                           (1)           (1)       (1)        (1)       (1)         (1)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        49.34      42.01     26.68     23.15      0.73        0.73

Data include firm-month observations from July 2004-December 2005. Ranking of effect out of 20 from
permutation tests in parentheses.
Table A.6: Unweighted and weighted sample characteristics for control firms relative to
                                 CDHP firm 1

                              CDHP firm 1   19 control firms, unweighted   19 control firms, weighted
                                Mean        Mean     # of std diff<0.25    Mean # of std diff<0.25
A. Statins
Median household income ($)     50,820      50,410           9             49,468          16
Unemployment (%)                  4.5         4.8            13              4.7           16
High school                       56          58              6              56            19
College                           27          26              7              26            17
Black                             13           9              8              15            16
Hispanic                          13           7              6              13            16
White                             68          79              5              67            18
B. Antihypertensive drugs
Median household income ($)     50,492      48,479           10            49,091          16
Unemployment (%)                  4.6         5.0            14              4.8           16
High school                       56          59              6              56            18
College                           27          24              6              27            18
Black                             14          11             10              15            18
Hispanic                          12           8              8              14            16
White                             68          77              6              66            17
C. Diabetes
Median household income ($)     50,334      46,622           9             48,665          15
Unemployment (%)                  4.6         5.3            5               4.8           15
High school                       55          59              6              55            17
College                           28          22              7              27            16
Black                             14          12             10              16            14
Hispanic                          14           9             10              15            14
White                             66          74              7              62            15
 Table A.7: Year 1 effects for CDHP firm 1, inverse probability weighted control sample

                            Total spending        Days supply        Low cost proportion
                              (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)
                           Purchased Used       Purchased Used       Purchased    Used
         A. Statins
         CDHP × 2005         -12.59     -7.87     -3.39      -1.93     0.01       -0.00
                               (1)       (1)       (1)        (1)       (6)       (16)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        58.40      56.84     20.23     19.72      0.04        0.04

         B. Antihypertensive drugs
         CDHP × 2005     -4.29    -2.53           -3.16      -1.57     0.01        0.01
                          (1)      (1)             (1)        (2)       (5)         (5)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        26.63      25.37     22.45     21.56      0.56        0.57

         C. Diabetes drugs
         CDHP × 2005     -8.02          -4.79     -2.97      -1.45     0.05        0.03
                           (1)           (3)       (1)        (2)       (1)         (3)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        42.45      36.84     23.87     20.99      0.73        0.74

Data include firm-month observations from July 2004-December 2005. Ranking of effect out of 20 from
permutation tests in parentheses.
Table A.8: Unweighted and weighted sample characteristics for control firms relative to
                                 CDHP firm 2

                              CDHP firm 2   19 control firms, unweighted   19 control firms, weighted
                                Mean        Mean     # of std diff<0.25    Mean # of std diff<0.25
A. Statins
Median household income ($)     55,544      50,410           6             56,547          17
Unemployment (%)                  4.2         4.8            13              4.3           18
High school                       55          58              6              53            15
College                           32          26              5              34            15
Black                              8           9             15               8            18
Hispanic                           7           7              6               8            15
White                             80          79              9              77            16
B. Antihypertensive drugs
Median household income ($)     52,719      48,479           9             52,527          17
Unemployment (%)                  4.5         5.0            14              4.6           18
High school                       56          59              7              55            16
College                           30          24              5              32            15
Black                              9          11             14               9            17
Hispanic                           8           8              5              10            16
White                             78          77              9              76            16
C. Diabetes
Median household income ($)     49,668      46,622           9             49,869          17
Unemployment (%)                  4.8         5.3            15              4.9           18
High school                       57          59              8              55            15
College                           27          22              7              30            15
Black                             11          12             14              11            15
Hispanic                           9           9              5              12            15
White                             75          74              6              69            16
 Table A.9: Year 1 effects for CDHP firm 2, inverse probability weighted control sample

                            Total spending        Days supply        Low cost proportion
                              (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)
                           Purchased Used       Purchased Used       Purchased    Used
         A. Statins
         CDHP × 2005         -1.97      -1.65     -0.97      -0.79     0.01        0.01
                              (5)        (7)       (4)        (4)       (6)         (5)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        60.97      59.06     21.31     20.68      0.04        0.04

         B. Antihypertensive drugs
         CDHP × 2005     -1.01    -0.71           -1.20      -0.79     0.00        0.00
                          (4)      (4)             (1)        (2)       (7)         (8)

         Observations         360        360       360       360       360         360
         Dep var mean        26.83      25.63     22.90     22.01      0.57        0.58

         C. Diabetes drugs
         CDHP × 2005     -0.76          -0.64     -1.42     -1.13      -0.01      -0.02
                           (5)           (7)       (3)       (2)        (18)       (18)
         Observations     360            360       360       360        360        360
         Dep var mean    43.07          37.26     24.42     21.44       0.74       0.74

Data include firm-month observations from July 2004-December 2005. Ranking of effect out of 20 from
permutation tests in parentheses.
Appendix Table A.10. Drugs in sample
!"#$%&$#'(&             )($("*+&$#'(&                    ,#-(&#.#*/#0/(&       ,#-(1&2($("*+&
!"#"$%&'
"#$%&'(!                !
                        )'$*+,*,%-!*-#!-%*&%-!           !           ./&012!             3"!!
"),'4(/$!               )'$*+,*,%-!/5,/-#/#!(/)/*+/!                67-/018!             3"!
9*#7/,!                 *:)'#%4%-/;*,'($*+,*,%-!                     6*-01<!             3"!
9(/+,'(!                ('+7$*+,*,%-!                                "7=01>!             3"!
?/+&')!                 @)7$*+,*,%-!                                 ./&0A>!             3"!


?/+&')!B?!              @)7$*+,*,%-!/5,/-#/#0(/)/*+/!                C&,011!             3"!
?%4%,'(!                *,'($*+,*,%-!                                ./&0AD!             3"!
E/$*&'(!                )'$*+,*,%-!                                  "7=0FG!         ./&012!
H(*$*&I')!              4(*$*+,*,%-!                                 C&,0A2!          67-01D!
JK,'(%-!                /L/,%:%M/N!+%:$*+,*,%-!                      67-01<!             3"!
O'&'(!                  +%:$*+,*,%-!                                 ./&0A2!          67-01D!
()*'+%,$-$"./&0'(12&'
!"#$%&'()(*+,-$         !                                !                                  !
?',/-+%-!               !M/-*L/4(%)!                     !             2AA2!         P/M01<!!
?',/-+%-!Q9R!           M/-*L/4(%)!Q9R!                                2AA8!         P/M01<!
?',(/)!                 M/-*L/4(%);*:)'#%4%-/!                         2AAS!         "4(021!
9*4',/-!                &*4,'4(%)!                                     2AF2!         E*(0AS!
9*4'L%#/!               &*4,'4(%)!;!Q9R!                               2AF<!         C&,0AG!
J*+',/&!                /-*)*4(%)!                                     2AFS!         "7=011!
J*+/(/,%&!              /-*)*4(%);I&,!                                 2AFD!         T/4012!
?/55/)!                 /-*)*4(%);@/)'#%4%-/!                          2AAD!             3"!


R/&L/:!                 #%)%,%*L/:!:*)/*,/;!/-*)*4(%)!                 2AAD!             3"!
E'-'4(%)!               @'+%-'4(%)!                                    2AA2!         3'$01>!
E'-'4(%)!Q9R!           @'+%-'4(%);Q9R!                                2AA<!         ./&01<!
O/+,(%)!                )%+%-'4(%)!                                    2AFF!          67)018!
H(%-%$%)!               )%+%-'4(%)!!                                   2AFA!          67)018!
O/+,'(/,%&!             )%+%-'4(%);Q9R!                                2AFA!          67)018!
H(%-L%#/!               )%+%-'4(%);!Q9R!                               2AFA!          67)018!
U-%$*+&!                :'/5%4(%)!                                     2AAS!         E*K01>!
U-%(/,%&!               :'/5%4(%);!Q9R!                                2AAG!         E*K01G!
"&/'-!                  4/(%-#'4(%)!                                   2AA>!             3"!
"&&74(%)!               V7%-*4(%)!                                     2AA2!         E*(01<!
"&&7(/,%&!              V7%-*4(%);I&,!                                 2AAA!         E*(01S!
"),*&/!                 (*:%4(%)!                                      2AA2!         C&,01S!
E*$%W!                  ,(*-#')*4(%)!                                  2AAD!          67-01G!
!./-$
",*&*-#!                !
                        &*-#/+*(,*-!                     !           67-0AF!             3"!!
",*&*-#!Q9R!            &*-#/+*(,*-;!Q9R!                            T/4011!             3"!
R/$/,/-!                /4('+*(,*-!                                  ./&0AG!             3"!
 !"#"$"%&'(!&               ")*+,-*$-%&.&'(!&                            /+#012&                /3&
 3#-)*+&                    4*5",-*$-%&                                  6")078&                /3&
 3#-94:"&                   4*5",-*$-%&.'(!&                             6")078&                /3&
 (+;--*&                    9+,-*$-%&                                    3)*07<&                /3&
 '=;--*&                    9+,-*$-%&.&'(!&                              3)*07<&                /3&
 >"%4?-*&                   +9@",-*$-%&                                  3)*01A&                /3&
 >"%4?-*&'(!&               +9@",-*$-%&.&'(!&                             BC%01D&               /3&
 E4?-*:4,&                  $"9@4,-*$-%&                                 /+#07F&                /3&
 E4?-*:4,&'(!&              $"9@4,-*$-%&.&'(!&                           /+#011&                /3&
 G4+#-%&                    #-9,-*$-%&                                   G"?07H&                /3&
 G4+#-%&'(!&                #-9,-*$-%&.&'(!&                             E-*07F&                /3&
 !"#$%&%'()*+,'(
 I9C?+)J-K"&                &@"$L+*@4%&J?9&                  &           E-*07<&            B-%01A&&
 I9C?+)J-K"&MN&             @"$L+*@4%&ON&                                P?$011&            P?$01D&
                            @"$L+*@4%&'(Q.&
 3#-%:-@"$&                 *+,-K94$-;+%"&                               P?$01A&                /3&
 E4?*+%-,"&                 K9=5C*4:"&                                  E-=0FR&             G"?078&
 I9=%-,"&                   @4?*+%4;":&K9=5C*4:"&                        E-*07A&            G"?078&
 I9C?+#-%?"&                @"$L+*@4%.K9=5C*4:"&                          BC9011&           S"501R&
 E"$-K94)&                  @"$L+*@4%.K94)4;4:"&                         P?$01A&            G"?01<&
 I9C?+$*+9&                 K94)4;4:"&                                  E-=0FR&            E-=07R&
 I9C?+$*+9&MQ&              K94)4;4:"&ON&                                3)*07R&            6")01D&
 3@-*=9&                    K94@")4*4:"&                                 /+#07<&            P?$01<&
                            K94@")4*4:".*+,4K94$-;+%"&
 3#-%:-*=9&                 @-9"-$"&                                     /+#01<&                /3&
 3#-%:4-&                   *+,-K94$-;+%"&                              E-=077&                 /3&
 3?$+,&                     )4+K94$-;+%"&                                 BC9077&               /3&
 3?$+,&T9C,&E"$&            @"$L+*@4%&.&)4+K94$-;+%"&                    3CK01<&                /3&
 3#-%:-@"$&               @"$L+*@4%&.&*+,4K94$-;+%"&                    P?$01A&              /3&
Note: “NA” indicates generics became available either after the sample period (2004-2006) or are still not available .
