                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE CHINA (SHANGHAI) PILOT FREE TRADE ZONE:
BACKGROUND, DEVELOPMENTS AND PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT OF INITIAL IMPACTS

                                               Daqing Yao
                                              John Whalley

                                          Working Paper 20924
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w20924


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2015




  We are grateful to the ORF (Ontario Research Fund) and CIGI (Centre for International Governance
  Innovation) for financial support. The first author also thanks to the SASS for financial support. The
  views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2015 by Daqing Yao and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
  two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
  is given to the source.
The China (Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone: Background, Developments and Preliminary
Assessment of Initial Impacts
Daqing Yao and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 20924
February 2015
JEL No. F49

                                              ABSTRACT

The China (Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone (SPFTZ) founded one year ago is a trial for China’s new
round of reform and opening out, which has promised liberalization on capital account and trade facilitation
as its main objectives. Here we discuss the differences between the SPFTZ and other free trade areas,
and the developments of the SPFTZ in the past year. We also make a preliminary assessment of the
SPFTZ’s initial impacts, especially of its impact on China’s capital account opening and financial
liberalization. It is possible that the successful practice of the SPFTZ and more pilot policies replicated
in China will give rise to a more balanced Chinese economy in the following decade.


Daqing Yao
Institute of World Economy
Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences
622 Huaihaizhong Rd.
Shanghai, 200020
China, P.R.
yaodaqing@sass.org.cn

John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca
1. Introduction



This paper discusses the Shanghai Free Trade zone (more accurately the China

(Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone (SPFTZ)) one year after its introduction. Launched

on Sep.29, 2013, the SPFTZ is more than a traditional “free trade area”, and more a

trial zone for China’s new opening and reform strategy. It is a unilateral set of measures

and procedures relating to a small area in Shanghai, which has promised liberalization

on capital account and trade facilitation as its main objectives. Relatively little has been

written in English about the SPFTZ, and so in part we describe and document.

Importantly, the SPFTZ is not a Free Trade Area based on bilateral or plurilateral tariff

liberalization.




The SPFTZ is a pilot zone for China’s new round of reform and opening out. The paper

discusses why China adopted such a FTZ, and what its objectives are. China has

achieved considerable economic development that was export and investment

dependent, but she cannot continue developing in this way much longer. There is no

more room globally for the second largest economy in the world to develop like a small

export oriented developing country. The precedents of Korea or other East Asian Tigers

cannot be replicated much further by China.




We review the development of the SPFTZ over the past one year. As a pilot zone for

exploring policy, the main impacts of the SPFTZ are not on the amount of its trade
                                             2
volume or foreign investment, but on the institutional innovation it generates. The most

significant new institutions lie in four areas: the implementation of a “negative list”

model for foreign investment management; the more efficient operation of new trade

supervisory institutions for trade execution; the beginning of financial reform

experiments on capital account convertibility and in financial services; and the cutting

of red tape in administration. These are analyzed later in more detail.




After one year’s operation, the impacts of the SPFTZ on economic performance need

assessment, especially on financial liberalization. One element is using data of on shore

and off shore RMB exchange rates to assess SPFTZ’s financial liberalization effect.

This data suggests that capital restrictions are loosening with the founding of the SPFTZ.

With more reform policies in the SPFTZ and if replicated in other areas in China, it is

possible that economic performance will be further improved in such areas as interest

and   exchange     rate   liberalization,   capital   account   opening,    and    RMB

internationalization.




2. Shanghai Pilot FTZ, the background



The SPFTZ can be compared with the Sheng Zheng special economic zone near Hong

Kong 35 years ago, which ushered in reforms and spectacular growth.




         2a)   Why a Pilot FTZ? A new stage for China’s economy, and structural

                                            3
           unbalance




China has accomplished major economic development in the new millennium.

According to the World Bank’s World Development Indicators1, China’s GDP in the

year 2001 when she joined the WTO was 1.535 trillion (constant 2005 US$). By 2013,

China’s GDP was 4.864 trillion, reflecting an annual rate of increase of 10.09%. By

comparison, the world total economy in the same period increased from 41.02 trillion

to 55.94 trillion, with an annual rate of increase of only 2.62%. In these twelve years,

China’s share in the world economy more than doubled, from 3.74% in 2001 to 8.69%

in 2013. China dwarfs Brazil, India and Russia with her 2013 GDP about 57.3% of the

four BRIC countries as a whole. In comparison with the United States, as in Fig.1,

China’s GDP has increased from about one-eighth (13%) of that of US in 2001 to more

than one-third (33.5%) in 20132.




1 All the data in this paper are obtained from the WDI database unless otherwise expressed.
2 If evaluated by exchange rate in constant 2005 US$, China’s GDP in 2013 is 4.86×1012, while US’s GDP is
1.45×1013. China’s GDP in 2001 is 1.53×1012, while US’s GDP is 1.17×1013.
                                                         4
China’s macroeconomic performance in the past decade reflects high domestic

investment, high dependence on the foreign market and a low consumption ratio. The

proportion of China’s gross capital formation in the world tripled from 6.3% in 2001 to

16.9% in 2012, increasing from US$575 billion to US$2.17 trillion, not much less than

United States’ 2.81 trillion. The annual growth rate of China’s gross capital formation

has been in two digits, since 2001, peaking in 2009 at 19.3%, while all other main

economies struggled in the aftermath of 2008 global financial crisis with their gross

capital formation decreased by more than 10% in 2009.




                                           5
To increase investment, China relies not only on domestic saving, but also on foreign

capital inflows. In 2001 the ratio of gross domestic saving to GDP in China was 38.4%,

more than two-thirds higher than the world average ratio of 22.8%. In 2006, that ratio

in China increased to 50.7%, and has remained at more than 50% since.. China is also

a main destination for global foreign direct investment (FDI). In 2001 the net inflow of

FDI into China was 44.2 billion US$, about 6.1% of the world, and this increased to

348 billion US$ in 2013, nearly a quarter (24.2%) of the world (Fig.3).




                                           6
The productive capacities induced by high investment and low domestic consumption

found an outlet in an export-oriented trade policy with a fixed exchange rate currency

policy. In 2001 exports of goods and services by China were 400 billion in 2005

constant US$, about 4% of the world. In 2013 China’s exports reached 1.92 trillion,

more than 10% of the world. Since China exported much more than she imported, the

trade balance increased steadily, from 47.7 billion in 2001 to 342 billion in 2013.




With both increasing foreign capital inflows and a trade imbalance induced by a fixed

exchange rate, as well as hot money for speculative RMB appreciation, China’s foreign

reserves increased rapidly. The value of China’s total reserves in 2001 were 220 billion

current US$, and by the year of 2013 it had increased to 3.88 trillion, more than triple

the second largest reserve holder Japan’s 1.27 trillion (Fig.4).




                                            7
While the economic accomplishments noted above are universally recognized, the

current development model of China has drawbacks and cannot sustain itself for

another one or two decades.




Firstly, the world has less ability to accommodate China’s future development in the

same way. China’s GDP per capita in 2013 was 3583 in constant 2005 US$, about 45%

of the world average 7852. If China and the world maintain a growth rate of GDP per

capita in the past twelve years, of 9.5% and 1.4% respectively1, China will reach the

world average GDP per capita in a decade, by 2023. But this would mean that China’s

gross domestic savings accounts for 70% of her GDP, exports account for 25% of the

world, and accommodate 59% of global FDI 2 , which is unlikely to happen 3 . Since

1 If evaluated in constant 2005 US$, the GDP per capita of China in 2001 is 1206, in 2013 is 3583, and the GDP
per capita of the World in 2001 is 6636, in 2013 is 7852. From these we can easily compute the growth rate is
9.5% and 1.4% respectively. Based on these growth rate, China’s GDP per capita will be equal to the World’s in
10.2 years.
2 All these projections are assuming the same increase rate of 2001 to 2012 in the following years of 2013 to

2023. For example, China’s saving ratio of GDP in 2001 is 0.383, in 2012 is 0.515, if keep the same increase rate, in
2023 this ratio will increase to 0.692, about 70%. The export and FDI in 2023 are projected in the same way.
3 According the macroeconomic theory, S=I+CA, where S is national saving, I is investment and CA is current

                                                          8
China has become the second largest economy in the world, it cannot simply replicate

the past development path from when she was relatively small.




Secondly, China cannot afford the environmental costs accompanying her current

development pattern for another decade. China accounts for 20% of the world’s energy

consumption, 25% of CO2 emissions and the PM10 level is 35% higher than the world

average. According to a report of WHO, there are 16 Chinese cities in the top 20 most

heavily air polluted cities of the world, including Tianjin, Chongqing, Shenyang, and

Beijing (Fig.5).




Thirdly, the national income of China may not be as large as her GDP appears. Lacking

technology and patents, Chinese firms are usually at the bottom of the product value

curve, using unskilled labor to produce low technology production such as assembling,

and earn a small share of the profit. According a latest research by two Asian


account surplus. As a big country in the world, a current account surplus of 5% of GDP is rare, therefore if China’s
national saving equals 70% of her GDP, its investment would be equal 65% of GDP, which is unbelievably high.
                                                          9
Development Bank economists 1 , when China exports an Apple iPhone, she only

receives US$6.5 as the manufacturing fee in the total cost of $178.96.




If the Sheng Zhen special economic zone can be seen as a symbol of the traditional

development model in past three decades, it is the SPFTZ that is aimed to be another

symbol for the new development model in the following decades.




           2b) A pilot zone for reform, not just for trade




It is not accidental for such a pilot free trade zone to be located in Shanghai. Shanghai

is the largest city in China and also the financial and economic center. Consisting of

only 0.06% of China’s total area, the GDP of Shanghai however accounts for 3.8% of

China’s total in 2013. Shanghai is leading China in the international economic and trade

sector, with container handling amount accounting for 17.8% of China’s total, goods

import and export amount accounting for 19.5%, and FDI amount accounting for 14.3%.

Just as the reform and opening of the Pudong New Area of Shanghai in 1991, if the

policy trials succeed in Shanghai, they may be replicated more easily in other parts of

China.




Located in the outskirts of Shanghai, the SPFTZ covers four existing “bonded zones”,

shown in Table 1.


1 Yuqing Xing and Neal Detert, How the iPhone Widens the United States Trade Deficit with the People’s Republic

of China, ADBI Working Paper Series, No. 257, December 2010
                                                     10
     Table 1: Transformation of existing bonded zones into the Shanghai FTZ

 Existing        bonded     Description                                                            Area

 zones                                                                                             (km2)


 Shanghai                   Officially launched in September 1990. It is the first bonded          10

 Waigaoqiao FTZ             zone in China and currently has the largest total economic

                            output among all bonded zones in China

 Waigaoqiao Bonded          It is China’s first “bonded logistics park1” that obtained the         1.03

 Logistics Park             special approval of the State Council. It is also connected to

                            the Waigaoqiao port and is 3 km from the Waigaoqiao FTZ

 Pudong Airport FTZ         Officially approved by the State Council in July, 2009. The            3.59

                            Shanghai international shipping center includes not only

                            water shipping but also air transport. Air cargo, which

                            involves high-value goods and high transportation speed, is

                            complimentary to water transportation

 Yangshan Free Trade        Launched when the Yangshan Deep-water Port was                         14.16

 Port Area                  officially opened on December 10, 2005, it is also China’s

                            first bonded port

 Total                                                                                             28.78


                                   Source: reproduced from Wan (2014)




1 In China, a bonded logistics park is a special customs zone in a bonded area with the aim to develop modern

international logistics under the permission of the State Council.
                                                          11
Although named as a “Free Trade Zone”, the SPFTZ is from the beginning actually a

pilot zone for reform, not just for trade. The difference between the SPFTZ and other

FTAs lies mainly in the following.




       (i) Firstly, the SPFTZ is not an area established by bilateral or multilateral

       negotiations, but a unilateral policy trial area of the Chinese government. A Free

       Trade Area (FTA), or equally a Free Trade Zone, can be used in two different ways.

       The first meaning of a free trade area is a type of trade bloc, a designated group of

       countries that have agreed to eliminate tariffs, quotas and preferences on most (if

       not all) goods and services traded between them. In the WTO, free trade agreements

       are regional trade agreements (RTAs), which are reciprocal trade agreements

       between two or more partners.




       According to the RTA database of WTO1, there are currently 109 FTAs in the world,

       all of them cover goods. Among them about half (54) FTAs are between two

       countries, and other 55 are among three or more countries. There are also 115 FTA

       & EIA2 with coverage on both goods and services, among them 71 are between

       two countries, and other 44 are among three or more countries. According this

       database, China has signed 11 FTA & EIA with other countries and areas, the

       counterpart and the year of entry into force are: ASEAN(2005), Chile(2006), Costa

       Rica(2011), Hong Kong, China(2003), Macao, China(2003), New Zealand(2008),


1   http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/region_e/rta_pta_e.htm
2   EIA means Economic Integration Agreement.
                                                      12
       Singapore(2009), Iceland(2014), Pakistan(2007), Peru(2010), Switzerland(2014).

       Four other FTAs have been signed with early announcements to the WTO: ECFA

       (the Cross-Straits Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement), China-

       Australia, China-Korea and China-Norway.




       The SPFTZ is more like the second meaning of Free Trade Zone, which refers to a

       geographic area where goods may be landed, handled, manufactured or

       reconfigured, and re-exported without the intervention of the customs authorities.

       Only when goods are moved to consumers within the country in which the zone is

       located do they become subject to prevailing customs duties. Such kind of Free

       Trade Zones are organized around major seaports, international airports, and

       national frontiers—areas with many geographic advantages for trade. The SPFTZ

       is one of these Special Economic Zones in China.




(ii)   Secondly, the SPFTZ is not aimed at free trade with other countries, but rather

       emphasizes new reform methods.




       The traditional development model of China has three economic pillars: an

       investment policy encouraging foreign direct investment in assembling industry to

       absorb excess labor, a trade policy encouraging exports to sell the excess products

       thus produced, and a financial policy aimed at stabilizing an undervalued RMB

       exchange rate. The SPFTZ is designed to accommodate these directions of policy.

                                             13
According to the Overall Plan for the SPFTZ designed by the State Council, the

central government of China, the major tasks of the SPFTZ include the following.




Firstly, the opening up of new investment sectors. In the past China has welcomed

foreign direct investments, while maintaining strict controls on other capital

inflows.. In the SPFTZ, the financial services, transportation services, commerce

and trade services, professional services, cultural services, and public services

sectors are to be enlarged and opened, and in most sectors market access

restrictions such as requirements concerning the qualification of investors,

limitations on foreign participation, restrictions concerning business scope, etc.,

will be suspended or cancelled. A "Negative List" mechanism will be implemented

within the zone. For the projects that are not stated in the "Negative List", foreign

investors and domestic investors will receive the same treatment.




Secondly comes the promotion of a transformation of China’s trade development

approach. In order to change from a low value added trade pattern, the SPFTZ is

cultivating new trading types and functions, aiming to increase China's competitive

advantage and enhance their position in the global trade value chain by focusing

on the development of technology, brands, quality and service. Multinational

companies are encouraged to set up Asia-Pacific regional headquarters and/or

operation centers with comprehensive functions of trading, logistics, settlement,

                                       14
etc. More efforts will be made to promote Shanghai as an international trade

settlement center, and to expand the function of the special account on cross-border

receipt or payment and financing of trade in services. Enterprises in the SPFTZ will

be supported to develop offshore business.




Thirdly, the deepening of innovation and opening up of financial services. Under

proper risk control, the SPFTZ will pilot RMB capital account convertibility,

interest rate liberalization, and the cross-border use of the RMB. In the SPFTZ, the

assets of financial institutions will be recorded at market rates. The SPFTZ will

explore a trial foreign exchange administrative system that is in line with

international practices to better facilitate trade and investment. Enterprises are

encouraged to leverage on both domestic and international market resources to

liberalize cross-border financing. Administration on foreign debt will be further

reformed to facilitate cross-border financing. Foreign exchange operations by

multinational companies will be enhanced to encourage the setup of regional or

global treasury centers in Shanghai.




3c) Comparison of SPFTZ and other special economic areas




There are several other special economic areas in China, some of them have a

degree of comparability with the SPFTZ. One is Qianhai, the modern service

industry cooperation zone of Shenzhen and Hong Kong. Another is the financial

                                       15
    cooperation between China and Singapore in the Suzhou Industrial Park (SZIP).

    Table 2 lists a comparison among these areas in their financial policies.




    Table 2: Comparison of SPFTZ, Qianhai, and Suzhou in financial policies

                     SPFTZ                             Qianhai               SZIP


 Background          Trial for financial reform        Cooperation between   Cooperation between

                     and opening out                   Shengzhen and HK      China and Singapore

 Location            Pudong (Shanghai)                 Shengzhen             Suzhou

 Starting Time       Sep. 2013                         Dec. 2012             Jun. 2014*

 Finance source      No limit                          Banks in HK           Banks in Singapore

 Finance Quota       Related to the paid-in            Balance Management    Balance Management

                     capital      and     macro

                     prudential    supervision

 Use of finance      In the SPFTZ or foreign           In the Qianhai area   In the SZIP

 Replicable or not   Will replicate to other           Not                   Not

                     areas in China


                                Source: reproduced from Shen (2014)

         * The SZIP launched in 1994, but the trial financial policies began in Jun. 2014.




3. Developments in the past year



After one year’s operation, the SPFTZ has already met several important policy

                                                  16
objectives.




           3a)     Legal and regulatory system




The 12th National Congress Standing Committee authorized the State Council to

temporarily adjust certain administrative examination and approval requirements under

"Law of the People's Republic of China on Wholly Foreign Owned Enterprises", "Law

of the People's Republic of China on Sino-Foreign Equity Joint Venture Companies",

"Law of the People's Republic of China on Sino-Foreign Cooperative Joint Venture

Companies" and such adjustments will be implemented in the next three years started

from 1 October 2013.




The regulatory environment for supervision and tax has also been improved. In the

SPFTZ, a foreign investment project no longer need apply for the confirmation from

Chinese government, unless it involves the negative list. As for the business registration,

the administration for industry and commerce has adopted a registered capital

contributions system, which is a reform to the former used registered capital paid up

system1. The administration of quality supervision, inspection and quarantine allocates

a specific organizational code to foreign investment enterprises in real time. The



1  According to the older version of “Company Law of the People’s Republic of China”, the registered capital of a
limited liability company shall be the amount of the paid-up capital contributions of all its shareholders as
registered with the company registration authority, which is called as registered capital paid up system. After the
trial in the SPFTZ, the new version of that law has changed the article as “The registered capital of a limited
liability company shall be the total amount of capital contributions subscribed to by all the shareholders
registered in the company registration authority”, which is called as registered capital contribution system.
                                                         17
administration for taxation has adopted a one-net express system in the SPFTZ. Firms

applying for taxation registration need not be examined. The e-invoice issued by e-

commerce firms has been extended from individual consumers to enterprises. Several

taxation procedures can now be accomplished on the internet rather than go to the

taxation office.




         3b) Negative list for foreign investment




On September 30th, 2013, the Shanghai municipal government published special

management recommendations for foreign investment in SPFTZ (2013 version),

usually called “Negative list”, which covers 1069 businesses in 89 divisions within 18

main categories. There are also 190 regulations on the conduct of business in the SPFTZ.

Any sectors not on the list are open to foreign investors. Since the 2013 version of the

list was quite similar to the existing Foreign Investment Industrial Guidance Catalogue,

the Shanghai municipal authorities declared a 2014 version negative list on the July 1st,

2014, decreased the 190 regulations to 139, among which 110 regulations are restrictive,

and the other 29 are prohibitive.




         3c) Trade Facilitation




In the past year, the Customs, Inspection and Quarantine Bureau, and Maritime Affairs

Administration of SPFTZ have provided more than 60 new policies on trade facilitation.

                                           18
The basic policy is “first-line decontrolled; second-line controlled safely and efficiently,

and free movement within the FTZ”. The so-called “first-line” refers to the border, and

“second-line” refers to the domestic market boundary (Guan, 2014). The Shanghai

Customs have provided 23 regulations in the SPFTZ, including entering FTZ first and

then applying for customs declaration, self-transportation within FTZ, simplifying the

documents in customs declaration, etc. The Inspection and Quarantine Bureau have

adopted paperless customs clearance operation, the admission of third-part’s inspection

and quarantine results. The maritime administration have adopted supervision of ship

safety operations, high efficiency ship registration, among other things. The Customs

and Inspection and Quarantine Bureau also jointly conduct “one application, one

inspection, and one pass”, and paperless customs access when going out of the border

through the frontline or entering the FTZ through the second line from other area of

China.




         3d) Financial Innovation.




The four financial supervisors, namely the People’s Bank of China (PBoC), and three

regulatory commissions on banking, securities, and insurance, have adopted 51 new

regulating methods to build a new financial architecture in the SPFTZ.

            i.    Free Trade Accounts. The People’s Bank of China issued

                  Implementing Rules on accounts differentiating in the SPFTZ on May

                  22th, 2014, which set out the regulation of free trade accounts.

                                            19
       According to the rules, the financial institutions in Shanghai can build

       a FTU (Free Trade Accounting Unit), which is separated from the

       institution’s other accounting system. The accounts opened in such

       FTU are called free trade accounts, in which both domestic currency

       (RMB) and foreign currencies are regulated by the same rules. Both

       organizations and individuals in the SPFTZ are qualified to open these

       free trade accounts. Cross border capital transactions under current

       account and direct investment can be settled in the free trade accounts.

 ii.   Currency exchange and remittance for investment and financing.

       According to the Opinions of the People’s Bank of China on Financial

       Measures to Support the SPFTZ, cross-border payment, receipt, and

       exchange involved in direct investment by enterprises can be

       processed directly by banks. Eligible individuals who are employed

       in the FTZ can make various kinds of overseas investment, including

       securities investment. The capital market is thus opened up steadily

       by these developments. Financial institutions and enterprises in the

       FTZ can make investments and trade in the securities and futures

       markets in Shanghai in accordance with relevant regulations.

iii.   Interest rate marketization. The People’s Bank of China, Shanghai

       Head Office removed the interest cap on retail foreign currency

       deposited in Shanghai from June 27th, 2014. Financial institutions in

       Shanghai can price independently the foreign currency deposits of

                                20
            enterprise clients. The interest cap for foreign currency deposits of

            individual clients will be removed later.

     iv.    RMB cross-border use. The People’s Bank of China, Shanghai Head

            Office issued detailed rules supporting RMB cross-border use in the

            SPFTZ on the February 21th, 2014. According to these rules, banks

            in Shanghai can provide cross-border RMB settlement services

            directly in current accounts and direct investment accounts to their

            clients. Individuals employed in the SPFTZ can open bank settlement

            accounts for cross-border RMB transactions under current accounts.

            The non-bank financial institutions and enterprises in the SPFTZ can

            borrow RMB funds from overseas, with a limit on the amount.

            Enterprises in the SPFTZ can build RMB fund pools to facilitate the

            double direction flow within the enterprise’s group. Banks in

            Shanghai can provide RMB settlement services to the cross-border e-

            commerce organization in the SPFTZ. The China Foreign Exchange

            Trade Center and the Shanghai Gold Exchange can also provide cross-

            border RMB transactions in the SPFTZ.




    3e) Assessing the effect of SPFTZ




Since the inception of the SPFTZ in 2013, it has made concrete progress in the




                                     21
       following areas1.




       Firstly, new registered enterprises have increased quickly. By September 26, 2014,

       there were 12547 new registered enterprises in the SPFTZ, in which the number of

       domestic investment enterprises is 10788, and the number of foreign investment

       enterprises is 1759. If separated by quarter as in Fig.6, we can see the proportion

       of foreign investment enterprises is steadily increasing, from 11.6% to 24.9%. In

       the 1759 foreign investment enterprises, there are 1581 enterprises that prefer the

       new registration method in SPFTZ.




       Secondly, financial innovation in SPFTZ has made progress. There are now 484

       free trade accounts opened by enterprises, and the RMB balance of these accounts

       is about 90 million. Many financial institutions have business in the SPFTZ,

       including 14 Chinese banks, 23 foreign banks, 11 insurance companies, and three

       security companies. There are 28 enterprises who have built so called “RMB

1   Some data are cited from Shen(2014)
                                             22
     money ponds”1 in the SPFTZ, with a balance of 16.9 billion. The RMB cross-

     border settlement in the SPFTZ is 111.5 billion. There are 71 enterprises who are

     involved with RMB finance from abroad, with a balance of 16.06 billion.




What is the economic impact of the SPFTZ? To optimists the SPFTZ is seen as China’s

most significant effort at economic reform since the reform and opening out in 1978,

and it has gained support from top Chinese leaders including President Xi Jinping and

Premier Li Keqiang. But to pessimists, the impact of the SPFTZ over the past year has

been below expectation. The SPFTZ has not accomplished the economic liberation that

many hoped it would provide. Progress in many areas, including the relaxation of

capital restrictions and the liberalization of interest rates, have been lackluster. The

2013 version of negative list was seen as no more than a replication of the Foreign

Investment Industrial Guidance Catalogue. The 2014 version list reduces restrictive

regulations from 190 to 139, which is seen as a big step forward, but the actual effect

may need more consideration. For example, the 2014 version list reduces restrictions

on investment in catalogues such as cotton processing, non-ferrous metals smelting, but

it seems no foreign enterprise will make such investment in the 29 square kilometer

SPFTZ. Some restrictions are reduced because any investment is forbidden, no matter

domestic or foreign capital, for example investment in the gaming industry.




Although far from satisfactory, the financial regulation in the SPFTZ is relaxed by the


1According to the rules of the People’s Bank of China, a “RMB money pond” is the finance of cross-border RMB
money among the non-financial companies of a multinational company group.
                                                        23
negative list and financial innovation. The capital control in China is loosened with the

founding of the SPFTZ. We may analyze the effect of SPFTZ on financial liberalization

through the study of interest differentiate between on shore and off shore RMB

exchange rates. There is currently a dual system of RMB markets (Chen and Whalley,

2013). One is the onshore market with an official spot exchange rate set by the People’s

Bank of China according to a basket of currencies. All current account transactions can

take place in this onshore market freely, as a commitment to current account

convertibility. But the transactions in capital account are under regulation of the State

Administration of Foreign Exchange. The other RMB market is offshore, which means

out of the regulation of Chinese authorities.




    The offshore RMB market began in 2004, when personal RMB deposits were

    permitted in Hong Kong. From then on, the RMB deposit balance in Hong Kong

    have increased steadily. Before 2009, the RMB in Hong Kong was mainly brought

    in by onshore tourists and Hong Kong residents. Since July 2009 when the People’s

    Bank of China announced the use of RMB in cross-border trade settlement, RMB

    deposits in Hong Kong increased sharply. From 2011 and onwards, the RMB could

    also be used in ODI (Overseas Direct Investment), and this drove more RMB into

    the offshore market. RMB deposits, loans and bonds are traded in the offshore

    market in Hong Kong, which is largely free of regulation from the monetary

    authority of Hong Kong.




                                           24
   The crucial point in understanding the offshore market is that, unlike the onshore

   market which is tightly controlled by the Chinese authorities, the RMB in offshore

   market can float freely. Therefore, the capital control in mainland China and capital

   free in Hong Kong bring two different prices for a single currency. It can be a

   reasonably inference that the spread between onshore RMB (CNY) and offshore

   RMB (CNH) exchange rates would tend to diminish if the capital control in China

   were abolished, as we can see from Fig.7.


                                       Fig. 7
                           Price Spread of CNY and CNH
        0.050000

        0.040000

        0.030000

        0.020000

        0.010000

        0.000000

        -0.010000

        -0.020000

        -0.030000

        -0.040000

        -0.050000


Source: the authors’ computation based on the Wind, Fred and Bloomberg Databases




   We already know that the founding of SPFTZ has loosed capital controls in China.

   Therefore, the assessment of its impact on financial liberalization can be based on

   the price spread between CNY and CNH, which has shown a slight tendency to

   diminish since the founding of SPFTZ. This is discussed more fully in a separate

   paper by us (e.g. see Yao and Whalley, 2015).
                                          25
4. Concluding Remarks



In this paper we discuss the economic background to China’s launch of the SPFTZ last

autumn, the main developments in the past year, and give an assessment on its effect

on China’s financial liberalization. The SPFTZ aims to herald a new round of economic

reform by the new generation of Chinese leaders, whose policy is targeting sustainable

development of the economy, and its social and natural environment. The aim of the

SPFTZ is to explore new systems, not preferential policies, and is a nursery of new

measures transplantable to other parts of the country.




Analyzing the impact of the SPFTZ is difficult as it is still early, however if we examine

the price spread between off shore CNH and on shore CNY exchange rates, we find it

has a tendency to diminish the gap. In a companion paper (Yao and Whalley (2015))

we report analysis of the yield gap between onshore and offshore RMB of 3-month

maturity, and find this gap is decreasing since the founding of the SPFTZ. These results

suggest that China’s capital control is also loosening since the SPFTZ.




 The practice in the SPFTZ is still developing. On December 28, 2014, China

announced the expansion of the SPFTZ, the founding of three new FTZs in Guangdong,

Tianjin and Fujian, as well as the simplification of a number of investment procedures

in these zones. The SPFTZ is expanded to include the Lujiazui financial district, Jinqiao

                                            26
development zone and Zhangjiang hi-tech park. With the further successful practice of

the SPFTZ and more pilot policies replicated in China as a whole, it is possible that a

more balanced Chinese economy in the East Asia in the following decade.




Bibliography



[1]. Chen, Hejing and John Whalley. 2013. “Are Offshore RMB Arrangements the

    Basis for a Long-term Exchange Rate System without Convertibility?” China and

    World Economy 21(1): 26-46.

[2]. Guan, Bing. 2014. “Influences on Shanghai Free Trade Zone on China’s Foreign

    Trade Enterprises and Countermeasures”. Working Paper for International

    Conference on Global Economy, Commerce and Service Science (GECSS 2014)

[3]. Ma Guonan. 2008. “Efficacy of China’s Capital Controls: Evidence from Price and

    Flow Data.” Pacific Economic Review, 13(1): 104-123.

[4]. The People’s Bank of China. 2013. “Opinions of the PBC on Financial Measures

    to    Support    the    China     (Shanghai)     Pilot    Free    Trade     Zone”.

    http://www.pbc.gov.cn/publish/english/955/2014/20140107162646760579545/20

    140107162646760579545_.html

                                          27
[5]. Shen, Yuliang, and the Project Team of Shanghai University of International

    Business and Economics. 2014. “The Evaluation Report of SPFTZ”(unpublished).

[6]. Song, Yu. 2014. “Analysis on the characteristics of Shanghai Pilot Free Trade

    Zone.” 3rd International Conference on Information, Business and Education

    Technology (ICIBET 2014)

[7]. Wan, Zheng. 2014. “Policy and politics behind Shanghai’s Free Trade Zone

    Program.” Journal of Transport Geography 34: 1-6.

[8]. Xing, Yuqing and Neal Detert. 2010. “How the iPhone Widens the United States

    Trade Deficit with the People’s Republic of China.” ADBI Working Paper Series,

    No.257.

[9]. Yao, Daqing and John Whalley. 2015. “An Evaluation of the Impact of China’s

    Capital Control since the SPFTZ.” NBER working paper 20901.




                                        28
