                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   NEW IDEAS IN INVENTION

                                          Mikko Packalen
                                          Jay Bhattacharya

                                        Working Paper 20922
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20922


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2015




A previous version of this paper was circulated under the title "Words in Patents: Research Inputs
and the Value of Innovativeness in Invention.'' We thank Darius Lakdawalla, Dana Goldman, Alan
Garber, Richard Freeman, John Ham, Josh Graff Zivin, David Blau, Joel Blit, Subhra Saha, Tom Philipson,
Neeraj Sood, Pierre Azoulay, Grant Miller, Jeremy Goldhaber-Fiebert, and Gerald Marschke for their
comments on early drafts of this paper and for their encouragement. We also thank seminar participants
at the Harvard Business School, Stanford School of Medicine, University of Guelph, and especially
Bruce Weinberg's working group on innovation and science at the NBER for excellent feedback. Despite
all this help, the authors are responsible for all errors in the paper. We acknowledge financial support
from the National Institute on Aging grant P01-AG039347. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mikko Packalen and Jay Bhattacharya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
New Ideas in Invention
Mikko Packalen and Jay Bhattacharya
NBER Working Paper No. 20922
January 2015
JEL No. I1,O31,O32,O33

                                             ABSTRACT

A key decision in research is whether to try out new ideas or build on more established ideas. In this
paper, we evaluate which type of work is more likely to spur further invention. When recent advances
create superior opportunities for invention, their adoption as research inputs in the invention process
promotes technological progress. The gains from pursuing such innovative research paths may, however,
be very limited as new ideas are often initially raw and poorly understood. We determine idea inputs
in invention based on the text of nearly every US patent granted during 1836–2010. We find that inventions
that build on new ideas early are more likely to spur subsequent invention than inventions that rely
on ideas of older vintage. Our results are important because they suggest a benefit from encouraging
and supporting innovative research that tries out new ideas — avoiding stagnation in technological
advance.


Mikko Packalen
University of Waterloo
Department of Economics
200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1
Canada
packalen@uwaterloo.ca

Jay Bhattacharya
117 Encina Commons
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
jay@stanford.edu
1    Introduction

Anyone involved in research must choose whether to build their work on recent advances or rely
on more established knowledge. This is a choice faced by scientists and inventors as well as private
and public financiers of research, such as pharmaceutical firms, the National Science Foundation,
and the National Institutes of Health. When recent advances create superior opportunities for in-
vention, innovative research that pursues those new opportunities promotes technological progress.
Many of the potential benefits of such innovative research may, however, never be realized as risk
aversion, the principal-agent problem, limited rationality, and entrenched interests may bias re-
searchers, firms, and research agencies against innovative research paths (e.g. Kuhn 1962; March
1991; Ahuja and Lambert 2001).
    Yet, favoring less innovative research directions is not necessarily foolish, as the private and
social benefits of work that tries out new ideas may be quite limited. Important new scientific
and technological advances are often initially raw and poorly understood (Marshall, 1920; Usher,
1929; Kuhn, 1962). Organizations also often lack the necessary complementary capabilities to
build on new ideas (Nerkar, 2003). Work that builds on fresh ideas thus need not result in much
useful invention. Knowledge about the properties of recent advances may also initially progress so
fast that inventions building on it soon become obsolete. Moreover, when the knowledge base in
recombinant invention is expansive enough, advances that add to it have little impact on what can
be achieved with invention (Weitzman, 1998).
    That the benefits of trying out new ideas may be small is not a mere theoretical possibility.
There exists both anecdotal and quantitative evidence (Utterback, 1996; Fleming, 2001) suggesting
that knowledge needs to mature and deepen before it becomes most useful in spurring subsequent
inventions.
    The benefits of trying out new ideas in invention may thus be large, small, non-existent, or even
negative. In this paper, we offer a quantitative comparison of invention that builds on new ideas
and invention that builds on more established ideas: we examine which type of work spurs more


                                                 1
subsequent invention.
    We find that inventions that build on new ideas are more likely to spur subsequent invention
than inventions that rely on ideas of older vintage. Our results are important because they suggest
a benefit from encouraging and supporting innovative research that tries out new ideas — avoiding
stagnation in technological advance. The results add to the heretofore sparse systematic evidence
on the benefits of pursuing innovative research directions (Fleming, 2001; Ahuja and Lampert
2001; Schoenmakers and Duysters 2010).1
    We examine patent texts to determine which inventions build on newer ideas. The textual
approach reveals organically which technologies and scientific discoveries have been popular idea
inputs in invention.2,3 We rely on patent citations to determine how much subsequent innovation
each invention generated. Because patent citations may reflect similarity rather than cumulative
invention, we develop a novel citation measure that reflects only inventions that build upon the
cited invention. We also contribute by organizing and examining patent-level data for 1836–2010.
To our knowledge, existing large-scale patent-level analyses have focused on the post–1975 time
period.



2     Methods

We first propose a new way to identify idea inputs in technological innovation. We then explain
how we use this information on idea inputs to measure of the vintage of idea inputs in each in-
   1 Ahuja and Lampert (2001) and Schoenmakers and Duysters (2010) find that, in chemical and pharmaceutical

industries, highly cited patents cite more recent patents than do other patents, suggesting that the use of emerging
knowledge facilitates invention. These analyses are, however, subject to an important caveat: a citation may reflect
mere similarity rather than cumulative invention (e.g. Jaffe et al., 2002). Hence, differences in the age of cited patents
may reflect mere differences in the extent of similar inventions rather than differences in idea inputs, and differences in
forward citations may reflect mere differences in the extent of similar inventions rather than differences in subsequent
advance. We address this issue by measuring the age of idea inputs from text instead, and by identifying breakthrough
inventions based on an approach that excludes forward citations that may reflect mere similarity.
   2 Existing textual approaches to measuring innovativeness from text (Evans, 2011; Grodal and Thoma, 2009;

Azoulay et al., 2011; Bhattacharya and Packalen, 2011) have relied on predefined word lists.
   3 Our analysis also complements the recombination theory of invention (e.g. Usher, 1922, Schumpeter, 1939,

Weitzman, 1998) by providing systematic evidence on what new ideas and matter are recombined in technological
innovation and on how important new knowledge is as an idea input.


                                                            2
vention. Next, we present our approach to measuring the extent of subsequent advance spurred by
each patent. Finally, we discuss how we link these constructed variables to estimate whether work
that builds on newer ideas spurs more further invention.


2.1     Identifying Idea Inputs from Patent Texts

Existing analyses of invention have typically captured idea inputs from patent citations (e.g. Ca-
ballero and Jaffe, 1993; Popp, 2002).4 Two well-known drawbacks of this approach are that (1)
in any given domain citations can reveal only a very limited set of idea inputs (Rosenberg, 1982)
and that (2) because the main purpose of patent citations is to delineate the boundaries of a patent
rather than disclose prior art the patent built upon, at least half of patent citations do not reflect
idea inputs (Jaffe et al., 2000).5 For these reasons, we sought to develop a new approach.
    In our approach, we measure idea inputs from patent text. By design, patent texts distribute
information about advancements in knowledge: a patent text describes the invention and its com-
ponents. Consequently, we expected that by indexing words and word sequences in patents we
would uncover at least a subset of the knowledge and matter that were recombined in the invention
process that led to the invention. Below we show that this indeed turned out indeed to be the case
— the indexing revealed important prior inventions and scientific discoveries that have served as
idea inputs in the invention process.6
    The patent data we index spans 175 years of US patents (1836–2010). We first index all words
   4 An alternative existing approach measures idea inputs from subclass designations in patents (Fleming, 2001). A

drawback of that approach is that subclasses capture a very limited set of idea inputs. In related work, Alexopoulos
(2011) uses classifications of technical books to measure rates of invention.
   5 Addressing the latter concern by excluding backward citations for which the cited and citing patents or their

components lie in same technology categories (see section 2.4) would leave one with idea inputs that are even more
limited in their number and in what the inputs cover.
   6 Because the purpose of patent text is to describe the invention, there does not appear to exist much reason for

inventors to include words that do not reflect the components of the invention. One source of noise is that some
inventions are re-named or named first only after proven valuable (e.g. drugs). It is also possible that a new word
or word sequence represents the output of the patent, as opposed to an input. However, this property does not drive
our results: for a given idea, the number of such patents is at most one, whereas the number of patents we consider
innovative because of the mention of the new idea is generally orders of magnitudes higher. Moreover, our results are
robust to excluding for each new concept the patent that received the most citations.



                                                         3
and 2- and 3-word sequences that appear in each patent. By word we mean a character sequence
that is separated from other character sequences with whitespace. For each patent, the indexed text
includes the title, abstract, body, and claims.
    We refer to the indexed words and word sequences as concepts. To determine when the idea
represented by a concept was a new input to the inventive process, we determine for each concept
the year in which first it appears in the patent data. We refer to this year of arrival as the idea’s
cohort.7,8 For all post–1870 cohorts, we examine the initial lists of words and word sequences that
appear often in patents and exclude words and word sequences that appear to reflect changes in
spelling or presentation of patents rather than changes in the nature of inventive activity. Please
see the Data Appendix for details.
    After indexing concept mentions in each patent and the cohort of each concept, we rank con-
cepts in each cohort based on the number US patents that mention each concept. This ranking
enables us to focus attention on the best idea inputs in each cohort.
    Table 1 lists the 20 most popular new concepts in each decade from 1920s to 2000s (part 1)
and from 1840s to 1910s (part 2). For this summary table, concepts are grouped by the decade of
their cohort. The colored squares affixed to each concept name in the table indicate the technology
category with the most patents that mention the concept.




   7 Cohort  years and the timing of invention are measured from grant years of patents because the application year is
often ambiguous and not readily available. Newer patents have multiple application years for patents that are based on
a continuation application. For older patents it must be extracted from OCR text.
    8 Due to OCR errors and typos, we ignore the initial mention of concepts that are mentioned less than 5 times during

the subsequent 25 years. For such concepts the cohort is set as the earliest year in which (1) the concept is mentioned,
and (2) the concept is mentioned at least 5 times during the 25 years that follow.


                                                           4
                     Table 1, Part 1: Top 20 Most Popular New Idea Inputs by Decade of of Cohort, 1920s-2000s.


                                                            Top 20 Most Popular New Idea Inputs by Decade of Cohort
                                                                    Colors Show the Technology Category where Mentioned the Most
                          1920s            1930s               1940s               1950s               1960s              1970s               1980s               1990s               2000s
                      1    capacitor           polyvinyl           circuitry           transistor          software            microprocessor      eeprom              computer readab..   bluetooth
                           methanol            copolymer           pressurized         transistors         read only memor..   personal comput..   hard disk drive     world wide web      markup language..
                           particle size       copolymers          elastomeric         surfactant          laser beam          pixels              network lan         intranet            voip
                           diodes              polystyrene         elastomer           surfactants         liquid crystal ..   microcomputer       laptop              web page            information del..
                      5    reactants           methacrylate        pulse width         clock signal        memory ram          microprocessors     area network la..   web browser         storage area ne..
                           capacitors          acrylate            polyethylene te..   printed circuit..   initialization      floppy disk         dna sequence        web site            instant messagi..
Rank within decade




                           recycled            added dropwise      electronic comp..   epoxy resin         initialized         downloaded          monoclonal anti..   pcr amplificati..   removable non r..
                           cyclohexyl          dioxane             silane              analog signal       memory rom          eprom               expression vect..   web server          session initiat..
                           cycloalkyl          polyamide           antibiotics         digital convert..   only memory rom     eukaryotic          computer progra..   web pages           volatile nonvol..
                     10    acrylic acid        acrylonitrile       elastomers          gate electrode      silicon substra..   polyclonal          gene expression     bus usb             computing syste..
                           butanol             injection moldi..   homopolymers        logic circuit       emitting diode      recombinant dna     transfected         pci bus             protocol wap
                           low pass            methacrylic         polytetrafluoro..   control circuit..   light emitting ..   performance liq..   polymerase chai..   pcr product         xml file
                           electron beam       methacrylic aci..   pressurizing        circuit boards      data bus            reactive ion et..   polymerase chai..   pcr products        protocol voip
                           hydroxide solut..   cross linking       homopolymer         liquid chromato..   laser light         microprocessor ..   dna sequences       polishing cmp       internet protoc..
                     15    dodecyl             thermosetting       elastomeric mat..   dopant              data communicat..   affinity chroma..   monoclonal anti..   interface gui       nonvolatile mag..
                           antioxidants        polyamides          antibiotic          oligomers           ion implantatio..   sepharose           codon               user interface ..   mp3 player
                           plasticizers        methyl methacry..   silicone rubber     epitaxial           light emitting ..   diode led           genomic dna         mechanical poli..   nonvolatile opt..
                           sorbitol            video signal        ethylenically       analog signals      glass transitio..   emitting diode ..   sequence encodi..   internet servic..   mp3 players
                           lauryl              residence time      ethylenically u..   analog converte..   initialize          communication p..   gene encoding       pcr reaction        initiation prot..
                     20    sodium hydroxid..   decyl               carboxymethyl c..   miniaturization     mosfet              restriction enz..   expression vect..   jpeg                pci express

                                     Chemical          Computers & Communications                   Drugs & Medical               Electrical & Electronics             Mechanical           Others
                     Table 1, Part 2: Top 20 Most Popular New Idea Inputs by Decade of of Cohort, 1840s-1910s.


                                                       Top 20 Most Popular New Idea Inputs by Decade of Cohort
                                                             Colors Show the Technology Category where Mentioned the Most
                          1840s           1850s               1860s                1870s                1880s                1890s                1900s                1910s
                      1    function        utilized            energized            molecule             voltage              voltages             catalysts            catalyst
                           plastic         utilizing           converter            telephone            benzene              frequencies          antenna              capacitance
                           user            utilize             reader               solenoid             torque               reaction mixtur..    image data           aircraft
                           axial           inexpensive         gasoline             electrical conn..    transformer          control system       coplanar             radio frequency
                      5    automatic       develop             converters           shunt                interconnect         high frequency       moisture conten..    automotive
                           involves        hydrocarbon         cardboard            electrical ener..    low voltage          impedance            isoprene             stabilizers
Rank within decade




                           development     frictional          aniline              electrolyte          naphthalene          high voltage         intake manifold      potassium hydro..
                           filter          esters              opposite polari..    microphone           sterilized           wireless             spark plug           silica gel
                           sensitive       insulation          telescoped           low resistance       filament             combustion engi..    shock absorber       liquid phase
                     10    regardless      effectiveness       ejector              push button          secondary windi..    internal combus..    motion picture       stabilizer
                           reliable        mating              fibre                telephones           transformers         sulfonic             diesel engine        capacitive
                           even though     chemicals           carburetor           current supplie..    sodium acetate       automobiles          heating unit         hydrogenation
                           buffer          tensile             fibres               solenoids            ball bearings        sulfonic acid        electromagnetic..    frequency compo..
                           replacement     helps               pressure gauge       electrically co..    hysteresis           inductance           turbo                airplane
                     15    clearance       realize             peripheral groo..    electric motors      trailer              internal combus..    exhaust manifol..    variable resist..
                           transmits       attractive          rheostat             salicylic            ohmic                sodium sulfate       aviation             carrier frequen..
                           largely         practicing          circuit connect..    side panels          supply circuit       motor vehicles       ignition system      bentonite
                           locate          rear wall           encasing             air outlet           series circuit       sulfates             aluminum silica..    carrier wave
                           demonstrated    braking             tumed                telephone syste..    amperes              air gap              spark plugs          automotive vehi..
                     20    rigidity        slightly larger     broadened            recorders            active material      magnetic flux        shock absorbers      control electro..

                                    Chemical      Computers & Communications               Drugs & Medical           Electrical & Electronics          Mechanical          Others
    Table 1 shows that starting from the late 19th century the most popular idea inputs captured
by our approach generally represent important prior inventions and scientific discoveries. The
approach put forward here thus works as intended: it captures important idea inputs in invention
— pieces of knowledge that were recombined in the invention process that led to the patented
invention. In Table A1 in the appendix we provide further supporting evidence, this time from the
perspective of which idea inputs render patents innovative in each decade, using the measure of
innovativeness defined below in section 2.4.
    The textual approach complements the citation and subclass based approaches to measuring
idea inputs in invention. Besides capturing many more types of idea inputs than either existing
approach, an advantage of the textual approach is that a non-expert will often find it much easier
to understand the meaning of ideas uncovered from text than the meaning of ideas uncovered from
citations or subclasses; subclass names and patent and scientific article titles are often narrow
and very technical. In our application, for example, this is beneficial because the lists of idea
inputs enable the reader to verify that the ideas uncovered from text are indeed ideas that drove
technological change and were relatively new inputs in the years that followed the idea’s cohort
year, and that, consequently, the patents that built on these ideas early represented innovative work
that tried out a new idea.9


2.2     Measuring the Vintage of Idea Inputs

We calculate the vintage of idea inputs in each patent based on the appearances of idea inputs with
the most potential. To identify these idea inputs, we apply the principle of revealed preference:
within each idea input cohort, we consider those new ideas that are mentioned the most often by
the end of the sample period to be the most potent new ideas. For this purpose, we first identify
the top 100 new concepts in each cohort based on the number of patents that mention them by the
   9 Other rationales for pursuing text analysis include: noise in citations (Jaffe et al. 2000; Alcacer et al., 2009;
Lampe, 2012), the fact that citations can reflect similarity rather cumulative invention (section 2.3), sparsity of patent-
to-science citations in pre–1980s data, and sparsity of any citations in pre–1947 patents.



                                                            7
end of the sample. For each patent, we then determine the age of the newest top 100 concept that
appears in it. We refer to this measure as Age of Idea Inputs; this measure is our main measure of
the vintage of idea inputs in each patent. We later calculate a similar measure based on appearances
of the top 10, 000 concepts in each cohort.
   A rationale for focusing on ideas with the most potential is that inventors, firms and funding
agencies who are considering pursuing or funding research that builds on a new idea are likely
to have private information (or beliefs) about the input’s long-term potential relative to other new
ideas. Hence, rather than contemplating whether early work on a random new idea is worth pur-
suing, their decision is more likely to be between pursuing work on a potent new idea now and
postponing that work until the idea has matured. For this decision, the key uncertainty revolves
around whether work on the new ideas with the most potential is worthwhile soon after their arrival
or only later; Fleming (2001) suggests that work should be directed elsewhere until new ideas have
matured sufficiently.


2.3    Measuring Advances Spurred by Each Invention

We measure the advances spurred by each invention from the citations the patent has received
from other patents. Citations are a commonly used measure of patent value (e.g. Harhoff et al.,
1999; Hall et al., 2005) and knowledge flows (e.g. Jaffe et al., 1993). Fewer than half of citations,
however, actually reflect cumulative invention (Jaffe et al., 2002). This is in part because the main
purpose of patent citations is not the disclosure of prior art upon which the invention built, but
rather to delimit the scope of the patent by indicating which parts of the citing invention are not
novel and therefore not covered by the patent (e.g. Jaffe et al., 1993; Strumsky et al., 2010). A
citation may thus merely indicate that two inventions, or some of their components, are similar in
the sense that the inventions or some of their components are near one another in the technology
space, even if they are built upon different ideas or principles (e.g. Jaffe et al., 2002).
   The concern that citations may reflect the mere similarity of inventions weakens the case for


                                                   8
using citations to measure cumulative invention. To address this issue, we construct a new measure:
the count of citations for which the novel parts of the citing invention are not anywhere near the
novel parts of the cited invention in the technology space. Among citations, such citing and cited
patent pairs seem the most likely to reflect cumulative invention.
    To construct this measure, we first determine how close the citing and cited patents’ novel parts
are in the technology space. The novel parts are specified by the claims of each patent. The primary
and multiple secondary technology classification codes assigned to a patent in turn delineate what
types of technologies are covered by the claims (Strumsky et al., 2010; U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office, 2005). We infer whether the novel parts of the citing invention are near the novel parts
of the cited invention in the technology space from the technology codes of each citing and cited
patent pair. The technology space is specified by patent examiners who assign the technology
codes to patents and also maintain the classification.
    At the 3-digit level, the classification system used in patents has over 400 technology classes.
Because different 3-digit codes may cover closely related technologies, a citing invention may be
near a cited invention even when the two do not share a 3-digit technology code. Fortunately,
Hall et al. (2011) mapped the 3-digit technology classes into 6 broad technology categories. This
mapping allows us to extract those citing and cited patent pairs that are unlikely to cover similar
technologies: patent pairs for which the technology categories spanned by their 3-digit technology
class codes do not overlap.
    In our approach, we first determine for each patent the primary and all secondary 3-digit tech-
nology codes assigned to the invention. Next, we determine which technology categories are
spanned by these technology classes.10 We then calculate the number of citations received from
patents which technology categories do not overlap with any of the technology categories of the
cited patent. We refer to the count of such received citations as No-Overlap Citations. From this
   10 The approach is distinct from counting citations for which the category of the primary technology class is different

for the citing and cited patents because, for instance, 26% of patents granted during 1920–2010 have technology codes
in multiple categories.




                                                            9
count, we also construct an indicator variable that captures whether a patent is among the top 5%
most cited by this citation measure among patents granted in the same technology class in the
same year. We refer to this measure as Top 5% by No-Overlap Citations. These are our preferred
measures of the extent of subsequent advance spurred by each patent. We also report results based
on two traditional measures of cumulative invention: the count of total received citations and the
corresponding top 5% most cited status of each patent (variables Total Citations and Top 5% by
Total Citations, respectively).


2.4       Estimating Link Between the Age of Idea Inputs and Subsequent Ad-

          vances

In non-parametric analyses, we examine how the number of received patent citations varies by the
age of idea inputs, as measured by the constructed Age of Idea Inputs variable. For these analyses
we first normalize each citation measure so that its mean is the same across all technology class
and year pairs. We then group patents based on the age of idea inputs and calculate the mean of
received patent citations for each group of patents.
   Because some technology areas may adopt new ideas faster than others, the vintage of ideas
that can be considered relatively new may vary across technology areas. To address this issue,
we also compare citations to patents that are among the first to use a potent new idea within a
given research area against citations to other, less innovative, patents in that same area. For these
analyses, we construct a dummy variable that captures whether a patent is among the top 5% most
recent based on the Age of Idea Inputs variable. The comparison group for each patent is other
patents granted in the same technology class in the same year. We refer to this indicator variable
as Top 5% by Age of Idea Inputs.11
   In parametric regression analyses, we employ as outcome variables the four measures that
capture received citations; we eschew from using the Age of Idea Inputs variable to avoid the use
  11 We   previously employed such a measure in Packalen and Bhattacharya (2015a).


                                                        10
of a non-linear fixed effects specification. The main explanatory variable is the variable Top 5%
by Age of Idea Inputs. We include patent length as a control variable – measured by the number
of characters – because longer patents are more likely to include any given concept. We include a
separate fixed effect parameter for each technology class and grant year pair (within estimation).
As the citation measures that serve as dependent variables are all either binary or count variables,
we employ conditional logit and Poisson models.



3       Data and Descriptive Statistics

Our data consist of nearly all US patent documents granted during 1836–2010.12 Figure A1 in the
appendix shows the number of patents granted in each year. For 1976–2010, the patent data are
a machine-readable transfer from the original patents. In these data, fields such as title, abstract,
claims, and references are clearly indicated. For 1836–1975, the patent data are an Optical Char-
acter Recognition (“OCR”) transfer from the original patent images, which we performed on 4+
million patents. In these data, only patent number and grant year are separately indicated; elements
such as title, application year, claims, and references must be determined by searching the ASCII
scan of each patent for the relevant markers. Please see the Data Appendix for details on our data
organization, extraction and disambiguation efforts.
     The key descriptive statistic is the extent of variation in the age of idea inputs in patents. Figure
A2 in the appendix shows the distribution of the Age of Idea Inputs variable by time period, when
the age of idea inputs is determined based on mentions of the top 100 concepts in each cohort.
We limit the analysis to patents granted since 1880 and mentions of idea inputs from the post-
1870 cohorts because we have not inspected the lists of new words and word sequences for the
pre–1870 cohorts; so many words and word sequences that do not reflect new idea inputs first
appear in the data during those early years that we deemed a manual elimination of such concepts
    12 The
         data cover over 99.8% of patents granted in any given year, over 99.93% of patents granted before 1976, and
over 99.99% of patents granted after 1976.



                                                        11
for the pre–1870s cohorts to be too resource-intensive. Figure A2 shows that within each time
period there is variation in whether a patent builds on the most potent ideas early. Comparison of
the distributions in Figure A1 across time periods suggests that since the 1970s there has been a
considerable increase in the pace at which new idea inputs are adopted in invention.
    Figure A3 in the appendix in turn depicts the mean for the outcome variable and No-Overlap
Citations by technology category for each year. We note that only patents granted since 1947
include a references section; we do not index in-text citations. The Figure A3 shows that patents
receive No-Overlap Citations in all technology categories.



4     Results

Figure 1 shows the mean of received citations by the age of the newest idea input. The main panel
and the upper right panel depict the results for the two preferred citation measures, Top 5% by
No-Overlap Citations and No-Overlap Citations, respectively. The bottom right panel depicts the
results for the measure Total Citations.
    In each panel the relationship is downward-sloping. Inventions that build on the most potent
new ideas early thus appear to spur more subsequent invention than do inventions that build on
these ideas only later. This result suggests that it is wise to pursue early work that tries out the
new ideas that hold the most long-term potential rather than postpone work on those ideas until the
ideas have matured. This result runs counter to an influential earlier analysis according to which
knowledge may need to mature first (Fleming, 2001).13
    Figure 2 presents the following comparison for each year: citations to patents that are among
   13 Fleming (2001) concluded that that “Organizations that seek technological breakthroughs should experiment with

new combinations, possibly with old components.” Our findings suggest that organizations should experiment with
relatively new components too. The approach of Fleming (2001) focuses on the average component, whereas we
focus on the age of the most recent idea input. Moreover, we infer idea components from words in patent texts
whereas Fleming (2001) infers them from technology subclasses. A caveat to both sets of results arises because not
all inventive efforts are successful. However, such truncation may not be that significant because the bar to patent is so
low (Fleming, 2001). This caveat notwithstanding, our analysis shows that the use of new ideas in invention matters
as it changes the distribution of outcomes and that words in patents are an important predictor of patent citations.



                                                           12
                                                                              Citations - Age of Idea Inputs Relationship
                                                                    (A) Based on Top 5% Status by No-Overlap Citations                  (B) Based on No-Overlap Citations
                                                              .15




                                                                                                                         Mean of No-Overlap Citations
                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                        3
              Mean of Top 5% Status by No-Overlap Citations




                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                             0     20   40    60    80

                                                                                                                                                             Age of Idea Inputs (years)


                                                                                                                                                        (C) Based on Total Citations
                                                              .05




                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                         Mean of Total Citations
                                                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                             0    20    40    60    80
                                                                     0          20          40            60      80
                                                                                 Age of Idea Inputs (years)                                                  Age of Idea Inputs (years)




Figure 1: Estimates of the citations–age of idea inputs relationship. In the main panel (A) the
outcome variable is the indicator variable Top 5% by No-Overlap Citations; in the side panels
(B) and (C) the outcome variables are No-Overlap Citations and Total Citations, respectively.
Age of idea inputs is determined based on mentions of the top 100 concepts in each cohort. The
reported values are averages for patents granted during 1976–2005; observations are weighted so
that observations from each year receive the same total weight as observations from any other year.
Capped lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                         13
                                                                  Citations to Innovative vs. Other Patents Each Year
                                                     .15
          Mean of Top 5% Status by No-Overlap Citations
                       .05            .1




                                                                                  Innovative Patents
                                                                                  Other Patents
          0




                                                           1880   1900                       1950                       2000
                                                                                         Year


Figure 2: Citations to innovative patents vs. citations to other patents. Horizontal axis depicts
the grant year of patents. Vertical axis depicts the mean of the indicator variable Top 5% by No-
Overlap Citations. Patents granted each year are divided to two groups based on the variable Top
5% by Age of Idea Inputs: innovative patents (patents with top 5% status by age of idea inputs) and
other patents. Age of idea inputs is calculated based on mentions of the top 100 concepts in each
cohort. Capped lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                       14
the top 5% most recent by the age of the newest idea input vs. citations to other patents. To deter-
mine which patents belong in the former, innovative, group of patents, each patent is compared to
other patents granted in the technology class in the same year. The results again support the con-
clusion that inventions that use new ideas early spur more subsequent advance than do inventions
that are less innovative in terms of the ideas that they build upon.
    Table 2 on the next page and Tables A2, A3 and A4 in the appendix show the results from
parametric regression analyses. In Table 2, the four columns show the age of idea inputs–received
citations relationship for each of the four citation measures. In Table A2, each of the seven columns
shows one robustness check. Column 1 shows the results when when the most cited patent asso-
ciated with each top 100 concept is reassigned from the innovative group of patents to the control
group of patents.14 Column 2 shows the results when the analysis is extended to the top 10, 000
concepts in each cohort. Column 3 shows the results when the comparison group for each patent
is patents granted in the same subclass in the same year. Columns 4 and 5 show results when the
analysis is restricted to either patents which first inventor is located in the US or patents which first
inventor is in a foreign country. Columns 6 and 7 show results when the analysis is restricted to
either patents that cite scientific literature or patents that do not cite scientific literature.15 Tables
A3 and A4, respectively, show the results by time period and by technology category.
    Across the citation measures, robustness checks, time periods, and technology categories, the
odds ratios shown in Table 2 and Tables A2, A3 and A4 indicate that the pattern already found in
  14 In this analysis, for each top 100 concept one of the innovative patents is reassigned as non-innovative, specifically

the innovative patent that has received the most No-Overlap Citations relative to patents in its control group (i.e. for
that patent the indicator variable measuring whether the patent is innovative is reassigned from 1 to 0). This analysis
addresses the concern that the estimates are driven by citations received by patents for which a new concept is an
output as opposed to an idea input. This approach establishes a lower bound for use of a new idea-citations link; the
approach is not meant to suggest that the reassigned patent — or any patent for that matter — necessarily covers the
concept in question.
   15 The domestic/foreign status indicator variable and cites/does not cite science indicator variable are additional

predictors of both breakthrough invention status and the age of idea inputs. Patents with a domestic first inventor
are two times more likely to be breakthrough inventions than patents with a foreign first inventor (Packalen and
Bhattacharya, 2015b). Patents that cite science are 50% more likely to be breakthrough inventions than patents that
don’t cite science. We discuss the link between the use of new ideas and science citation status in the earlier version
of this paper (Packalen and Bhattacharya, 2012).




                                                           15
Table 2: Estimates of the Age of Idea Inputs–Received Citations Relationship for Each Citation
Measure. Sample time period is 1976–2005.

                                                 (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
   Dep. Var.:                               Top 5% by       Top 5% by      No-Overlap        Total
                                            No-Overlap        Total         Citations       Citations
                                             Citations       Citations
   Model:                                   Conditional     Conditional       Poisson        Poisson
                                              Logit           Logit
   Top 5% by Age of Idea Inputs               2.488∗∗∗       2.589∗∗∗        1.878∗∗∗        1.598∗∗∗
                                               (.036)         (.036)          (.019)          (.011)
   Patent Length                              1.452∗∗∗       1.678∗∗∗        1.304∗∗∗        1.278∗∗∗
                                               (.009)         (.007)          (.004)          (.002)
   Fixed Effects                            Year-Tech       Year-Tech       Year-Tech      Year-Tech
                                            Class Pairs     Class Pairs     Class Pairs    Class Pairs
   Number of Groups (Fixed Effects)            10717          10717           10534          10709
   Observations                               2784582        2784582         2783485        2784559
Reported coefficients are odds ratios (columns 1-2) and incidence rate ratios (columns 3-4). The odds ratio
on patent length measures the effect of a one standard deviation increase in the variable. The model
includes a separate fixed effect for each year-technology class pair. Observations are weighted so that
observations from a given year received the same total weight as observations from any other year.
Standard errors in parentheses; standard errors are clustered by the groups that corresponding to the fixed
effects. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                                    16
the non-parametric analyses is robust. Patents that are innovative in that they build on the most
potent new ideas early receive much more citations than do other patents. Supporting the pursuit
of such innovative research directions has measurable benefits, as such inventions spur much more
subsequent advance than does the average invention.



5      Conclusion

Our quantitative analysis suggests that work that tries out a new idea early spurs much more sub-
sequent advance than does other work. Encouraging and supporting innovative research that tries
out new ideas thus appears to have an important benefit — avoiding stagnation in technological ad-
vance. The findings offer quantitative support for programs like the National Science Foundation’s
Small Business Innovation Research program (NSF SBIR), which supports innovative, risky, R&D
projects that build on new ideas and have the potential to be transformative.16
     Two additional contributions of the analysis are the development of a new approach for mea-
suring idea inputs – we measure idea inputs from text – and the development of new patent data
– we extend the span of available data from several decades to nearly two centuries. Given the
central role of research inputs as drivers of technological and scientific progress and the centrality
of patent data in analyses of invention, we expect these additional contributions to serve as fruitful
research inputs in subsequent research.
     One intriguing direction for future research is to examine to what extent scientific work that
tries out new ideas spurs subsequent scientific advances. Findings obtained here need not extend
to science because researcher incentives are different in science from what they are in invention
(e.g. Aghion et al., 2008). The direction of invention is largely disciplined by the for-profit motive
of firms, whereas scientists generally do not risk failure if they shun innovative ideas to protect
    16 According
               to NSF, ‘[t]ransformative research often results from a novel approach or new methodology’ (National
Science Foundation 2014a). The NSF SBIR program is designed to enable the pursuit of R&D projects that are ‘based
on innovative, transformational technology with potential for great commercial and/or societal benefits’ (National
Science Foundation 2014b).



                                                        17
the value of their own human capital and past ideas. Because entrenched interests can exclude
innovative ideas with relative ease in science, the private and social benefits of trying out new
ideas need not be aligned in science to the same degree that we expect them to be aligned in
invention.




                                               18
References
Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M. and J. C. Stein, 2008, “Academic Freedom, Private-Sector Focus, and
    the Process of Innovation,” RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 39, pp. 617-35.

Ahuja, G. and C. M. Lampert, 2001, “Entrepreneurship in a Large Corporation: A Longitudi-
    nal Study of How Established Firms Create Breakthrough Invention,” Strategic Management
    Journal, vol. 22, pp. 521-43.

Alcacer J., Gittelman M. and B. N. Sampat, 2009, “Applicant and Examiner Citations in U.S.
    Patents: An Overview and Analysis,” Research Policy, vol. 38, pp. 415-27.

Alexopolos, M., 2011, “Read All about It!! What Happens Following a Technology Shock?”
    American Economic Review, vol. 101, pp. 1144-79.

Azoulay, P., Manso, G. and J. Graff Zivin, 2011, “Incentives and Creativity: Evidence from the
    Academic Life Sciences,” RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 42, pp. 527-54.

Bhattacharya, J. and M. Packalen, 2011, “Opportunities and Benefits as Determinants of the Di-
    rection of Scientific Research,” Journal of Health Economics, vol. 30, pp. 603-15.

Caballero, R. J. and A. Jaffe, 1993, “How High are the Giants’ Shoulders: An Empirical Assess-
    ment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic Growth,”
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 8, pp. 15-83.

Evans, J. A., 2010, “Industry Induces Academic Science to Know Less about More,” American
    Journal of Sociology, vol. 116, pp. 389-452.

Fleming, L., 2001, “Recombinant Uncertainty in Technological Search,” Management Science,
    vol. 47, pp. 117-32.

Grodal, S. and G. Thoma, 2009, “Cross-Pollination in Science and Technology: Concept Mobility
    in the Nanobiotechnology Field,” Annals of Economics and Statistics, vol. 93.

Hall, B., Jaffe, A. and M. Trajtenberg, 2001, “The NBER Patent Citations Data File: Lessons,
     Insights, and Methodological Tools,” NBER Working Paper No. 8485.

Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. and M. Trajtenberg, 2005, “Market Value and Patent Citations,” RAND
     Journal of Economics, vol. 36, pp. 16-38.




                                              19
Harhoff, D., Narin, F., Scherer, F. M. and K. Vopel, 1999, “Citation Frequency and the Value of
    Patented Innovations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 81, pp. 511-5.

Jaffe A., Trajtenberg, M. and M. S. Fogarty, 2002, “The Meaning of Patent Citations: Report on
     the NBER/Case-Western Reserve Study of Patentees,” in Jaffe, A. and M. Trajtenberg (eds.)
     Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A Window on the Knowledge Economy, MIT Press.

Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M. and R. Henderson, 1993, “Geographic Localization of Knowledge
     Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108, pp.
     577-98.

Kuhn, D., 1962, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. University of Chigaco Press.

Lai, R., D’Amour, A., Yu, A., Sun, Y. and L. Fleming, 2013, “Disambiguation and Co-authorship
     Networks of the U.S. Patent Inventor Database (1975 - 2010),” Mimeo.

Lampe, R., 2012, “Strategic Citation,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 94, pp. 320-33.

March, J. G., 1991, “Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning,” Organizational
    Science, vol. 2, pp. 71-87.

Marshall, A., 1920, Principles of Economics, 8th ed., London: Macmillan and Co.

National Science Foundation, 2014a, “Characteristics of Potentially Transformative Research,”
    web page (http://www.nsf.gov/about/transformative research/characteristics .jsp; last ac-
    cessed 8/20/2014).

National Science Foundation, 2014b, “Small Business Innovation Research Program Phase
    I Solicitation (SBIR) June 2014 Submission,” web page (http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/
    2014/nsf14539/nsf14539.htm; last accessed 8/20/2014).

Nerkar, A., 2003, “Old Is Gold? The Value of Temporal Exploration in the Creation of New
    Knowledge,” Management Science, vol. 49, pp. 211-29.

Packalen, M. and J. Bhattacharya, 2015a, “Age and the Trying Out of New Ideas,” Mimeo.

Packalen, M. and J. Bhattacharya, 2015b, “Cities and Ideas,” Mimeo.

Schoenmakers, W. and G. Duysters, 2010, “The Technological Origins of Radical Inventions,”
    Research Policy, vol. 39, pp. 1051-9.

Schumpeter, J., 1939, Business Cycles. McGraw-Hill: New York.

                                               20
Strumsky, D., Lobo, J. and S. van der Leeuw, 2010, “Using Patent Technology Codes to Study
    Technological Change,” Santa Fe Institute Working Paper 10-11-028.

Utterback, J. M., 1996, Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation, Harvard Business School Press.

Usher, A. P., 1922, History of Mechanical Inventions, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 2005, Handbook of Classification.

Weitzman, M., 1998, “Recombinant Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 113, pp. 331-
    60.




                                              21
Appendix: Additional Tables and Figures
Table A1: Lists of which idea inputs render patents innovative in each decade. Each embedded
list below contains a decade-specific list of the idea inputs that render one or more patents in that
decade innovative. Innovativeness of each patent is measured by the dummy variable Top 5% by
Age of Idea Inputs (defined in section 2.4). A concept renders a patent innovative if the concept is
the newest concept in a patent and the patent has the Top 5% by Age of Idea Inputs status. The six
columns of each table contain the following items:
    1. Decade.
    2. Concept name.
    3. Cohort of the concept (the year the concept first appeared in patents).
    4. Number of times a mention of the concept in a patent during the decade in question renders
       the patent innovative, relative to the patent’s comparison group. The comparison group for
       each patent is other patents granted in the same technology class in the same year.
    5. Cumulative share out of all innovative patents during the decade in question (calculated
       based on column 4).
    6. The total number of patents that mention the concept (during 1836-2010).
Within each decade, the concepts are ordered by column 4. To open an embedded list (a PDF file),
click on one of the decades listed below (the links do not access the internet).
     Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1880s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1890s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1900s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1910s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1920s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1930s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1940s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1950s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1960s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1970s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1980s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 1990s
   Top 100 New Idea Inputs by Cohort for 2000s



                                                 22
Table A2: Estimates of the Age of Idea Inputs–Received Citations Relationship: Robustness Checks. Sample time
period is 1976–2005, the dependent variable is Top 5% by No-Overlap Citations, and the model is Conditional Logit.

                                                (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)               (6)       (7)
                                          Reassignment      Top 10,000       Subclass          Domestic        Foreign         Cites       Does Not
                                           Approach          Concepts       Comparisons        Patentees      Patentees       Science     Cite Science
 Top 5% by Age of Idea Inputs                2.189∗∗∗         2.271∗∗∗         2.064∗∗∗         2.250∗∗∗       2.307∗∗∗       2.175∗∗∗     2.578∗∗∗
                                              (.034)           (.030)           (.022)           (.036)         (.053)         (.050)       (.037)
 Patent Length                               1.463∗∗∗         1.458∗∗∗         1.427∗∗∗         1.492∗∗∗       1.387∗∗∗       1.399∗∗∗     1.441∗∗∗
                                              (.009)           (.009)           (.004)           (.010)         (.011)         (.014)       (.007)
 Fixed Effects                              Year-Tech       Year-Tech         Year-Tech       Year-Tech      Year-Tech      Year-Tech     Year-Tech
                                            Class Pairs     Class Pairs     Subclass Pairs    Class Pairs    Class Pairs    Class Pairs   Class Pairs
 Number of Groups (Fixed Effects)             10717            10717            125035            9864           8070          6734         10131
 Observations                                2784582          2784582          2706574          1511912        1214288        691570       2058878

    Reported coefficients are odds ratios. The model includes a separate fixed effect for each year-technology class pair, except
in column 3 where the model includes a separate fixed effect for each year-technology subclass pair. For further notes, please
see notes to Table 2.
Table A3: Estimates of the Age of Idea Inputs–Received Citations Relationship by Time Period. The dependent
variable is Top 5% by No-Overlap Citations, and the model is Conditional Logit.

                                                      (1)                 (2)        (3)              (4)
                                               1880s-1910s 1920s-1960s           1970s-1980s      1990s-2000s
              Top 5% by Age of Idea Inputs         1.195∗∗∗          1.580∗∗∗     2.037∗∗∗         2.534∗∗∗
                                                    (.023)            (.021)       (.031)           (.042)
              Patent Length                        .966∗∗∗           1.080∗∗∗     1.325∗∗∗         1.471∗∗∗
                                                    (.006)            (.004)       (.007)           (.010)
              Fixed Effects                       Year-Tech        Year-Tech     Year-Tech        Year-Tech
                                                  Class Pairs      Class Pairs   Class Pairs      Class Pairs
              Observations                         1101316           2158399      1398471          2076232
              Number of Fixed Effects               13844             19314        8215              6608
    Reported estimates are odds ratios. The model includes a separate fixed effect for each year-technology class pair. For
further notes, see notes to Table 2.



Table A4: Estimates of the Age of Idea Inputs–Received Citations Relationship by Technology Category. Sample
time period is 1976–2005, the dependent variable is Top 5% by No-Overlap Citations, and the model is Conditional
Logit.

                                            (1)                     (2)                 (3)                 (4)         (5)           (6)
                                         Chemical       Computers & Comm.        Drugs & Medical      Electronics   Mechanical      Other
 Top 5% by Age of Idea Inputs            2.534∗∗∗                2.120∗∗∗            1.668∗∗∗          2.696∗∗∗      2.800∗∗∗      2.680∗∗∗
                                          (.071)                  (.071)              (.130)            (.081)        (.069)        (.066)
 Patent Length                           1.445∗∗∗                1.463∗∗∗            1.256∗∗∗          1.537∗∗∗      1.447∗∗∗      1.534∗∗∗
                                          (.015)                  (.014)              (.036)            (.012)        (.011)        (.011)

 Fixed Effects                          Year-Tech               Year-Tech           Year-Tech         Year-Tech     Year-Tech     Year-Tech
                                        Class Pairs             Class Pairs         Class Pairs       Class Pairs   Class Pairs   Class Pairs
 Number of Groups (Fixed Effects)          1973                   1120                 363               1385          2855         3021
 Observations                             468650                 456738              268325             543265        518117       529487
    Reported estimates are odds ratios. The model includes a separate fixed effect for each year-technology class pair. For
further notes, see notes to Table 2.
                                                        Number of Patents Granted in the U.S.




                              100000
                          10000
                     Patents
                              1000
                              100


                                                 1850                1900                1950                 2000
                                                                              Year



            Figure A1: Number of US patents granted each year during 1836–2010.


                                                         Distribution of the Age of the Newest Idea Input
                              .03   .02
                      Share of Patents
                     .01




                                                                               1970s-2000s
                                                                               1920s-1960s
                                                                               1880s-1910s
                              0




                                           0                  20                40                60                 80
                                                                   Age of the Newest Idea Input



  Figure A2: Distribution of the 5th percentile of the age of idea inputs for three time periods.


                                                        Mean of Received No-Overlap Citations
                                                                    by Technology Category
                              2.5




                                                                        Chemical
                                                                        Computers & Communications
                                                                        Electrical & Electronics
                              2




                                                                        Drugs & Medical
                     Received Citations




                                                                        Mechanical
                                1.5




                                                                        Others
                        1     .5
                              0




                                          1840              1880            1920       1947            1976      2010
                                                                              Year



Figure A3: Mean of received No-Overlap Citations by technology category each year 1840–2010.
Data Appendix

Overview
Our main data source is US patents granted during 1836–2010 (“Patent Document Data”). For
patents granted during 1976–2010 the patent documents are readily available in ASCII form (avail-
able here). For patents granted during 1836–1975 the patent documents are available as images of
the original patents (available here). To transform these images to ASCII text, we apply an optical
character recognition (“OCR”) program to these images of the 4 million patents granted during
1836–1975. From each patent we extract the following elements: patent text (title, abstract, brief
summary, description, claims), citations to prior patents, and citations to scientific literature and
other non-patent references. We limit the analysis to utility patents, which form the vast majority
of patents.
    Our other data sources are (1) Table of Issue Years and Selected Document Types Issued Since
1836 (“Grant Year File”, available here), which indicates the grant year for each patent number; (2)
U.S. Patent Grant Master Classification File (“Master File”, available here), which indicates patents
granted each year as well as patent classes assigned to each patent; (3) Mapping of Technology
Classes to Technology Categories and Technology Category Labels (“Technology Category File”,
available here) as developed by Hall et al. (2001), which links each 3-digit patent technology
class to one of six broad technology categories; and (4) cleaned inventor location data for patents
granted during 1975–2010 as developed by Lai et al. (2013), which we use perform a robustness
check that limits the analysis to patents granted to inventors located in the U.S.

Differences to previous version in terms of data construction. (1) In the previous version of this
paper (Packalen and Bhattacharya, 2012) we used patent document data for 1920–2010. Here, we
extend the analysis to patent documents granted since 1836. (2) In the previous version we relied
on an existing ASCII transformation of the images for patents granted during 1920–1975, whereas
here we apply an OCR program to transform the images ourselves. This results in less OCR errors,
enables us to extend the analysis to also to patents granted during 1836–1919 as well as patents
granted during 1971–1975 comprehensively (the existing ASCII transformation had information
on less than 50% of patents granted during this 5-year period). (3) We now cull through the list
of top concepts in each cohort more carefully to exclude concepts that likely do not reflect idea
inputs (see item 7.11 below); previously we excluded concepts that include any one of less than
100 words and character sequences, we now exclude concepts that include any one of more than
1,000 words or character sequences.

Details
1. Obtain and organize the Grant Year File. These data specify the number of the first utility
patent granted each year. We use these data to determine the grant year of each patent in the Master
File.
2. Obtain and organize the Master File, and link the Master File to the Grant Year File.
The Master File specifies the patent number, a primary technology classification, and multiple

                                                 26
secondary technology classifications for granted patents. The assigned classifications are updated
when the classification system changes as a result of the introduction of new patent classes. Only
the current version is available. We use version 1110 (mcfcls1110.txt, November 2011). We com-
bine these data with the Grant Year File to obtain a list of patents granted each year, which enables
us to examine the completeness of the patent document data. We use the assigned primary technol-
ogy class for each patent in the Master File in determining the comparison group for each patent
in the analyses (patents with the same primary technology class and grant year are compared to
one another). Approximately 1000 patents have no assigned primary technology class. We assign
each such patent to the technology class that appears most often among the secondary technology
classes of the patent. The primary technology class is also combined with the Technology Category
File to assign each patent to one of 6 technology category (see below). We use the primary and all
secondary assigned technology classes of citing and cited patents in determining which citations
are Non-Overlap Citations.
3. Obtain the Technology Category File. These data specify 6 broad technology categories and
map each technology class to one category. The technology class 850 is not mapped in these
data; we map it to technology category 4 (and subcategory 43 though we do not use subcategory
information). We use the mapping to assign each patent to a technology category based on the
patent’s primary technology class, enabling us to (1) determine the technology category in which
each concept appears most often and (2) obtain technology category specific estimates of the age
of idea inputs–received citations link. We also use the technology category mapping to determine
the technology categories spanned by the primary and all secondary technology classes of patent;
this information is used in determining which citations are Non-Overlap Citations.
4. Obtain and organize the Patent Document Data.
4.1 Download and unzip the data. We use these data to determine the patent text, citations to
patents, and citations to the scientific literature and other non-patent references.
4.2 Apply OCR algorithms to older (pre–1976) patent document data. This transforms images
of patent document to ASCII files.
4.3 Store information on newer patents (post–1975) in patent-specific files. The data have
multiple patents in each file but individual patents within each file are clearly indicated. Informa-
tion on some patents appears in multiple places.
5. Determine which patents in the Patent Document Data appear also in the Master File.
We only consider information in those patents in the Patent Document Data that appear also in the
Master File.
6. Determine patent text. In the newer data, the fields we consider as patent text (title, abstract,
brief summary, description, claims) are clearly indicated. In the older data, the fields are only
indicated among the scanned text. For these data, we determine where patent text ends and citations
begin by searching for indications of the presence of phrases such as “CITED REFERENCES” and
“following references are of”. Any text considered as being part of a bibliography is not included
in the textual analysis.
7. Index words and 2- and 3-word sequences (Concepts) in each patent.
7.1 Construct a list of all text in a patent. We add a space character between text from different
text fields and paragraphs.
7.2 Replace special characters with the space character. Exceptions: parentheses, brackets, and


                                                 27
braces are deleted; period, comma, colon and semi-colon are replaced with “ X ” when followed
by whitespace (so that indexed word sequences do not contain words from different sentences or
words from different independent clauses of a sentence); period, comma, colon and semi-colon are
replaced with the space character when not followed by whitespace (as in those cases the characters
may reflect something other than punctuation that separates two sentences or two independent
clauses within a sentence).
7.3 Change all alphabetic characters to lowercase. In principle, analysing to what extent men-
tions of a given concept begin with an upper case letter could be used to exclude concepts such
as “Microsoft” that do not represent innovation inputs in the traditional sense. However, such an
approach would also exclude important inventions such as “Teflon”.
7.4 Eliminate possessive case. Character sequence “ ’s ” is replaced with the space character.
Character sequence “ s’ ” is replaced with the character “ s ”.
7.5 Replace certain control sequences with whitespace. We exclude character sequences such as
“ldquo”, “apos”, “centerdot”, etc. and character sequences that begin with certain characters such
as the character “ x ” followed by a number, which reflect changes in how patents are recorded.
7.6 Replace character sequences that have two or more consecutive numeric characters with
whitespace. Concepts with multiple consecutive numeric characters are often page numbers, pub-
lication years and typographical control sequences.
7.7 Eliminate excess whitespace. All whitespace longer than the space character is replaced with
the space character.
7.8 Extract all such words and 2-, and 3-word sequences from the list that satisfy charac-
ter length limits on concept length and on length of individual words within concepts. We
only extract 1-grams with 3-29 characters, 2-grams with 7-59 characters and 3-grams with 11-89
characters. We only extract 2- and 3-grams for which each word is at least 3 characters long.
7.9 Exclude concepts with DNA or RNA sequence information. We exclude all concepts that
include one or more words that consist only of characters in the set “a,c,g,t” or the set “a,c,g,u.
7.10 Exclude concepts that include certain common words. Concepts for which any of the
words is “the” are excluded. Concepts for which either the first or last word is a common word
such as “than”, “and”, and “have” are excluded.
7.11 Exclude concepts which appearance as new concepts likely does not reflect new idea
inputs We cull through the list of top 100 concepts for each cohort and exclude concepts to manu-
ally exclude concepts that likely do not reflect idea inputs. We delete, for example, concepts with
words such as“filed”, “valid”, “jan”, “novel”, and concepts that include character sequences such
as “natl acad”, “priority”, “application”, “provisional”, “federally” , “sponsored” and “envisi”. The
complete list of words and character sequences that we use to eliminate concepts is included as an
embedded file here (click to open an internal PDF file; does not access the internet). We exclude
all concepts that include a word sequence in this embedded list.
7.13 Save the list of concepts that were not excluded.
8. Index concept cohorts and total mentions, and rank concepts in each cohort.
8.1 Combine Patent Document Data with the Technology Category File. We assign each
patent to a technology category based on the technology class-technology category mapping in the
Technology Category File and on the primary technology class of each patent.
8.2 Determine the cohort of each concept. Generally, the cohort of a concept is the year in which


                                                 28
the concept first appeared in any patent. However, as indicted in the main text, we ignore the initial
mention of concepts that are mentioned less than 5 times during the subsequent 25 years. For such
concepts the cohort is set as the earliest year in which (1) the concept is mentioned, and (2) the
concept is mentioned at least 5 times during the 25 years that follow.
8.3 For each concept, calculate the number of patents that mention the concept by the end
of the sample. We also calculate how many times each concept appears in a given technology
category.
8.4 Rank concepts in each cohort. We rank concepts based on the number of patents that mention
each concept by the end of the sample.
9. Construct patent-specific variables measuring the age of the newest idea input. We con-
struct this variable both based on mentions of the top 100 concepts in each cohort and based on
mentions of the top 10,000 concepts in each cohort.
10. Index citations to patents and citations scientific and other non-patent references
10.1 Index Patent Citations. In the newer Document Data, patent citations are indicated in a
separate field. In the older Document Data, patent citations are among the scanned text. We extract
these patent citations by first searching for indications of the presence of phrases such as “CITED
REFERENCES” and “following references are of” and then analyzing the text that follows. We
extract the patent number, grant year and inventor name in each reference. We use the grant year
and inventor name information in these citations to compensate for OCR errors in the following
way: we only include citations for which either the cited grant year is within 10 years of the actual
grant year of the cited patent or the first letter of the cited inventor name matches the first letter of
the actual inventor name of the cited patent (the actual grant year is determined from the Master
File and Grant Year File; the actual inventor name is determined from citations in the newer patent
data to pre–1976 patents).
10.2 Index Citations to Scientific and Other Non-Patent References. In the newer Document
Data, non-patent references are indicated in a separate field (there are additional non-patent refer-
ences in the patent text but we do not consider them to limit the scope of the analysis). To distin-
guish scientific references from other non-patent references, we first search the non-patent refer-
ences for terms that would indicate that the reference is to a patent reference, technical publication,
marketing material, or web page (the searched terms include terms such as “ser. no.”, “patent”,
“pat. appl”, “derwent”, “’database wpi”, “’search report”, “office action”,“advertisement”, “ibm
technical bulletin”, “disclosure”, “language abstract”, “withdrawn”, “JP”, “EP”, “english transla-
tion”, “www.”, “website”, etc.). We designate references for which such terms are not found as
potential scientific citations. Among the potential scientific citations we then search for an indi-
cation of a publication year (we first search inside parentheses for a 4-digit number between 1500
and 2015, and — when such sequence is not found — we then search for 2-digit numbers that
follow either the character “ ’ “ or the character“ / ”.) Those citations for which a publication year
is found are considered scientific references. In the older Document Data, non-patent references
are among the scanned text. For these older data, we extract non-patent references by searching
for indications of the presence of the phrase“OTHER REFERENCES” within the“CITED REF-
ERENCES” section (see Index Patent Citations step above) and then search for publication years
(a 4-digit number) Older patents for which such publication year is found among other references
are assigned as having a non-patent reference. The search is stopped when an indication is found


                                                   29
for the presence of phrases as“CERTIFICATE”, “FOREIGN PATENTS” or “CORRECTION”.
10.3 Disambiguate Scientific References To disambiguate the scientific references, we find cita-
tions that have the same publication year and are similar to one another. After indexing citations
by publication year, we seek citations that have two double quotations (which typically surround a
title) and examine which of such citations are similar to one another. We then extend the similarity
comparison to all references among citations with to references with a given publication year. In
these comparisons, we exclude certain character sequences such as “pages” that can be expected
to be present in some citations to a scientific reference but not in other citations to the same ref-
erence. We also exclude character sequences that include non-alphabetic characters and character
sequences that are shorter than 3 characters. We consider two citations to be to the same scien-
tific reference when the SequenceMatcher comparison in Python returns a value above 0.9. We do
not disambiguate Chemical Abstracts and references to GenBank accession numbers. We use the
disambiguate scientific references to construct the table that lists the Top 20 most cited scientific
references in each cohort (shown in the earlier version Packalen and Bhattacharya (2012) of this
paper).
11. Index patent titles. In the newer Document Data, patent titles are indicated in a separate field.
For the older Document data, we extract patent title based on the appearance of capital letters near
the beginning of the text. We use these data to display patent titles in the table that lists the Top 20
most cited patents in each cohort (shown in the earlier version Packalen and Bhattacharya (2012)
of this paper).




                                                  30
