NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RACIAL DISPARITIES IN SAVINGS BEHAVIOR FOR A CONTINUOUSLY EMPLOYED
COHORT
Kai Yuan Kuan
Mark R. Cullen
Sepideh Modrek
Working Paper 20937
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20937
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

We would like to thank Liran Einav for his helpful comments and Alex Christodoulou for helping
us assemble the data for this project. This work was supported by several grants including a supplement
from the National Institute On Aging of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number R01AG026291
and the Stanford Center for Longevity. The findings and conclusions are solely the responsibility of
the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health,
the Stanford Center for Longevity, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Kai Yuan Kuan, Mark R. Cullen, and Sepideh Modrek. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Racial Disparities in Savings Behavior for a Continuously Employed Cohort
Kai Yuan Kuan, Mark R. Cullen, and Sepideh Modrek
NBER Working Paper No. 20937
February 2015
JEL No. D14,D31,I31,J11,J32
ABSTRACT
The wealth gap has reached record highs. At the same time there has been substantial proliferation of
401(k) savings accounts as the dominant retirement savings vehicle, and these accounts make up an
increasing proportion of overall wealth. In this paper we examine 401(k) saving behavior of continuously
employed workers over an eight-year period at a single, geographically diverse employer. We demonstrate
substantial difference in 401(k) savings behavior by employee ethnicity even within a single employer
401(k) plan architecture. We show both African American and Hispanic employees are less likely
to participate in the 401(k) plans. Moreover, conditional on participation African Americans contribute
a lower proportion of their income to their 401(k) plan on average. We also show that African Americans
and Hispanics tend to draw down on their 401(k) balances more often. Finally, we document that both
African Americans and Hispanics favor safer assets within their plan options. Together these differences
substantially impact the level of 401(k) balances accumulated and therefore overall wealth accumulation.
Kai Yuan Kuan
Stanford University
Statistics Department
390 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-4065
kykuan@stanford.edu
Mark R. Cullen
Stanford University School of Medicine
1265 Welch Rd X338
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
mrcullen@stanford.edu

Sepideh Modrek
Department of General Medical Disciplines
School of Medicine, Stanford University
1070 Arastradero Road Room 309
Palo Alto, CA 94304-1334
smodrek@gmail.com

Introduction
The wealth gap between whites and minorities in the United States has reached record highs (Taylor, Kochhar
et al. 2011, Shapiro, Meschede et al. 2013). Several studies document the importance of higher incomes, larger
inheritance and higher rates of home ownership amongst whites in the widening gap in the wealth accumulation
(Gittleman and Wolff 2004, Borgo 2013, Shapiro, Meschede et al. 2013), but controversy remains over the role
of savings behavior and asset returns in accelerating the gap.
Savings behavior, the choice to save or spend a certain proportion of one’s income and how to save across
investment options (i.e. housing, pensions, stocks, bonds, etc), is very difficult to assess because detailed
longitudinal data is required. Though several studies have tried to assess racial difference in asset accumulations
and returns, some controversies remain. Gittleman and Wolff (2004) use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) data, which follows the same families to examine differences in the rate of wealth accumulation of white
Americans relative to African Americans. They find that the majority of the difference in asset accumulations
over the 10-year period is driven by larger inheritances and incomes for white families. They find no difference
in savings rate conditional on income and find no evidence of difference in asset returns. In a more recent study
Del Bago (2013) uses the Health and Retirement Survey and finds that after accounting for income differences
some of the wealth gap can be explained by lower capital gains for African Americans. She finds that the lower
capital gains may be due to the lower appreciation rate of housing owned by African Americans and differences
in the rate of investments in high-return assets such as stocks. Another study by the Social Security
Administration (Choudhury 2001)., which uses administrative data, finds that at every income quartile and
educational level, the percentage of African American and Hispanic households that own risky, higher-yielding
assets is considerably smaller than the percentage of white households that do. She concludes that some of the
wealth gap appears to be attributable to differences in savings behavior and rates of returns on investments
chosen by each ethnic group.
Another major barrier to understanding the wealth gap is that incentives to save in non-housing wealth,
particularly 401(k) type pensions, vary substantially by one’s occupation and even one’s company. Therefore,
even if studies can control for income, they may not be able to adequately account for the vastly different
savings incentives offered by employers. As employer-based defined contribution plans replace traditional
defined benefits pensions, these saving vehicles are becoming a larger share of wealth; understanding racial and
ethnic differences in these savings vehicles becomes increasingly important because individuals bear the
responsibility of ensuring adequate saving for their retirement.
This study examines one aspect of asset accumulation and savings behaviors, using company-sponsored 401(k)
benefits. Following a cohort of workers from a single, geographically diverse national company will allow us to
examine the extent to which savings behavior differences persist in participation, contributions, balances, and
asset allocations in 401(k) pensions across different minority groups facing similar information and incentives.
Importantly we intend to control for changes in health (Pollack, Cubbin et al. 2013), document differences in
choices of asset types across groups and comment on pathways, which may underlie the observed differences
and ultimately accelerate the wealth gap.
Factors that May Affect 401(k) Behavior
Here we survey the relevant literature in preparation to attempt to clarify potential pathways via which any
observed differences in behavior across ethnicities may manifest.
401(k) Plan Awareness and Financial Literacy
An individual’s familiarity with the structure of the 401(k) plan offered by his/her employer and understanding
of the various investment options may be an important factor in determining his/her willingness to participate
2

and contribute to 401(k) plans. Familiarity breeds confidence, and individuals who feel that they understand
how the system works may be more willing to participate and also trust a larger portion of their savings to the
plan. More financially-experienced individuals are also likely to allocate funds within a pension plan
differently.
Clark and Schieber (1998) examine the effect of plan awareness on 401(k) participation and contributions via a
dataset of employees from 17 different companies ranging in size from 7,000-10,000 workers. They separate the
workers via inferred different levels of employee communication. At the first level, workers received only plan
enrollment forms and periodic statements of balances. At the second level, workers received generic newsletters
regarding information on 401(k) plans. The third level of communication involves communication materials
specifically tailored to the employer’s 401(k) plan. They find that more dissemination of information increases
participation and contributions. In a more recent study, Shah Goda, Manchester et al. (2012) uses an
experimental design to provide over 16,000 employees at the University of Michigan customized information
on projected future account balances and retirement income bases on increases in current participation and
contributions. Using administrative data, they find increased participation and contributions for those who
receive the most informative and customized mailings.
Beyond specific plan knowledge, studies have also shown that general financial literacy (i.e. such as a working
understanding of the benefits of compound interest, risk diversification, tax treatment of retirement savings, and
inflation) has some effect on 401(k) behavior. Mitchell and Hastings (2011) examines the linkage between
financial literacy and retirement savings using evidence from the 2009 Chilean Encuesta de Proteccion Social
(EPS) (similar to the US Health and Retirement Survey). They find that financial literacy has a significant and
positive effect on pension savings controlling for education and income. This effect appears to hold in the US as
well. Using US Health and Retirement Survey data, Lusardi and Mitchell (2007) find a positive link between
financial literacy and planning, as well as between planning and wealth. They show that planning increases
wealth rather than vice-versa and again conclude that financial literacy has a positive effect on retirement
savings. Cole and Shastry (2009) find a positive relationship between financial literacy and general financial
market participation (Heinberg, Hung et al. 2014). However, while participation is increasing in financial
literacy, they find no significant effect on portfolio allocations.
Important for this study, several previous studies document substantial differences in financial literacy amongst
minorities as compared to whites. Indeed, African Americans and Hispanics display the lowest level of financial
knowledge in the U.S. context, regardless of the financial literacy measure used (Lusardi and Mitchell 2014).
Institutional (Dis)Trust
A complementary literature finds important differences in attitudes regarding saving institutions between white
Americans and minorities (Lusardi and Mitchell 2014). Studies suggest that African Americans may generally
feel mistrust in investing in equity markets (Mabry 1999), or perceive discrimination and self-select away from
formal financial institutions where they feel discriminated against (Longhofer 2004, Apgar and Calder 2005).
Recent media accounts highlight historical and recent accusation of racial discrimination on the part of financial
institutions (Savage 2011, Savage 2012, Coates 2014). These accounts suggest that distrust is justified and may
further exacerbate latent distrust. Alternatively, difference may be driven by the access to information and the
types of financial institutions that serve different ethnic groups which are often segregated in different
communities (Rugh and Massey 2010).
Network Effects
Many aspects of human behavior are now believed to be influenced by peer groups (Evans, Oates et al. 1992,
Karlan 2007, Webel, Okonsky et al. 2010), and there are also studies suggesting that 401(k) behavior is as well.
Duflo and Saez (2002) examine the pension decisions of employees of a large university. They identify peer
groups by dividing individuals into sub-groups by departments, and instrumenting average group participation
using salary and tenure within groups, find a significant effect of peer behavior on participation and fund
3

choice. Outside the realm of pensions, Hong, Kubik et al. (2005) find that stock market participation increases
with peer participation. If minorities have historically been less likely to invest in financial assets, then peer
effects could further explain current differences.
Investor Economic Preferences
The investment goals of the individuals in question may lead to differing 401(k) contribution behavior. Munell,
Sunden et al. (2001) examines the effects of an individual’s planning horizons on contributions and
participation using data from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). They find that individuals with longer
planning horizons tend to participate and contribute more. Relatedly, Mitchell and Hastings (2011) examine the
effect of (im)patience on contributions using evidence from a dataset of Chilean EPS respondents (see financial
literacy section). They find that individuals who are better able to forgo current gratification for a better future
outcome tend to also place more of their income into pensions accounts.
Another important investor preferences that may relate to 401(K) savings is risk aversion. While most 401(k)
plans allow participants to invest in low risk options, participants may not be fully aware of this or may not feel
comfortable taking on the risk associated with a somewhat illiquid asset. The theoretical literature suggests that
risk preferences influence stock market participation, contributions and allocations (Michaelides and Gomes
2005), and seminal work from the Health and Retirement Survey on risk aversion provides empirical evidence
that risk aversion affects a series of risk related behaviors including investing in stock (Barsky, Kimball et al.
1997).
Non-401(k) Financial Circumstances
Financial theory suggests that 401(k) savings decisions and asset allocations within 401(k) accounts are not
made in a vacuum. Rather, investors consider all their asset holdings when making financial plans. Many issues
can influence an individual’s pension savings, including spousal income and savings behavior, existing wealth,
medical conditions and family expenditures.
Pence (2002) suggests that 401(k) savings have little to no effect on actual household savings. Rather, she finds
weak evidence that individuals substitute external (non-401(k)) real assets for 401(k) balances. If individuals
have marginal utility functions decreasing in wealth, we would expect that individuals with higher wealth would
save less. If utility is also decreasing in absolute risk aversion (DARA), we would expect individuals with
higher wealth to maintain riskier (in the absolute sense) portfolios. Given that minorities have lower wealth
holdings than do whites, and also have lower incomes (Gittleman and Wolff 2004), this would suggest that all
other factors equal, a minority individual may behave differently to a difference in wealth (either inherited or
from previous income).
Household Budget Constraint
While current individual income will obviously affect participation, contributions and balances in 401(k)
accounts, household income is a more important determinant. Households jointly optimize their retirement
savings accounting for relative current resources and constraints as well as desired long-term savings (Lundberg
and Ward-Batts 2000). Current household income, which would include any spousal income, and current total
retirement savings, which would include spousal saving, are key factor in determining a worker’s individual
choices in their personal 401(k) account. In addition family composition affects individual savings through their
budget constraint and could affect substantially saving behavior (Scholz and Seshadri 2007).
There are well-documented differences is household income, particularly for women across racial and ethnic
lines (Corbetti and Hill 2014), that could drive any relationship between race and savings. There are also
differences in household composition, which should affect available resources (Passel, Livingston et al. 2012).
Plan Characteristics
4

Employer 401(k) plans differ along two key dimensions: employer match rates (the percentage of employee
contributions that the employer contributes on the employee’s behalf) and access to funds (the ability draw upon
401(k) balances before retirement via withdrawals and loans (Love 2007).
In theory the existence and introduction of a match rate has an ambiguous effect. On one hand, a larger match
rate increases the return on 401(k) savings, but at the same time allows individuals to meet retirement targets
with lower contributions. The effect of employer match rates on contributions depends on which of these two
effects dominates. Evidence suggests that access to funds and the introduction of an employer match increase
participation and contribution (Basett, Fleming et al. 1998, Clark and Schieber 1998, Munell, Sunden et al.
2001). However, the effect of introducing an employer-matching contribution is small on non-highly
compensated workers (Mitchell, Utkus et al. 2005). The effect of increasing an existing employer match rate is
controversial and previous studies have encountered mixed results. While some researchers have found that
increasing the match rate increases contributions (Pepke and Poterba 1995, VanDerhei and Copeland 2001,
Choi, Laibson et al. 2002, Engelhardt and Kumar 2007, Chetty, Friedman et al. 2012), others have found the
opposite (EBRI 1994, Munell, Sunden et al. 2001).
The option to access funds in 401(k) savings plans should theoretically affect participation rates and
contributions by making such assets more liquid in case of an adverse economic shock. The IRS sets a 10%
penalty in addition to the income tax ramifications for early withdraws from 401(k) savings accounts. However,
the IRS mandated penalty does not apply in many cases, and many early withdrawal events are not penalized.
The most important exception is for employees aged 55 or older who take a withdrawal when they separate
from an employer. Taxpayers can also get an exemption from the penalty if they take withdrawals for hardship
reasons, home purchase, and post-secondary education (Argento, Bryant et al. 2015). Employee access to
401(k) accounts via loans is regulated by the employer’s particular plan instead of the IRS. VanDerhei, Holden
et al. (2009) calculate that 88% of 401(k) participants belong to plans that allow participant to take loans, and
the terms of the loan are set by individual savings plans. These loan characteristics have previously been shown
to affect the amount and frequency of loans (Beshears, Choi et al. 2010).
In Figure 1 we summarize these overarching pathways. We denote pathways for which we believe race
differences could be an important contributor. We also highlight those pathways for which we have some
measure that we could exploit to better understand pathways to explain the racial difference we document.
Methods
We examine 401(k) savings and withdrawals behavior of employees over a period of 8 years (most of our
models only include 6 years due to missing data for 2008 and data issues in 2005), specifically focusing on
differentials between Whites, African Americans and Hispanics).
We examine savings behavior along five dimensions for each year in the sample period. These include
participation in the employer’s 401(k) plan, and conditional on participation, we examine 401(k) contributions,
balances, withdrawals/loans and whether an individual made any contributions to a particular kind of fund in
that year (stock funds, money markets and bond funds). During each year, we observe information about the
individual’s salary, health conditions as well as detailed demographics about each person.
This setting allows us several advantages in addressing the racial wealth gap. First, we are able to examine
individuals who are making decisions within a common incentive system. This allows us to overcome the issue
of heterogeneity in employer-offered 401(k) plans, which may otherwise interact with racial distribution across
employers in a way that could bias the analysis. Second, the heterogeneity among individuals in our dataset is
likely reduced compared with most other analyses in the literature, which sample nationally and across a wide
array of occupations. While reducing the generalizability of the results obtained, this also allows us to reduce
the error resulting from widely differing demographic characteristics of different races across occupations.
5

Finally, we are able to observe the behavior of our cohort with relatively little measurement error because it is
derived from administrative records, as opposed to self-reported savings, which has been previously shown to
be inconsistent (Gustman, Steinmeier et al. 2008). These data are derived from the company’s third-party
401(k) administrator and therefore provide us with precise numerical data for contributions, balances and most
of the demographic variables. In addition, we are able to conduct a variety of mediation analyses to understand
pathways underlying the observed differences. Despite these strengths, there are still many factors that we are
unable to fully account for in this analysis, e.g. non-401(k) financial circumstances, institutional trust, network
effects described above. Most notably we have no information on personal or family savings external to the
employer’s 401(k) plan and household income and assets. Furthermore, given the complexity surrounding the
factors that drive savings behavior, which include cultural, historical and demographic factors, we focus on
describing the differences and test several hypotheses regarding the underlying pathways.
Data
Baseline Sample
In order to ensure that we observe each individual’s behavior for all the years in our sample period, we restrict
our sample to those who are continuously employed over the period 2003-2010. The sample of workers
survived a series of large layoffs in 2009, and therefore previous studies have shown that this surviving sample
is selected to be healthier (Modrek, Hamad et al. 2015) and likely more productive. This does not represent a
major problem as the main focus of this paper is behavior differentials between ethnicities; reducing the sample
in this manner only serves to illustrate that the results we obtain hold across individuals of possibly higher
levels of financial literacy, albeit with reduced generalizability.
We make three further restrictions on our cohort:
i)
ii)

iii)

Employee type: We remove executives from the sample as they are not likely to behave the same
way as regular employees. (205 individuals removed from the panel.)
Salary: We retain only workers who earned at most $200,000 for every year in the sample period.
This avoids bias resulting from the cap in 401(k) contribution amounts (see plan details below) and
differences in behavior of especially high earners, who are also likely to be more financially literate.
This represents 1.1% of the sample, or 115 people. Furthermore, individuals who have high salaries
are more likely to participate in outside investment vehicles and otherwise have more savings
outside the plan (Bricker, Kennickell et al. 2012). Since we are unable to account for external
investments, restricting our sample to those who do not earn too much reduces the bias from such
considerations.
Risk Score: This is a numerical score (produced by Verisk®) designed to capture the amount an
individual is expected to pay for health care in a given year. It is normalized such that a risk score of
1 corresponds to a mean level of health care payments (with respect to the population of US workers
covered by commercial health insurance in that year). A risk score of in a year then indicates that
the individual is expected to pay times the mean for health care in the following year. In order to
reduce bias from extremely ill individuals, we limit out cohort to only individuals whose risk score
never exceeds 6 during the 2003-2010 period. (461 people removed, not including the 115
individuals removed as a result of the salary limit)

Our final baseline panel comprises 9,622 workers and 71,386 observations over 7 years, and will be further
reduced depending on availability of data (for most of our analyses we did not receive data for 2008, and we
have excluded 2005 from the analysis as there are some data irregularities in that year that we have been unable
to account for). Table 1 provides demographics for this cohort. The cohort is predominately male, 83%, and
about three-quarters hourly workers across 29 different US locations. The racial composition of the cohort is
83% White, 8.3% African American, 6% Hispanic and 2.8% Other (this category includes Native Americans
and Asian Americans). The average age in our final observation year was 52. The median annual salary was
$53,666 over all years in the sample period and the median risk score was 0.788 (our sample is healthier on
6

average than the population of working US adults covered by employer sponsored health insurance). Our cohort
held a median of $52,522 in 401(k) balances.
Outcome Measures
Participation
Our participation measure is a binary variable, which takes on the value 1 if workers participated in the 401(k)
plan. If any contribution was made to the 401(k) account, either by the individual or the company in a given
year, then the worker is considered to be a participant. In Figure 2 we present the secular trend in participation
rates by age and race (including only the three largest race/ethnic groups) over the study period. For each group
there is a secular trend of increasing participation over the eight-year period, but with some decline or
stabilization after 2009.
Contributions
We measure contributions in two ways, either as the log of contributions or as a percent of the worker’s yearly
income. The former is the natural log of the dollar amount contributed by the individual to all the 401(k)
accounts in the given year. Transforming monetary values by taking logs is customary when dealing with
dependent variables that are highly skewed to stabilize the variance. The latter is, as its name suggests, the
proportion of an individual’s yearly income that was made in contributions to his/her 401(k) accounts. We
include in the regressions only those individuals who participated, and we use White’s heteroskedasticity
correction as an added measure against inaccurate standard errors. In both measures the contributions variables
include both contributions made by the employee herself and those made by the employer on her behalf.1 Figure
3 displays median contributions by age and race, showing an increase in median contributions over time, as well
as a tendency for White workers to contribute more than their Hispanic or African American counterparts of the
same age group.
Balances
We measure total balances in all the 401(k) accounts on one date each year. Here again we log transform the
balances to stabilize the variance of the dependent variable. Figure 4 illustrates the median balances held by
individuals over time, by age and race. As expected, the balances grow over time, with some widening of the
gap between groups.
Withdrawals and Loans
Hardships or large purchases may cause an individual to require access to a substantial sum of money during
some point in his or her career. The employer’s 401(k) savings plan offers withdrawals and loans as methods
for employees to gain access to funding sourced from their 401(k) savings and they differ only in the
technicalities of when an individual may request one or the other as well as the penalties that apply. As such, we
analyze them together and to provide a joint picture of how often individuals of different races access their
401(k) savings during their working lives. There were a total of 10,151 withdrawals and 7,915 new loans made
during the sample period.
Individuals 59.5 years or younger may at any time withdraw the current market value of their after-tax
contributions, whereas pre-tax contributions can only be withdrawn under specific conditions such as serious
medical conditions, to pay tuition for graduate or college education for oneself, spouse or legal dependents, or
for funeral expenses, and only after other avenues of sourcing funds are exhausted, including taking a loan on
401(k) balances. There are no restrictions on withdrawals for individuals older than 59.5. There may be tax
1

While we are unable to separate out the contributions made by the employer and those made by the employee for most years, we are
able to do so for a smaller set of years and this is included as a robustness check detailed below.

7

penalties associated with early withdrawal and both income and capital gains taxes are due on untaxed income
that is withdrawn.
Loans from the 401(k) plan are divided into general purpose loans and primary residence loans. An individual
with a 401(k) savings account may request a general purpose loan at any time for any purpose, whereas as one
would guess, a primary residence loan is available only to purchase a home. Loans act as vehicles for an
individual to withdraw their balances as they are treated as loans taken from the individual’s 401(k) account
itself; an individual cannot borrow more than 50% of their remaining 401(k) account balances (minus any
outstanding loans), interest is charged at the prime interest rate and any repayments and interest is accrued to
the individual’s own 401(k) account. Any defaults are treated as withdrawals.
Figures 5 and 6 graph the rate at which new withdrawals and loans are taken out by race and age. Within a
given age group, African Americans tend to make the most withdrawals and in most years take the most loans
as well, followed by Hispanics. Whites persistently tend to take out the least loans and make the least
withdrawals in a given year.
Allocations
Several studies have shown that one of the potential drivers of the ethnic wealth gap is the way in which people
of different ethnicities invest their money. In this set of models we examine how people of different races
choose to allocate their savings between various asset classes. Individuals within the employer’s 401(k) plan are
offered a range of choices in terms of where to invest their 401(k) savings. Choices comprise funds run by
various providers, and differ in terms of their risk/return objectives and maturities. In order to abstract from
these complexities, we separate the menu of choices into three categories: stock funds, bond funds and money
market funds. Employees are also offered company stock as an investment category, but we choose to exclude
all investments in this category as during the sample period, the 401(k) plan was such that all employer match
contributions were made to company stock, and a holding period was required before funds held in company
stock could be rebalanced into other asset classes (this policy has since been changed). This makes it difficult to
measure, which contributions into company stock are intentional and which are simply due to company policy.
The set of models used here are logistic regressions, where the dependent variables are binary and take on the
value 1 if an individual makes a contribution to the given type of fund in a particular year. By using binary as
opposed to continuous contribution amount variables, we avoid details regarding percentage portfolio
allocations and differing levels of 401(k) savings and simply focus on whether or not an individual made an
investment in a particular asset type. Unless the individual has substantial outside asset holdings, we expect
individuals to diversify their holdings and invest in various asset classes. 2
Statistical Methods
Primary Analyses
Our primary analyses examines saving behavior along four different dimensions: participation, contributions,
balances, and withdrawals/loans. For each outcome, we estimate a series of regression to describe differences
by race/ethnicity. In our base model, model 1, we estimate
2

We assume that middle to upper-middle income earners in our sample will likely hold a large proportion of their financial market
investments in their 401(k) accounts as opposed to outside vehicles (such as private brokerage accounts) due to the favorable tax
treatment received by 401(k) investments as well as the generous terms of the company’s 401(k) plan. Reasoning along these lines we
would expect that an analysis relying on binary variables would not have much to say about the issue of racial investment allocations
but surprisingly, we will show strong pattern in the classes of assets minorities and Whites invest their 401(k) savings in.

8

where the
is the savings outcome of interest, is an indictor variable for race, is vector of time-invariant
individual factors such as birth year, gender and employee type, is yearly income from company W2
is the individuals risk score in a specific year,
is the county-level yearly unemployment rate, is
filings
series of controls for each location, and is a series of controls for year. For dichotomous outcomes these
regressions are modeled using logistic random effects models and for continuous outcomes they are modeled
using random effects linear regressions. All models account for heteroskedasticity by using Huber-White
(White 1980) robust standard errors. We similarly examine differences 401(k) portfolio allocation mix by race.
In this set of models we examine how people of different races choose to allocate their savings between various
asset classes categorized into classes as noted above. For each of these asset classes, we estimate three models,
similar to model 1, were
is dichotomous variable to indicate if an individual invested any portion of their
portfolio in that specific asset class.
Sensitivity Analyses
We also conduct two supplemental analyses to ensure that the measurement of the participation or contribution
outcome is not sensitive to the method of measurement. For participation, we note that some may consider it
more appropriate to limit participation to individuals who actively participate, i.e. if the individual
himself/herself made any contribution to the 401(k) account. In several years of the data we cannot separate
employee or employer contributions; however, we can do so for five of the survey years. Therefore we reestimate Model 1 defining participation as only those who make a contribution themselves.
We also re-examine the measurement of contributions. One potential source of error in this analysis is the
structure of the 401(k) plan, which allows contributions both before and after tax. Before-tax and after-tax
contributions are both recorded as their respective dollar amounts in our dataset, but are treated differently for
accounting purposes in order to avoid double taxation. Aside from that, all 401(k) plans also stipulate different
limits to the maximum allowable contribution depending whether contributions are made before or after tax.
Therefore we reexamine contributions only made before taxes since so few people have after tax contributions.
Pathway analyses
In order to better understand our descriptive results, we perform mediation analyses by examining the same
models as above, but adding one more construct, the mediator, to see if we can attenuate the relationship
between race and saving behavior.
(Model 2)

This model is identical to model 1, except for the inclusion of, M, the mediating variable. We are interested if
its inclusion reduces the magnitude of the race relationship estimated by . We investigate a series of
mediators including family composition (Scholz and Seshadri 2007), risk aversion, financial literacy (Lusardi
and Mitchell 2007) and network effects (Duflo and Saez 2002). Due to missing data, the mediation analysis will
use a subset of observation and the number of observations will vary in each of these analyses. Again, for
dichotomous outcomes these regressions are modeled as a logistic random effects model and for continuous
outcomes they are modeled using random effects linear regressions. All models account for heteroskedasticity
by using Huber-White robust standard errors.

9

Results
In this section we will focus on describing the results from our main set of analyses and on addressing the
various forms of errors that could arise as a result of variable definitions and the setting in which the data were
generated and recorded. In the next section, we will discuss and test various hypotheses that could underlie the
results presented in this section.
Participation, Contributions and Balances
Table 2 presents results from our base model on participation, contributions, and balances. Notably, even
among this fairly homogeneous sample of employees there is a significant and substantial reduction in the
likelihood that a given African American or Hispanic individual would participate in the plan. African
American are least likely to participate in employer sponsored 401(k) plans (OR = 0.26, 95% CI = [0.18, 0.39])
compared to White employees of similar background. Similarly Hispanic employees are also less likely to
participate in the 401(k) plan than their White colleagues, (OR = 0.36, 95% CI = [0.23, 0.57]) 3 Columns 2 and
3 of Table 2 presents the outcome of linear regression analyses where the dependent variables are logged
contributions and the 401(k) contribution rate as a percent of annual income respectively. The analysis in Table
2 column 3 suggests that conditional on participation, Hispanics contributed a similar proportion of their income
their 401(k) savings accounts as Whites. African Americans on the other hand, participate less and moreover,
those who do participate tend to contribute less. The coefficients suggest that African Americans who do invest
contribute 1.9% less of their income than do Whites ( = -1.86, 95% CI = [-2.25, -1.48]). Column 4 presents the
results of a linear regression on logged 401(k) balances, limited to individuals who participate in the plan. The
coefficients in this analysis indicate that both African Americans and Hispanics maintain lower 401(k) balances
overall than Whites.
Withdrawals and Loans
Table 3 presents the regression analyses of race and a set of explanatory variables on withdrawals and loans
made on 401(k) balances. For each of these binary dependent variables, we use a logistic regression to model
the outcome. We limit the regression to only individuals who participated in the 401(k) plan. African Americans
within in our sample are much more likely to make a withdrawal (OR = 8.2, 95% CI = [6.2, 10.9]) and to take a
loan (OR = 2.2, 95% CI = [1.9, 2.5]) in a given year than White employees. 4 Hispanics also withdraw at a
higher rate than do Whites (OR = 1.83, 95% CI = [1.3, 2.6]), and also take out loans at a higher rate (OR = 1.7,
95% CI = [1.4, 2.0]). Both Hispanics and African Americans draw down their 401(k) balances through
withdrawals and loans at a higher rate than Whites, but African Americans take withdrawals at a much higher
rate than even their Hispanic colleagues. Drawing down on 401(k) balances not only reduces retirement
savings by the amount withdrawn (although loans are repaid and so the net effect is that the principal remains in

3

As a benchmark, the odds of a randomly selected individual participating in the plan was 4.75 during 2003, the year with the least
participation and 11.30 during 2007, the year when participation was the highest. In order to get a sense of the magnitude of this, if the
odds ratio were at those levels, then a ballpark estimation indicates that all else being equal the probability of an African American
participating would be reduced to 53% from 83% in the former case, and 73% from 92% in the latter.
4
As a ballpark estimate to illustrate the impact of an African American coefficient of 8, using as a baseline probability the number of
withdrawals (11,663) as a proportion of total observations in the sample (67,354), we get a baseline probability of 17%. This gives an
odds ratio of 0.21, and the African American flag increases this odds ratio to 1.68, thus corresponding to a probability of 63%. Given
that we have 1746 observations of African Americans making withdrawals in our sample, and 4452 person-year observations of
African Americans in total, this translates to 40% probability of a randomly selected African American making a withdrawal in a
randomly selected year. This compares to a 17% probability of a randomly selected White person making a withdrawal in a randomly
selected year. The case for loans is similar, and the effect is small only in comparison to the effect on withdrawals.

10

retirement savings), but also causes the individual to miss out on any capital gains that might have resulted had
those balances been held within the 401(k) account.
Allocation-Mix Models
In Table 4, we present difference in allocation mix by race. We find that relative to Whites, Hispanics and
African Americans in our sample tend to favor safer asset classes as opposed to stocks. We see that both
Hispanics and African Americans contribute to stock funds at a lower rate than their White colleagues. African
Americans are about half as likely as Whites to contribute to stock funds (OR = 0.43, 95% CI = [0.26, 0.70]),
(OR = 0.43, 95% CI = [0.26, 0.70]), as are Hispanics (OR = 0.49, 95% CI = [0.27, 0.90]). These minorities
seem to contribute to stocks similarly. At the same time, both African Americans and Hispanics are more likely
to contribute to money market funds than their White colleagues. African Americans contribute to money
market funds with about twice the odds of Whites (OR = 2.85, 95% CI = [1.92, 4.22]). Likewise, Hispanics also
contribute to money market funds similarly to African Americans but much more likely than Whites (OR =
1.95, 95% CI = [1.21, 3.15]).
Robustness Analyses
Alternative definitions of participation
Some may argue that it is more appropriate to consider the individual an active participant only if the individual
herself made the contribution. While there were data-related challenges in separating out individual
contributions from employer contributions for all years, for 5 years (2003, 2004, 2008, 2009 & 2010) we were
able to separate out employee from employer contribution. We re-estimate Model 1 using only selfparticipation as the outcome variable. We find almost identical similar magnitudes for the lower participation
rates of African Americans and Hispanic employees relative to White employees (See Table 5, columns 1 and
2). Therefore, we conclude that this definition distinction does not affect our results.
Pretax contributions
As noted above there is different marginal benefits to 401(k) contributions based on whether the contribution is
before tax or after. In the analyses above we present all contributions. However, only about 10% of the cohort
makes any after tax contributions to the 401(k) plans. To ensure the robustness of our results, we further verify
that our results are indeed robust to examining only pre-tax contribution, by including a separate regression with
only before tax contributions in Table 5, column 3 (note that not all years can be included here as we are unable
to separate the contribution type for all years).
Discussion and Pathway Analyses
We explore a series of pathways in which race/ethnicity could affect savings behavior. We explore several
pathways put forth in the literature on the wealth gap in our data using simple mediation analyses. The pathway
analyses assume that race is associated with a mediating variable, and that this mediating factor can explain a
portion of the relationship between race and saving behavior. We implement these analyses in the spirit that
attenuation potentially evidences a valid pathway, whereas a negative result (no effect) does not imply the
absence of a pathway but rather, is more likely due to limitations in our data.
Family Size and Composition
For 56% percent of the sample, we know the number of children in the household under six years old for each
year. This is an important cut-off because childcare is quite expensive until children enter school. If African
11

Americans and Hispanics have larger households, particularly with more young children, then the difference in
participation and saving amounts could be a mechanical relation, where retirement savings is reduced to pay for
necessary childcare. When we estimate the mediation model, Model 2, with number of children under age 6 in
each year for each employee in our cohort, we find no substantial change in the magnitude of participation,
contributions, balances, loans and withdrawals for Hispanics or African Americans (See Tables 6 and Table 7).
Unfortunately, we do no have yearly information on spouses or cohabitation of domestic partners which also
affects household size and composition.
Risk Aversion
While we do not have access to employees to ask standard risk aversion questions, we have a behavioral proxy
for this construct. In particular, sometime in the period 2003-20065, the employer-sponsored insurance options
were changed for a subsample of employees in such a way that there was no default option, necessitating an
active choice on the part of the employee. In addition, the company insurance options all include the same
provider network, therefore there is no potential that insurance choices are being made to keep a particular
provider or other unique aspect of the benefit unrelated to financial design. Given that insurance decisions
expose workers to varying amounts of financial risk and the monetary differences between insurance options
are often economically meaningful, choices on insurance could serve as a measure of risk aversion and are
potentially more realistic than measures based on hypothetical lotteries often used in surveys. A similar measure
has been used previously as a measure of relative risk aversion (Einav, Finkelstein et al. 2012). There are 5
plans/levels6, which we use as a proxy for an employee’s risk aversion, and we include this time invariant
variable as a mediating variable.
The addition of risk aversion substantially attenuates the differences in participation rates for African
Americans and Hispanics relative to White. While African Americans still participate less, the magnitude of the
coefficient on African American is essentially halved (see Tables 8 and Table 9) and Hispanics no longer
participate at a lower rate than whites. This suggests that risk aversion mediates the decision to participate in
the employer sponsored 401(k) plan. However, conditional on participation, African Americans still contribute
1.5% less. In addition, if we examine allocations, we find that the addition of this measure or relative risk
aversion eliminates the significance of ethnic differences in choosing stock funds and the most risk adverse
group contributes to stocks less (see Table 9). This measure is not a perfect proxy for pure risk aversion because
it likely includes considerations of pre-existing health conditions and consumption tradeoffs. While the
estimated gradients on this risk aversion measures are not perfectly monotonic, the patterns are largely inline
with theory.
Financial Literacy
Financial literacy has been shown to substantially affect savings behavior. Moreover, there are substantial
differences in financial literacy by education (Lusardi and Mitchell 2011). While we do not have a direct
measure of financial literacy, we can distinguish whether workers were hourly or salaried employees. This
employee type variable can serve as a crude proxy for financial literacy based on the idea that salaried workers
generally have a college education while hourly workers do not (Worthington 2006, Lusardi and Mitchell 2007,
Delavande, Rohwedder et al. 2008). Previously we include this variable as a control variable in model 1.
Excluding this variable does lead to larger differences in the magnitudes of participation rates and savings as a
portion of income, which suggests that employee status does mediate the relationship somewhat (analysis not
shown, but available). However, it may be that much of the ethnic differences are driven by the differences in
5

The date the change occurred for each employee depends on the employee’s plant.
The plans are increasing numerically in their coverage level. Hence 1 represents the plan which has the least coverage and is taken to
represent the lowest level of risk aversion, whereas 5 represents the highest level of risk aversion.
6

12

racial composition of employee types. We therefore include an interaction term between employee status and
race to investigate these relations further. We find that salaried African Americans are less likely to participate
relative to salaried whites (OR = 0.30, 95% CI = [0.13, 0.67]), but Hispanic salaried workers participate at a
similar rate as white salaried workers. Moreover, hourly African Americans and Hourly Hispanics participate
less than hourly white workers (See Table 10).
Network Effects
In order to measure the effect of peer groups on 401(k) behavior, at each location we calculate the proportion of
people in the same gender, ethnicity and employment type that participate in the 401(k) plans. We use this
variable as proxy for how people within each workers peer groups participate in the 401(k) plans, and include
this in the regression models as a mediating factor. We find the including this variable does mediate the
relationship between race and savings behavior substantially (See Table 11). We interpret these results to
suggest that peer groups may act as vehicle for information dissemination; however, we interpret this mediation
analysis with caution because peer networks are assumed based on demographic and location characteristics
alone.
Conclusions
In this paper we demonstrate that even within a single employer architecture, there is substantial difference in
401(k) savings behavior by employee ethnicity. We show both African American and Hispanic employees are
less likely to participate in the 401(k) plans. Moreover, conditional on participation African Americans
contribute a lower proportion of their income to their 401(k) plan on average. We also show that African
Americans and Hispanics tend to draw down on their 401(k) balances more often through withdrawals and
loans and this may cause lower average accumulations among these ethnicities over time. We also show that
both African Americans and Hispanics tend to favor safer assets as opposed to Whites and this should have
strong impact on the level of balances accumulated by these individuals and therefore overall wealth.
We undertake several supplementary analyses to better understand pathways that underlie some of the
differences in savings behaviors across ethnicities. To explore this we conduct mediation analyses, using proxy
variables for household composition, risk aversion, financial literacy, and peer networks. In each case the
measurement of the construct of interest is imprecise relative to the underlying construct of interest.
Nonetheless, we find suggestive evidence that both risk aversion and peer networks mediate some of the
relationship between ethnicity and savings behavior.
There are other important factors that we would have liked to include in our analyses. For example, household
income is an important variable for which we have no measure. If income shocks are distributed unevenly
across groups and if such shocks affect savings behavior, then they are likely to mediate the observed
relationship. Another variable of interest would be a measure of institutional distrust. If the legacy of
contentious race relations has made certain ethnicities, such as African Americans and Hispanics, less likely to
trust or invest in established/formal sector financial institutions, then that too could mediate the relationships
observed. While these important constructs are missing in our mediation analyses, the primary results that there
are substantial differences in savings behavior by race still hold. In future analyses we will link employees to
households, allowing us to account for the impact of spousal income on savings behavior. This will allow us to
address the issue of household income shocks. Regrettably we do not have an apparent data source to further
explore psychological pathways, such as institutional distrust within the current data framework.

13

References
Apgar, W. C. and A. Calder (2005). The Dual Mortgage Market: The Persistence of Discrimination in Mortgage
Lending The Geography of Opportunity: Race and Housing Choice in Metropolitan America. Washington,
D.C., Brookings Institution Press: 101-123.
Argento, R., et al. (2015). "Early Withdrawals from Retirement Accounts During the Great Recession."
Contemporary Economic Policy 33(1): 1-16.
Barsky, R. B., et al. (1997). "Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach
in the Health and Retirement Survey." Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 537-579.
Basett, W. F., et al. (1998). "How workers use 401(k) plans: the participation, contribution, and withdrawal
decisions." National Tax Journal 51(2): 263-289.
Beshears, J., et al. (2010). The Impact of 401 (k) Loans on Saving. NBER Working Papers, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Borgo, M. D. (2013). "Ethnic and Racial Disparities in Saving Behavior." Institute for the Study of Labor. from
http://www.iza.org/conference_files/SUMS_2013/dal_borgo_m5011.pdf.
Bricker, J., et al. (2012). Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2007 to 2010: Evidence from the Survey of
Consumer Finances. Federal Reverse Bulletin. 98.
Chetty, R., et al. (2012). Active vs Passive Decisions and Crowd-out In Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence
from Denmark. NBER Working Papers.
Choi, J. J., et al. (2002). "Defined contribution pensions: plan rules, participant decisions, and the path of least
resistance." Tax Policy and the Economy 16: 68-113.
Choudhury, S. (2001). "Racial and ethnic differences in wealth and asset choices." Soc Secur Bull 64(4): 1-15.
Clark, R. L. and S. Schieber (1998). Factors Affecting Participation Rates and Contribution Levels in 401(k)
Plans. Living with Defined Contributions Pensions. O. S. S. Mitchell, Sylvester. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
University of Pennsylvania Press: 69-97.
Coates, T.-N. (2014). The Case for Reparations. The Atlantic. Washington, D.C., Atlantic Media Company: 162.
Cole, S. and G. K. Shastry (2009). Smart Money: The Effect of Education, Cognitive Ability, and Financial
Literacy on Financial Market Participation, Harvard Business School.
Corbetti, C. and C. Hill (2014). The Simple Truth about the Gender Pay Gap. American Association of
University Women Report, American Association of University Women.
Delavande, A., et al. (2008). Preparation for Retirement, Financial Literacy and Cognitive Resources. Michigan
Retirement Research Center Working Papers.
Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2002). "Participation and investment decisions in a retirement plan: the influence of
colleagues’ choices." Journal of Public Economics 85(1): 121-148.
14

EBRI (1994). Salary Reduction Plans and Individual Saving for Retirement. Employee Benefits Research
Institute Research Brief. Washington, D.C. 155.
Einav, L., et al. (2012). "How General Are Risk Preferences? Choices under Uncertainty in Different Domains."
American Economic Review 102(6): 2606–2638.
Engelhardt, G. V. and A. Kumar (2007). "Employer matching and 401(k) saving: Evidence from the health and
retirement study." Journal of Public Economics 91(10): 1920-1943.
Evans, W. N., et al. (1992). "Measuring Peer Group Effects: A Study of Teenage Behavior." Journal of Political
Economy 100(5): 966-991.
Gittleman, M. and E. N. Wolff (2004). "Racial Differences in Patterns of Wealth Accumulation." The Journal of
Human Resources 39(1): 193-227.
Gustman, A. L., et al. (2008). Do Workers Know Their Pension Plan Type? Comparing Workers' and
Employers' Pension Information. Overcoming the Saving Slump. A. Lusardi, University of Chicago Press: 4781.
Heinberg, A., et al. (2014). Five Steps to Planning Success. Experimental Evidence from U.S. Households.
NBER Working Papers.
Hong, H., et al. (2005). "Social Interaction and Stock-Market Participation." The Journal of Finance 59(1): 137163.
Karlan, D. S. (2007). "Social Connections and Group Banking." The Economic Journal 117(517): F52-F84.
Longhofer, S. D. a. P., Stephen R., (2004). "Self-Selection and Discrimination in Credit Markets " SSRN. from
http://ssrn.com/abstract=118088
Love, D. A. (2007). "What can the Life-cycle Model Tell us about 401 (k) Contributions and Participation?"
Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 6(02): 147-185.
Lundberg, S. J. and J. Ward-Batts (2000). "Saving for retirement: Household bargaining and household net
worth." Michigan Retirement Research Center Research Paper(2000-004).
Lusardi, A. and O. S. Mitchell (2007). "Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles of Planning, Financial
Literacy, and Housing Wealth." Journal Of Monetary Economics 54(1): 205-224.
Lusardi, A. and O. S. Mitchell (2014). "The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy: Theory and Evidence."
Journal of Economic Literature 52(1): 5-44.
Michaelides, A. G. and F. J. Gomes (2005). "Optimal Life Cycle Asset Allocation : Understanding the
Empirical Evidence " Journal of Finance 60(2): 869-904.
Mitchell, O. S. and J. S. Hastings (2011). How Financial Literacy and Impatience Shape Retirement Wealth and
Investment Savings. NBER Working Papers.
Mitchell, O. S., et al. (2005). Turning Workers into Savers? Incentives, Liquidity, and Choice in 401(k) Plan
Design. NBER Working Papers.
15

Modrek, S., et al. (2015). "Psychological Well-being during the Great Recession: Changes in Mental Healthcare
Utilization in an Occupational Cohort." American Journal of Public Health 105(2): 304-310.
Munell, A. H., et al. (2001). What Determines 401(k) Participation and Contributions. Social Security Bulletin.
64: 64-75.
Passel, J., et al. (2012). "Explaining why minority births now outnumber white births." from
http://pewsocialtrends.org/2012/05/17/explaining-why-minority-births-now-outnumber-white-births.
Pence, K. E. (2002). 401(k)s and Household Saving: New Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,
Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board.
Pepke, L. E. and J. M. Poterba (1995). "Survey evidence on employer match rates and employee saving
behavior in 401(k) plans." Economics Letters 49: 313-317.
Pollack, C. E., et al. (2013). "Do wealth disparities contribute to health disparities within racial/ethnic groups?"
J Epidemiol Community Health 67(5): 439-445.
Rugh, J. S. and D. S. Massey (2010). "Racial Segregation and the American Foreclosure Crisis." American
Sociological Review 75(5): 629-651.
Savage, C. (2011). Countrywide Will Settle a Bias Suit. New York Times. New York, New York.
Savage, C. (2012). Wells Fargo Will Settle Mortgage Bias Charges. New York Times. New York, New York.
Scholz, J. K. and A. Seshadri (2007). Children and household wealth. Michigan Retirement Research Center
Working Papers.
Shah Goda, G., et al. (2012). What Will My Account Really Be Worth? An Experiment on Exponential Growth
Bias and Retirement Saving. NBER Working Papers.
Shapiro, T., et al. (2013). The roots of the widening racial wealth gap: Explaining the black-white economic
divide. . Institute on Assets and Social Policy Research and Policy Brief. Waltham, MA, Brandeis University.
Taylor, P., et al. (2011). Wealth Gaps Rise to Record Highs Between Whites, Blacks and Hispanics. Pew Social
& Demographic Trends. Pew Research Center. Washington, D.C, Pew Research Center, .
VanDerhei, J. and C. Copeland (2001). "A Behavioral Model for Predicting Employee Contributions to 401(k)
Plans: Preliminary Results." North American Actuarial Journal 5(1): 80-94.
VanDerhei, J., et al. (2009). 401(k) Plan Asset Allocation, Account Balances, and Loan Activity in 2008
Employee Benefit Research Institute Issue Brief.
Webel, A. R., et al. (2010). "A Systematic Review of the Effectiveness of Peer-Based Interventions on HealthRelated Behaviors in Adults." American Journal of Public Health 100(2): 247-253.
White, H. (1980). "A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for
heteroskedasticity." Econometrica(48): 817–830.
Worthington, A. C. (2006). "Predicting Financial Literacy in Australia." Financial Services Review 15(1): 5979.
16

17

Figure 1. Pathways for Differences in 401(k) Behavior

18

Figure 2. Participation Rate by Age and Race

19

Figure 3. Median Contributions by Age and Race

20

Figure 4. Median Balances by Age and Race

21

Figure 5. Withdrawal Rate by Age and Race

22

Figure 6. New Loan Rate by Age and Race

23

Table 1: Cohort Descriptive Statistics and Outcome Statistics
Panel A: Cohort Descriptive (N= 9,622)
Percent

Gender
Male
Birth Cohort
Pre-1945
1946-1950
1951-1955
1956-1960
1961-1965
1966-1970
1971-1975
Post-1976

Ethnicity

82.52%
1.53%
10.35%
24.12%
26.08%
17.48%
11.53%
6.36%
2.56%

White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other

83.09%

0-1
1-2
2-3
3-4
4-6

64.11%

Risk Scores

Employee Type
Hourly

Annual Pay (Mean and SD)
Panel B: 401K outcomes (N=50822)
401K outcomes
Participated (N=57,732)
Contributions (Mean and SD)
Withdrew
Got Loans
Contributed to Stock Funds
Contributed to Bond Funds
Contributed to Money Market Funds

8.29%
5.79%
2.04%
0.79%

26.17%
6.62%
2.10%
1.00%
76.43%
$56,283

$19,181

88.03%
$7,060

$5,007

19.97%
15.57%
62.83%
24.88%
56.83%

24

Table 2:Participation, Contributions and Balances

Race (White Omitted)
African American
Hispanic
Other
Risk (Risk Score 0-1 Omitted)
Risk Score 1-6
Gender (Female Omitted)
Male
Employee Type (Hourly
Omitted)
Salaried
Constant
Birth Cohort FE
Year FE
Location FE
Observations
Number of Unique Workers

Participation
(OR)&

Log
Contributions

Percent Income
Contributed

Log Balances

0.264***
(0.0533)
0.361***
(0.0840)
1.078
(0.306)

-0.193***
(0.0251)
-0.0312
(0.0298)
0.140***
(0.0429)

-1.867***
(0.196)
-0.342
(0.266)
1.650***
(0.421)

-0.610***
(0.0455)
-0.187***
(0.0517)
-0.00432
(0.0734)

0.965
(0.0795)

-0.0180***
(0.00583)

-0.0469
(0.0481)

-0.00913
(0.00574)

0.965
(0.0795)

-0.0180***
(0.00583)

-0.0469
(0.0481)

-0.00913
(0.00574)

3.904***
(0.577)
181.1***
(106.2)
Yes
Yes
Yes
48,508
9,066

0.401***
(0.0160)
7.508***
(0.0676)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,882
8,521

3.397***
(0.163)
10.62***
(0.507)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,882
8,521

0.898***
(0.0269)
8.817***
(0.112)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,795
8,516

Controls: Yearly Salary, Country-Level Unemployment
&

First analysis is a logistic regression, where the dependent variable is a binary variable that takes on the value 1 if a contribution was made to
any of his/her 401(k) savings accounts (by the individual or by the company). The coefficients are displayed in odds ratio format. The remaining
models use linear regressions.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05

25

Table 3: Withdrawals and Loans
Ethnicity (White Omitted)
African American
Hispanic
Other
Risk (Risk Score 0-1 Omitted)
Risk Score 1-6
Gender (Female Omitted)
Male
Employee Type (Hourly
Omitted)
Salaried
Constant
Birth Cohort FE
Year FE
Location FE
Observations
Number of Unique Workers

Withdrawals (OR)

Loans (OR)

8.207***
(1.188)
1.835***
(0.339)
1.142
(0.289)

2.187***
(0.146)
1.713***
(0.141)
1.136
(0.144)

1.252***
(0.0638)

1.015
(0.0370)

0.581***
(0.0664)

0.791***
(0.0440)

0.540***
(0.0590)
0.888
(0.379)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,882
8,521

0.575***
(0.0324)
0.216***
(0.0534)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,882
8,521

Controls: Salary, Country-Level Unemployment
Both analyses are logistic regressions, where the dependent variable is binary and takes on the value 1 if a withdrawal or loan was made by the
individual in the given year. The coefficients are displayed in odds ratio format.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05

26

Table 4: Allocation Mix Models

Ethnicity (White Omitted)
African American
Hispanic
Other
Risk (Risk Score 0-1
Omitted)
Risk Score 1-6
Gender (Female Omitted)
Male
Employee Type (Hourly
Omitted)
Salaried
Constant
Birth Cohort FE
Year FE
Location FE
Observations
Number of Unique Workers

Contributed to Stock
Funds (OR)

Contributed to Bond
Funds (OR)

Contributed to Money
Market Funds (OR)

0.426***
(0.109)
0.489**
(0.152)
0.667
(0.263)

0.820
(0.142)
0.509***
(0.107)
0.677
(0.194)

2.849***
(0.572)
1.954***
(0.477)
2.399***
(0.729)

1.028
(0.0590)

1.072
(0.0556)

1.133**
(0.0573)

0.628***
(0.0975)

0.621***
(0.0790)

0.689***
(0.0964)

5.541***
(0.788)
38.20***
(23.21)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,882
8,521

3.438***
(0.409)
0.217***
(0.105)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,882
8,521

0.741**
(0.0933)
3.917***
(1.974)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,882
8,521

Controls: Salary, Country-Level Unemployment
All analyses are logistic regressions, where the dependent variable is a binary variable that takes on the value 1 if a 401(k) investment was made
into a stock fund, bond fund or money market fund in the given year. The coefficients are displayed in odds ratio format.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05

27

Table 5: Contribution Type Robustness
Participation (OR)

Log Contributions

Log After Tax
Contribution

0.237***
(0.0495)
0.336***
(0.0803)
1.111
(0.307)

-0.170***
(0.0255)
-0.00827
(0.0304)
0.171***
(0.0439)

-0.186***
(0.0257)
-0.0105
(0.0305)
0.142***
(0.0454)

0.936
(0.0905)

-0.0122
(0.00711)

-0.0105
(0.00708)

1.137
(0.167)

0.102***
(0.0178)

0.103***
(0.0179)

2.582***
(0.376)
172.4***
(108.6)
Yes
Yes
Yes
40,832
9,598

0.233***
(0.0168)
6.877***
(0.0643)
Yes
Yes
Yes
37,033
9,033

0.218***
(0.0169)
6.871***
(0.0648)
Yes
Yes
Yes
36,663
8,968

&

Ethnicity (White Omitted)
African American
Hispanic
Other
Risk (Risk Score 0-1
Omitted)
Risk Score 1-6
Gender (Female Omitted)
Male
Employee Type (Hourly
Omitted)
Salaried
Constant
Birth Cohort FE
Year FE
Location FE
Observations
Number of Unique Workers

Controls: Salary, Country-Level Unemployment
&
First analysis is a logistic regression, where the dependent variable is a binary variable that takes on the value 1 if a contribution was made by
the individual to any of his/her 401(k) savings accounts. The coefficients are displayed in odds ratio format. The remaining two models use
linear regressions.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05

28

Table 6: Family Size - Participation, Contributions and Balances

Ethnicity (White Omitted)
African American
Hispanic
Other
Number of Kids Under 6 (0 Kids
Omitted)
1 Kid
2 Kids
3 Kids
4 Kids
Risk (Risk Score 0-1 Omitted)
Risk Score 1-6
Gender (Female Omitted)
Male
Employee Type (Hourly Omitted)
Salaried
Constant
Birth Cohort FE
Year FE
Location FE
Observations
Number of Unique Workers

Participation
(OR)&

Log
Contributions

Percent Income
Contributed

Log Balances

0.234***
(0.0571)
0.315***
(0.0864)
0.991
(0.323)

-0.176***
(0.0299)
-0.0145
(0.0344)
0.114**
(0.0521)

-1.616***
(0.224)
-0.0931
(0.293)
1.399***
(0.473)

-0.660***
(0.0545)
-0.180***
(0.0623)
-0.0571
(0.0856)

1.092
(0.170)
1.094
(0.276)
0.639
(0.338)
6.495
(17.04)

0.00642
(0.0123)
0.0470**
(0.0206)
0.0632
(0.0476)
-0.188
(0.244)

0.176*
(0.0983)
0.582***
(0.163)
0.734**
(0.337)
0.000776
(0.905)

0.0388***
(0.0150)
0.0530**
(0.0247)
0.0311
(0.0584)
-0.0334
(0.208)

0.860
(0.0848)

-0.0111
(0.00655)

-0.0539
(0.0517)

-0.0119
(0.00649)

1.579**
(0.311)

0.0710***
(0.0243)

0.582***
(0.216)

0.269***
(0.0451)

3.693***
(0.641)
100.1***
(73.94)
Yes
Yes
Yes
39,480
6,292

0.359***
(0.0190)
7.466***
(0.0822)
Yes
Yes
Yes
35,944
5,961

3.191***
(0.176)
10.60***
(0.579)
Yes
Yes
Yes
35,944
5,961

0.866***
(0.0320)
8.723***
(0.135)
Yes
Yes
Yes
35,877
5,959

Controls: Salary, Country-Level Unemployment
&
First analysis is a logistic regression, where the dependent variable is a binary variable that takes on the value 1 if a contribution was made to
any of his/her 401(k) savings accounts (by the individual or by the company). The coefficients are displayed in odds ratio format. The remaining
models use linear regressions.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05

29

Table 7: Family Size - Withdrawals and Loans
Withdrawals (OR)

Loans (OR)

7.624***
(1.296)
1.628**
(0.348)
1.050
(0.295)

2.200***
(0.171)
1.710***
(0.162)
1.203
(0.172)

0.896
(0.0826)
0.924
(0.140)
0.682
(0.261)
2.007
(2.005)

0.938
(0.0541)
0.799**
(0.0728)
1.190
(0.259)
0.589
(0.382)

1.283***
(0.0770)

0.976
(0.0420)

0.564***
(0.0849)

0.798***
(0.0568)

0.553***
(0.0682)
1.034
(0.525)

0.574***
(0.0364)
0.212***
(0.0606)

Yes
Yes
Yes
31,160
5,960

Yes
Yes
Yes
31,160
5,960

Ethnicity (White Omitted)
African American
Hispanic
Other
Number of Kids Under 6 (0 Kids
Omitted)
1 Kid
2 Kids
3 Kids
4 Kids
Risk (Risk Score 0-1 Omitted)
Risk Score 1-6
Gender (Female Omitted)
Male
Employee Type (Hourly Omitted)
Salaried
Constant
Birth Cohort FE
Year FE
Location FE
Observations
Number of Unique Workers

Controls: Salary, Country-Level Unemployment
Both analyses are logistic regressions, where the dependent variable is binary and takes on the value 1 if a withdrawal or loan was made by the
individual in the given year. The coefficients are displayed in odds ratio format.

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05

30

Table 8: Risk Aversion

Ethnicity (White Omitted)
African American
Hispanic
Other
Risk Aversion (Level 1 Omitted)
Risk Aversion Level 2
Risk Aversion Level 3
Risk Aversion Level 4
Risk Aversion Level 5
Risk (Risk Score 0-1 Omitted)
Risk Score 1-6
Gender (Female Omitted)
Male
Employee Type (Hourly Omitted)
Salaried
Constant
Birth Cohort FE
Year FE
Location FE
Observations
Number of Unique Workers

Participation
(OR) &

Log
Contributions

Percent Income
Contributed

Log Balances

0.418***
(0.112)
0.568
(0.183)
1.552
(0.793)

-0.137***
(0.0356)
-0.0659
(0.0456)
0.160**
(0.0679)

-1.468***
(0.309)
-0.557
(0.420)
2.281***
(0.817)

-0.513***
(0.0674)
-0.181**
(0.0804)
0.114
(0.104)

0.486
(0.467)
0.744
(0.744)
0.176***
(0.103)
0.355
(0.197)

-0.190**
(0.0882)
-0.181***
(0.0649)
-0.217***
(0.0321)
-0.187***
(0.0282)

-1.936**
(0.822)
-2.574***
(0.673)
-2.537***
(0.382)
-2.123***
(0.349)

-0.111
(0.155)
-0.151
(0.123)
-0.365***
(0.0595)
-0.254***
(0.0523)

0.966
(0.123)

-0.00139
(0.00906)

0.0465
(0.0821)

-0.0135
(0.00892)

0.792
(0.188)

0.146***
(0.0260)

0.849***
(0.269)

0.300***
(0.0477)

4.158***
(1.073)
425.0***
(439.6)
Yes
Yes
Yes
19,347
3,289

0.338***
(0.0285)
7.870***
(0.0980)
Yes
Yes
Yes
17,561
3,145

2.896***
(0.279)
12.50***
(0.873)
Yes
Yes
Yes
17,561
3,145

0.863***
(0.0476)
8.864***
(0.175)
Yes
Yes
Yes
17,528
3,144

Controls: Salary, Country-Level Unemployment
& First analysis is a logistic regression, where the dependent variable is a binary variable that takes on the value 1 if a contribution was made to
any of his/her 401(k) savings accounts (by the individual or by the company). The coefficients are displayed in odds ratio format. The remaining
three models use linear regressions.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05

31

Table 9: Risk Aversion – Allocation Mix

Ethnicity (White Omitted)
African American
Hispanic
Other
Risk Aversion (Level 1 Omitted)
Risk Aversion Level 2
Risk Aversion Level 3
Risk Aversion Level 4
Risk Aversion Level 5
Risk (Risk Score 0-1 Omitted)
Risk Score 1-6
Gender (Female Omitted)
Male
Employee Type (Hourly Omitted)
Salaried
Constant
Birth Cohort FE
Year FE
Location FE
Observations
Number of Unique Workers

Contributed to Stock
Funds (OR)

Contributed to Bond
Funds (OR)

Contributed to Money
Funds (OR)

0.760
(0.231)
0.762
(0.289)
2.180
(1.120)

0.660
(0.165)
0.422***
(0.128)
1.047
(0.458)

3.061***
(0.839)
1.699
(0.565)
1.075
(0.490)

0.241
(0.183)
1.354
(0.693)
0.888
(0.233)
0.481***
(0.111)

0.169**
(0.124)
1.429
(0.677)
1.046
(0.244)
1.138
(0.235)

8.552***
(5.995)
1.432
(0.705)
1.178
(0.301)
1.272
(0.284)

1.052
(0.0976)

1.099
(0.0818)

1.210**
(0.0961)

0.771
(0.155)

1.060
(0.183)

0.536***
(0.100)

1.660**
(0.379)
55.80***
(45.36)
Yes
Yes
Yes
17,561
3,145

2.271***
(0.437)
0.387
(0.264)
Yes
Yes
Yes
17,561
3,145

0.873
(0.181)
2.339
(1.666)
Yes
Yes
Yes
17,561
3,145

Controls: Salary, Country-Level Unemployment
All analyses are logistic regressions, where the dependent variable is a binary variable that takes on the value 1 if a 401(k) investment was made
into a stock fund, bond fund or money market fund in the given year. The coefficients are displayed in odds ratio format.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05

32

Table 10: Financial Sophistication

Ethnicity-Employee Type
Interactions (Salaried-White
Omitted)
Hourly-African American
Hourly-Hispanic
Hourly-Other
Hourly-White
Salaried-African American
Salaried-Hispanic
Salaried-Other
Risk (Risk Score 0-1 Omitted)
Risk Score 1-6
Gender (Female Omitted)
Male
Constant
Birth Cohort FE
Year FE
Location FE
Observations
Number of Unique Workers

Participation
(OR)&

Log
Contributions

Percent Income
Contributed

Log Balances

0.0716***
(0.0179)
0.0893***
(0.0247)
0.233***
(0.0758)
0.287***
(0.0451)
0.297***
(0.130)
0.772
(0.368)
6.954
(7.156)

-0.587***
(0.0288)
-0.431***
(0.0332)
-0.269***
(0.0500)
-0.408***
(0.0170)
-0.272***
(0.0634)
-0.0681
(0.0746)
0.150
(0.0803)

-5.167***
(0.247)
-3.759***
(0.298)
-1.955***
(0.421)
-3.425***
(0.174)
-2.643***
(0.524)
-0.371
(0.753)
2.398
(1.247)

-1.496***
(0.0522)
-1.084***
(0.0581)
-0.913***
(0.0844)
-0.910***
(0.0285)
-0.758***
(0.118)
-0.253**
(0.125)
-0.00154
(0.169)

0.965
(0.0800)

-0.0180***
(0.00583)

-0.0471
(0.0481)

-0.00913
(0.00574)

1.066
(0.154)
717.8***
(438.9)
Yes
Yes
Yes
48,508
9,066

0.0954***
(0.0177)
7.912***
(0.0683)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,882
8,521

0.569***
(0.169)
14.02***
(0.520)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,882
8,521

0.258***
(0.0311)
9.720***
(0.113)
Yes
Yes
Yes
43,795
8,516

Controls: Salary, Country-Level Unemployment
&
First analysis is a logistic regression, where the dependent variable is a binary variable that takes on the value 1 if a contribution was made to
any of his/her 401(k) savings accounts (by the individual or by the company). The coefficients are displayed in odds ratio format. The remaining
three models use linear regressions.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05

33

Table 11: Network Effects – Average Network Participation

Ethnicity (White Omitted)
African American
Hispanic
Other
Risk (Risk Score 0-1 Omitted)
Risk Score 1-6
Gender (Female Omitted)
Male
Employee Type (Hourly
Omitted)
Salaried
Constant
Birth Cohort FE
Year FE
Location FE
Observations
Number of Unique Workers

Participation
(OR)

Contributed to
Stock Funds
(OR)

Contributed to
Bond Funds (OR)

Contributed to
Money Funds
(OR)

0.470***
(0.0930)
0.584**
(0.132)
1.020
(0.297)

0.473***
(0.113)
0.563**
(0.163)
0.733
(0.262)

0.710**
(0.122)
0.528***
(0.110)
0.828
(0.227)

2.241***
(0.471)
1.687**
(0.408)
2.153***
(0.627)

0.977
(0.0786)
0.913
(0.138)

1.027
(0.0588)
0.687**
(0.103)

1.072
(0.0554)
0.759**
(0.0962)

1.132**
(0.0571)
5.686*
0.779*
(0.112)

1.312
(0.291)
0.109*
(0.126)
Yes
Yes
Yes
55,723
9,066

3.539***
(0.541)
1.265
(1.066)
Yes
Yes
Yes
50,478
8,522

3.199***
(0.371)
0.0427***
(0.0223)
Yes
Yes
Yes
50,478
8,522

0.921
(0.128)
0.475
(0.392)
Yes
Yes
Yes
50,478
8,522

Controls: Salary, Country-Level Unemployment
All analyses from logistic regression model, where the dependent variable is a binary variable. All coefficients are displayed in odds ratio format.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05

34

