                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     STATE CAPITALISM VS. PRIVATE ENTERPRISE

                                     Alexander Ljungqvist
                                        Donghua Chen
                                        Dequan Jiang
                                          Haitian Lu
                                       Mingming Zhou

                                      Working Paper 20930
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20930


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2015




Thanks for helpful comments go to Heitor Almeida, Yakov Amihud, Tim Baldenius, Mara Faccio
(our ABFER discussant), Hui He (our NBER discussant), Takeo Hoshi, Kose John, Jun-koo
Kang, Barbara Katz, Bin Ke (our MIT Asia discussant), Kenneth Kim, Ross Levine, Agnes Lo,
Meijun Qian (our JFLA conference discussant), Antoinette Schoar, Henri Servaes, Andrei
Shleifer, Denis Sosyura, Marti Subrahmanyam, Daniel Wolfenzon (our AFA discussant),
Donghui Wu, Xueping Wu, and Bernard Yeung, and to audiences at various conferences and
seminars. We thank Lei Zhen for outstanding research assistance. Chen gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the China National Natural Science Foundation (grant no. 71372032).
Jiang gratefully acknowledges financial support from the China National Natural Science
Foundation (grant no. 71502130). Ljungqvist gratefully acknowledges the hospitality of Hong
Kong Polytechnic University while working on this project. Zhou gratefully acknowledges
financial support from UCCS. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Alexander Ljungqvist, Donghua Chen, Dequan Jiang, Haitian Lu, and Mingming
Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
State Capitalism vs. Private Enterprise
Alexander Ljungqvist, Donghua Chen, Dequan Jiang, Haitian Lu, and Mingming Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 20930
February 2015, March 2016
JEL No. G15,G31,G32,G34,P1,P31

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the efficiency of capital allocations at state-controlled and privately owned business
groups in China. Using highly granular data on within-group capital transfers, we document stark
differences: while private groups allocate more capital to units with better investment
opportunities, state groups do the opposite, especially when part of the “national team.” Minority
shareholders in state owned enterprises suffer as a result. External monitoring by outside
investors helps discipline state groups’ tendency to ignore investment opportunities. We trace
capital allocation decisions to the objectives of the Chinese Communist Party, which incentivizes
managers to maintain social stability. Consistent with the party’s policy preferences, capital
allocations are used to prop up struggling employers in high-unemployment areas and when many
young men enter the local labor market, but the interests of the party and of managers may be
misaligned.

Alexander Ljungqvist                            Haitian Lu
Stern School of Business                        Hong Kong Polytechnic University
New York University                             haitian.lu@polyu.edu.hk
44 West Fourth Street, #9-160
New York, NY 10012                              Mingming Zhou
and NBER                                        University of Colorado Colorado Springs
aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu                          School of Business
                                                Colorado Springs, CO
Donghua Chen                                    mzhou@uccs.edu
Nanjing University
dhchen@nju.edu.cn

Dequan Jiang
Wuhan University
dqchiang@whu.edu.cn
The key function of an economic system is to allocate scarce resources efficiently. Having

proved superior to central planning, Western liberal capitalism, based on markets and private

enterprise, was in the ascendant following the collapse of the Soviet Union. More recently, state

capitalism, as practiced in China and other emerging economies, has won adherents as an

alternative to Western capitalism. 1 State capitalism combines the power of the state with the use
                                       2F




of capitalist tools: the state controls access to capital, picks winners, and influences investment

decisions, while at the same time listing state firms on domestic or overseas stock markets.

    We ask how efficiently capital is allocated under state capitalism. Our focus is on China, the

country where state capitalism is perhaps the most entrenched. 2 Because China’s capital markets
                                                                          3F




are relatively underdeveloped and firms cannot access them without political approval (Allen,

Qian, and Qian 2005), we focus on firms’ internal allocations of capital – i.e., the internal capital

markets operating inside business groups. As we show, Chinese firms rely much more heavily on

capital obtained from fellow group members than they do on external capital markets.

    We investigate the efficiency of capital allocation empirically by contrasting how state

business groups and privately owned business groups in China allocate capital across their

member firms. Prior evidence suggests that we should find greater capital efficiency at private

groups. Allen, Qian, and Qian (2005), for example, document that private enterprises in China

are often credit-rationed by state banks and face higher interest rates. These financial constraints

translate into a high shadow cost of capital, suggesting that private enterprises should allocate

capital efficiently. State owned enterprises, in contrast, often face soft budget constraints (e.g., in

the form of state directed lending) and can thus afford to be more profligate (Kornai, Maskin,

and Roland 2003). Our empirical findings confirm this prediction, with an important twist.
1
  See, for example, “The Rise of State Capitalism”, The Economist, Jan. 21, 2012.
2
  To illustrate, China’s state firms account for two-thirds of China’s stock market capitalization in 2014. The
combined profits of three of the largest, PetroChina, Sinopec, and China Shenhua, exceed the combined profits of all
the 1,531 private enterprises listed on China’s A share market in 2014. China’s state firms are large even by global
standards: 92 of Fortune’s 2014 list of the 500 largest firms worldwide are Chinese, and 85 of these are state owned
firms; their collective revenues of $4.6 trillion are equivalent to over 60% of China’s 2014 GDP.

                                                                                                                  1
    Using data on all internal transfers among group member firms at 211 state business groups

and 76 private business groups over the period 2004 to 2013, we measure a group’s capital

efficiency as the sensitivity of each member firm’s capital allocation in the group’s internal

capital market to the firm’s investment opportunities.3 Our tests reveal differences that go well

beyond private enterprises being more capital efficient. We show that private groups in China

allocate more capital to member firms with better investment opportunities, as measured by

Tobin’s Q. This pattern is consistent with maximizing group value. State groups, by contrast, not

only use capital less efficiently, they turn efficiency on its head by reallocating capital from high-

Q to low-Q member firms. This unexpected pattern is remarkably robust in the data.

    Two pieces of evidence suggest that the negative sensitivity of capital allocations to Q at

China’s state groups reflects a deliberate choice. First, state groups divert less capital away from

high-Q firms over which they have less control, suggesting that outside minority investors help

monitor capital allocation decisions. Even so, we find that minority investors are harmed when

capital is diverted away from state firms with relatively better investment opportunities. Second,

capital allocation policies vary with a group’s access to cheap external capital. In particular, we

find that China’s “national team” of privileged state groups enjoying the softest external budget

constraints are especially prone to allocating capital in a non-value-maximizing way.

    Our findings suggest that state capitalism does a poor job of allocating capital efficiently, at

least in China. This likely reflects the fact that the objective function of the Chinese Communist

Party (CCP), which ultimately controls most functions of state, is not exclusively the

maximization of profits or shareholder value but also the pursuit of a “harmonious society,” the

political doctrine in force over most of our sample period. This doctrine is widely understood to

be aimed at avoiding social unrest resulting from job losses, something commentators argue the


3
  As Stein (1997) and Almeida, Kim, and Kim (2014) note, an efficient internal capital market allocates more capital
to units with relatively better investment opportunities.

                                                                                                                  2
CCP “has long feared.” 4 Consistent with a political desire to maintain socio-political stability,
                           4F




we document that the chairmen of state groups in our sample are rewarded with promotions to

higher political office for avoiding large scale job losses.

    Our tests show that state group chairmen are quite responsive to these career incentives. Not

only are internal capital allocations used to prop up large and struggling employers with poor

prospects operating in areas of high unemployment and when many young men enter the local

labor market, consistent with the CCP’s policy aims. Capital allocations are also particularly

distorted whenever group chairmen are up for promotion and cease to be distorted once a group

chairman becomes ineligible for promotion under the CCP’s rules on mandatory retirement.

    In principle, such behavior could be in the CCP’s best interest, by staving off layoffs, but a

final test suggests that state group chairmen’s interests may be misaligned. We find that capital

allocations become significantly less distorted after crackdowns on corruption among holders of

high political offices in the province in which a state group is headquartered. To the extent that

such crackdowns are perceived as exogenous shocks to the risk of being held accountable for

self-serving behavior, state group chairmen may prefer to lie low for a while and not misallocate

capital for their private career ends. Our results are consistent with this interpretation.

    Our paper contributes to the literature on state and private firms, surveyed in Megginson and

Netter (2001), by providing the first empirical comparison of their capital allocation decisions.

Prior literature identifies two sources of inefficiencies at state firms. The “political view” argues

that politicians extend a “grabbing hand” to divert public resources for their own benefit

(Shleifer 1998, La Porta and Lopez-de-Silanes 1999). The “social view” argues that the state

pursues non-commercial objectives beyond maximizing profits or shareholder value (Aharoni
4
  See, for example, a confidential 2006 report by the Congressional Research Service entitled “Social Unrest in
China,” available at https://wikileaks.org/wiki/CRS:_Social_Unrest_in_China,_June_12,_2006. The report argues
that “In the late 1990s, labor protests became commonplace in older industrial cities as workers in moribund state
owned enterprises faced unemployment, cuts or suspension in pay and benefits, and loss of pensions. … Fears of
greater unrest have triggered debates with[in] the Communist Party leadership about the pace of economic reforms.
… The CCP has long feared a worker’s democratic movement similar to Poland’s Solidarity movement.”

                                                                                                                     3
1986, Toninelli 2000), such as keeping redundant workers employed or reducing regional

variation in incomes by locating plants in uneconomic areas (Musacchio and Lazzarini 2012).

   Our evidence is consistent with both sources of inefficiency. The influence of chairmen’s

career concerns is suggestive of the political view, while transferring capital to struggling

member firms with poor prospects is suggestive of the social view. Indeed, our results suggest

the two sources of inefficiency are interlinked in China: by pursuing social objectives, political

appointees at state firms maximize their personal chances of obtaining political benefits.

   Our paper also contributes to the literature on business groups. This literature, reviewed in

Stein (2003), emphasizes two views of internal capital markets. According to the “bright side”

view, divisions compete for corporate resources while group management picks winners based

on the quality of their investment opportunities (Khanna and Tice 2001, Peyer and Shivdasani

2001). According to the “dark side” view, rent-seeking behavior by divisional managers may

lead to inefficient capital allocations (Lamont 1997, Scharfstein and Stein 2000, Shin and Stulz

1998, Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales 2000, Gertner, Powers, and Scharfstein 2002, Motta 2003,

Ozbas and Scharfstein 2010). Our evidence suggests that for private groups in China, the “bright

side” of internal capital markets appears to dominate. For Chinese state groups, on the other hand,

the “dark side” of internal capital markets appears to dominate.

   Finally, our paper contributes to the growing literature on corporate governance in China.

Prior work shows that the presence of outside private investors at state owned enterprises (or

SOEs) improves value (Wei, Xie, and Zhang 2005), operating performance (Sun and Tong

2003), transparency (Gul, Kim, and Qiu 2010), and pay-for-performance sensitivity (Cao, Pan,

and Tian 2011). We add to this the finding that outside investors make it harder for state groups

to divert resources away from member firms with good investment opportunities.

1. Measuring Capital Efficiency

   To measure how efficiently Chinese business groups allocate capital internally, we estimate

                                                                                                     4
the extent to which a business group’s capital allocations to its member firms correlate with each

member firm’s investment opportunities in a particular year. According to neoclassical theories

of capital budgeting, the correlation should be positive: the parent should allocate more capital to

a unit the better the unit’s investment opportunities (Almeida, Kim, and Kim 2014).

    The empirical literature on internal capital markets uses Tobin’s Q to capture investment

opportunities, and we follow the same approach. Unlike in the U.S., where a multi-segment

firm’s divisions are rarely themselves stock market listed, it is common outside the U.S. for

business groups to include multiple firms that are stock market listed. This greatly facilitates the

measurement of each member firm’s Q ratio. Korea’s chaebols are a prominent example of such

a group structure; 5 China’s business groups is another.
                    6F




    We can measure the direction, magnitude, and nature of all internal capital transfers that

occur within each business group in China courtesy of two stock market listing rules. The first

rule requires listed firms, starting in 2004, to disclose related-party transactions. This allows us
                                                                                              7F




to measure capital transfers among firms in a group at a highly granular level, for example in the

form of loans or cash advances. 6 (In the U.S., in contrast, multi-segment firms need only disclose
                                     8F




segment-level data on sales, cash flow, and capital expenditure, 7 necessitating creative but
                                                                           9F




indirect approaches to infer intra-group capital allocations. 8 ) The second rule requires listed
                                                                     10F




firms to disclose their ultimate controlling shareholders. This allows us to identify the group

membership and ultimate control of each listed firm in China.

    Using the data described in the next section, we estimate regressions of the following form:


5
  See Bae, Kang, and Kim (2002), Baek, Kang, and Lee (2006), Bae, Cheon, and Kang (2008), and Almeida et al.
(2011). Our approach follows theirs in using listed member firms’ Qs to capture investment opportunities.
6
  The rule defines 24 separate categories of related-party transactions among as many as 12 separate categories of
related parties. See Appendix A for further details.
7
  Under SEC rule S-K and FASB rule 14, U.S. firms have to break out sales, cash flow, and capital expenditure for
any segment selling primarily to unaffiliated customers and accounting for 10% or more of consolidated sales.
8
  For example, Shin and Stulz (1998) and Shin and Park (1999) regress a segment’s CAPEX on the cash flows of its
parent’s other segments. A positive coefficient is interpreted as evidence that the segment is a net recipient of
capital. For a critique of approaches of this kind, see Billett and Mauer (2003).

                                                                                                                 5
                    net capital allocationi ,t  Qi ,t 1  X i ,t 1   j ,t   k ,t   i ,t                (1)

for firm i operating in industry k and belonging to business group j in year t. The dependent

variable, net capital allocation, is a measure of firm i’s (potentially negative) net capital

allocations from elsewhere in its business group. The main variable of interest is Qi,t-1, the firm’s

beginning-of-year investment opportunities as measured by its lagged Tobin’s Q.

    If business groups in China follow neoclassical capital budgeting rules and allocate internal

capital efficiently, a firm’s net allocation should increase in its Q (i.e.,   0 ). 9 Testing whether
                                                                                                     1F




  0 requires some care. The reason is that investment opportunities vary both within and

across groups and within-firm. The right variation to exploit is the within-group one.

    To see why we do not want to capture cross-group variation, note that one group’s best

opportunity could be less promising than another group’s worst opportunity, yet it could easily

attract greater funding. The reason is simple: each group can only fund those opportunities that it

has access to, so both groups in this example should rank their individual opportunities and

allocate capital in descending order. How one group’s opportunities compare to those of another

group is of no consequence. From a capital allocation point of view, it is equally irrelevant how

investment opportunities vary within-firm over time. Consider a group whose lowest-Q firm

experiences a large improvement in investment opportunities that still leaves its Q far below

those of its sister firms. If capital is allocated based on ranking member firms according to their

investment opportunities, the change in Q is only relevant insofar as it changes the relative

ranking, which is fully captured by the point-in-time within-group variation we focus on.

    To ensure that we estimate  from within-group variation in the way each group allocates

capital across its various member firms in a given year, we include a set of group-year fixed



9
 This prediction mirrors the use of the Q sensitivity of segment-level capital expenditures to measure the efficiency
of internal capital markets in U.S. multi-segment firms; see Lamont (1997), Scharfstein (1998), Shin and Stulz
(1998), Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales (2000), and Ozbas and Scharfstein (2009).

                                                                                                                    6
effects,  j,t . These fixed effects allow us to test whether business groups allocate relatively more

capital to relatively higher-Q member firms, allowing each group to have its own time-varying

average level of capital allocations and its own time-varying average level of Q.

     The regression in equation (1) controls for a set of lagged firm-level characteristics Xi,t-1,

described in the next section, as well as a set of industry-year fixed effects,  k ,t . The latter filter

out the effects of industry-level booms and busts on capital allocation decisions by removing

time-varying industry-level shocks that affect all firms in a particular industry in a given year.10

     We cluster standard errors at the business group level. This allows for serial correlation in a

member firm over time and, importantly, for arbitrary correlations of the error term across

member firms belonging to the same business group in any given year as well as over time.

2. Sample and Data

     Much of our data comes from the CSMAR database, which contains accounting and

ownership data for all stock market listed firms in China. We use the ownership data to identify

all listed firms that have the same ultimate controlling shareholder and so belong to the same

business group. In the typical Chinese business group, the parent is unlisted; it controls group

member firms through direct equity stakes or via a pyramidal structure (Fan, Wang, and Zhang

2013). For private groups, the ultimate parent is usually a family. For state groups, the ultimate

parent is an unlisted holding company that is either controlled by the State-Owned Asset

Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC) in Beijing or a provincial equivalent. 11                        13F




     Using these criteria, we identify 230 state and 91 private business groups between 2004 and

2013.12 (Of the former, 82 are controlled by SASAC in Beijing and 148 are controlled by a local


10
   We use the China Securities Regulatory Commission’s 13 industry groups (agriculture, mining, communications,
construction, manufacturing, utilities, trade, transport, IT, finance, real estate, social services, and miscellaneous).
11
   To clarify with a concrete example, PetroChina and Sinopec are two separate state business groups, even though
both are ultimately controlled by SASAC. See Appendix A for details of how state groups are identified.
12
   Following Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003) and Bae, Cheon, and Kang (2008), we require a group to have a
minimum of two listed member firms in any given year.

                                                                                                                         7
equivalent.) Owing to the need to construct lags, our empirical models use data for 287 business

groups (211 state and 76 private ones), with a total of 5,013 firm-year observations. Between

them, the state groups control 660 listed SOEs while the private groups control 166 listed firms.

     In addition, business groups invariably also control unlisted firms. Unlisted firms have no

disclosure requirements and so are not covered in the CSMAR database. To get a sense of their

relative importance, we use group-level data manually extracted from two print directories of

SOEs. 13 Using these, we estimate that listed member firms account for 34.3% of group assets,
       14F




30.5% of group sales, and 29.1% of group employees in the average state group. (Equivalent

data for private groups are not publicly available.) Even though we lack data on business groups’

unlisted firms, it is important to note that our measure of within-group capital allocations,

described next, captures all internal capital transfers that listed firms receive or make, regardless

of whether they originate at or are sent to a listed or unlisted member firm.

2.1 Measuring Within-Group Capital Allocations

     To measure within-group capital allocations, we use data on related-party transactions among

group member firms and other controlling entities, such as the ultimate controlling shareholder.

Following Li, Sun, and Wang (2004), our baseline measure of the net amount of capital a group

member firm is allocated in a given year is the sum of the differences between accounts payable

and receivable, between notes payable and receivable, between advances and accounts prepaid,

and between other accounts payable and receivable. We then scale by beginning-of-year total

assets to make the measure comparable across firms. Net capital allocation can be positive or

negative, depending on whether a firm is a net recipient or a net source of capital within the

group. Appendix A contains further details on the construction of this measure.

     Several comments are in order. First, we do not use aggregate line items to construct the net

13
  The directories are “Large Corporations of China” (中国大企业集团名录), published by the National Bureau of
Statistics (2003 to 2008), and “The Development Report on Top 500 Enterprises of China” (中国 500 强企业发展
报告), published by China Enterprise Confederation and China Enterprise Directors Association (2007 to 2013).

                                                                                                              8
capital allocation measure. Aggregate line items (such as those available in a firm’s income

statement filed with regulators) include not only transactions among related firms within a group

but also transactions involving unaffiliated suppliers and end-customers. The great advantage of

China’s mandated disclosure of related party transactions is that firms must break out capital

transfers involving affiliated firms at a highly granular level, and it is these data we use.

     Second, our measure is based on accounting quantities that are normally associated with a

firm’s working capital. As such, these accounting quantities capture both internal capital

transfers and ordinary-course-of-business transactions among group members. As the Internet

Appendix shows, our findings are robust to stripping out ordinary-course-of-business cash flows,

the reason being that these do not vary with Tobin’s Q and so do not contaminate the estimates. 14                     15F




     Third, we capture intra-group capital allocations using a firm’s stock of what are essentially

working capital loans, rather than using the year-on-year change. This approach is sensible

because the loans business groups use to transfer capital from one member firm to another, being

short-term, have to be either repaid or rolled over from year to year. The correct measure of how

much capital a member firm is allocated in a given year is thus the total amount it borrows from

elsewhere in the group. This equals the amount rolled over from the previous year plus any

change compared to the previous year – in other words, the stock of working capital loans. Using

instead the change would not capture the amount of capital the firm is allocated in a given year.

     Other ways to transfer capital internally such as equity investments 15 or transfer pricing, 16
                                                                                       16F                       17F




while popular in some countries, are uncommon in China.


14
   Specifically, our findings are robust to using Jian and Wong’s (2010) “related lending” variable (the difference
between the amount lent to and the amount borrowed from group members) and Jiang, Lee, and Yue’s (2010) “orec”
measure (which ignores accounts receivable/payable and instead uses only “other” receivables/payables involving
group members).
15
   For tax reasons, internal capital transfers in China rarely involve the sale of equity, unlike, for example, in Korea
(see Almeida, Kim, and Kim 2014).
16
   Half the state groups in our sample are diversified conglomerates operating in multiple broadly defined industries
(roughly, one-digit SIC), rather than being vertically integrated. This reduces the parent’s scope for moving capital
around the group by inflating transfer prices (a capital allocation practice we are told is anyway rare in China).

                                                                                                                             9
2.2 Control Variables

       Our main variable of interest is Tobin’s Q, a popular proxy for a firm’s investment

opportunities. Following the literature, we approximate Tobin’s Q as the sum of the market value

of equity and the book value of debt divided by the book value of the firm’s total assets. How

well Q captures investment opportunities in China is an empirical question. Prior work suggests

Q works about as well in China as in other countries. 17         s18F




       In addition, our empirical models include the following controls that are standard in the

internal capital markets literature: return on assets and log total assets (Gopalan, Nanda, and Seru

2007); leverage (Bae, Cheon, and Kang 2008); collateral (Almeida and Wolfenzon 2006); the

ultimate owner’s voting and cash flow rights (Bertrand, Mehta, and Mullainathan 2002);

institutional ownership (Khanna and Palepu 2000); and an indicator set equal to one if the firm’s

CEO is a shareholder (Xuan 2009). In addition, we follow Ahn, Denis, and Denis (2006) and

include an indicator for firms that are in “special treatment” (a label China’s stock exchanges

assign to struggling firms at risk of delisting).

2.3 Summary Statistics

       Table 1 presents summary statistics for the 211 state groups and the 76 private groups in our

estimation sample. Averaged across the sample, SOEs and private firms are allocated an average

of 0.622% and 0.328% of lagged assets from other group members, respectively. This

calculation pools users and sources of internal capital transfers and so understates the economic

magnitudes involved. The average state user receives transfers equivalent to 3.9% of its assets,

while the average state source of internal capital makes funds equivalent to 3.9% of its assets

available to sister firms. To appreciate just how large these internal capital flows are, note that

they exceed a year’s profit: returns on assets among SOEs average only 2.9%.

       Comparing SOEs to private firms reveals that state groups are heavier users of internal

17
     See Bai et al. (2004), Sun and Tong (2003), Wei, Xie, and Zhang (2005), or Lin et al. (2011), among others.

                                                                                                                   10
capital markets: while state sources transfer an average of 3.9% of their assets to state users,

private sources transfer an average of only 2.7%. The difference is significant at the 1% level.

     Table 1 also reports summary statistics for external funding. This reveals that internal capital

markets in China are a considerably more important source of capital than are external capital

markets, for both state and private groups. For example, in the average firm-year, SOEs raise

1.1% and 0.5% of assets via external equity and bond issues, respectively, or a total of 2% when

all external sources (including bank loans) are considered. This is only a little over half the

amount of capital the average SOE user of internal capital receives from sister firms.

     Compared to SOEs, firms belonging to private groups look different on a number of

dimensions: they are smaller in terms of assets, sales, and employees; they have higher Tobin’s

Q and are more profitable, but they are also less productive 18 and more likely to be in “special
                                                                    19F




treatment”; they have lower leverage; their parents control fewer of their votes and own less of

their equity; more of their equity is owned by outside private investors and less by state entities

(such as local finance bureaus) or institutional investors; and their CEOs are more likely to own

equity. Each of these differences between state and private enterprises is statistically significant.

2.4 Selection and Unobserved Heterogeneity

     State ownership is clearly not randomly assigned. Nor, however, is it a choice variable: over

our sample period, no private group is taken over by the state, nor is any state group privatized.

Accordingly, we treat state ownership as both historically and econometrically predetermined.

The main identification challenge is hence not self-selection but systematic differences between

state and private firms. In our regressions, we control for the observable differences shown in

Table 1 to ensure that they do not drive any differences in capital allocation practices between

state and private business groups. This leaves unobserved heterogeneity.


18
  As Li, Liu, and Wang (2014) note, Chinese SOEs are more productive than private firms because they dominate
the upstream parts of key industries, enabling them to extract rents from private firms in downstream sectors.

                                                                                                             11
   Short of random assignment, the presence of unobserved heterogeneity in observational data

is inevitable. However, it is important to note what unobserved heterogeneity does and does not

affect in our setting. It does not affect the validity of the fact we establish: state groups do behave

differently from private groups in China, regardless of whether or not state and private groups

differ systematically along some unobserved dimensions. The only aspect of our analysis that

unobserved heterogeneity does potentially affect is the interpretation of this fact: what is the

mechanism that explains why state groups behave differently? Hence, while we trace the

mechanism to the CCP’s policy objectives and – potentially – to agency problems, we cannot

rule out that state groups allocate capital differently not due to state ownership but because they

differ in some other unobserved way from private groups.

3. Capital Allocations in State and Private Business Groups

3.1 Baseline Results

   Table 2 presents our baseline results. Column 1 regresses net capital allocations on Tobin’s

Q, controlling for member firm characteristics, in the pooled sample of state and private business

groups. The unit of observation is a member firm-year. We interact Q with an indicator for SOEs

to allow for differences in the way state and private groups allocate capital among member firms.

   For private enterprises, we find that capital allocations are significantly positively related to

Q. Given our focus on within-group/year variation, the economic interpretation is that in private

groups, member firms are relatively heavier users (providers) of intra-group capital allocations

the higher (lower) their Q. The sensitivity is quite large: for every unit by which its Q exceeds

the group average, the average private enterprise is allocated an additional 0.52% of its assets via

the group’s internal capital market (p=0.006).

   Capital allocations in state groups, on the other hand, are significantly negatively related to

Q: SOEs are allocated relatively more internal capital the lower their Q ratios compared to their

sister firms. Summing the coefficients for the main and interaction effects, the average SOE is

                                                                                                     12
allocated an additional 0.26% of its assets for every unit by which its Q falls below the group

mean (p=0.011). The difference in the Q sensitivity of private and state owned enterprises is both

economically and statistically significant (p<0.001).

     Columns 2 and 3 confirm these findings by estimating capital-allocation regressions

separately for private and state groups. Column 4 shows that the Q sensitivity of state groups

exhibits little time variation over our sample period: it is a little less negative in the second half

of our sample period compared to the first, but not significantly so (p=0.453), and it is

significantly negative in each half (p=0.037 and p=0.099, respectively). Tables IA.1 and IA.2 in

the Internet Appendix show robustness to alternative measures of internal capital allocations.

     It is possible that state groups use their high-Q firms as conduits for raising “cheap” funds in

the external capital markets and then channel such externally raised funds internally to their

lower-Q firms. This could potentially account for the observed negative correlation between

internal capital allocations and Q at state groups. However, columns 5 through 7 show that

neither equity issues, nor bond issues, nor aggregate net external funding (which includes bank

loans) vary with Q at state groups. Moreover, external fundraising is anyway rare: according to

Table 1, fewer than 10% of state-firm/years in our sample involve equity or bond issues.

     The results in Table 2 point to a fundamental difference in the way state and private business

groups’ internal capital markets work in China: while private groups allocate capital to member

firms with the best investment opportunities, state groups reallocate capital from high-Q to low-

Q firms. 19 We next explore if this data fact reflects deliberate policy rather than measurement
          20F




error in Q which, for whatever reason, differs systematically between SOEs and private firms.



19
  Since Q is a forward-looking measure, it will be affected by investors’ expectations of the value transfers we
document. However, this does not invalidate the use of Q for our purposes. If investors expect high-Q state firms to
be drained of capital, the Q we observe will be lower than it would have been had capital been allocated efficiently.
Similarly, if investors expect low-Q state firms to receive capital infusions, their observed Q will be higher. Thus,
the observed within-group range of Qs will be narrower but the within-group ranking of units – which is what our
tests exploit – will be unchanged.

                                                                                                                   13
3.2 Corporate Governance

    If the negative Q sensitivity in state groups is the result of deliberate policy, and if it is costly

to source firms, corporate governance should act as a constraint on a state group’s behavior.

Since all member firms in our sample are stock market listed, they each have outside investors

with an incentive to monitor capital allocation decisions (Gupta 2005). Columns 1 and 2 of Table

3 allow the Q sensitivity in state groups to depend on the size of the parent’s ownership stake in

the member firm.20 The results indicate that high-Q firms are used more heavily to fund sister

firms when the parent controls a larger fraction of their equity capital. The coefficients on Q are

–0.167 (p=0.068) and –0.830 (p=0.002) for member firms with below and above median parent

ownership stakes, respectively – a difference that is not only statistically significant (p=0.013)

but also large economically. These patterns are consistent with state groups finding it harder to

divert capital away from high-Q firms over which they have less control.

3.3 Central Versus Regional State Business Groups

    External governance may not be the only constraint on state groups’ internal capital

allocation decisions. Another mitigating factor may be capital market forces: a persistent failure

to allocate capital efficiently within a group will lead to underperformance and potentially to

economic ruin unless a business group enjoys the privilege of a soft external budget constraint.

    To determine which state groups face a soft external budget constraint, we make use of an

aspect of the SOE reforms adopted by the CCP’s 15th National Congress in 1997. Known under

the slogan “Grasp the big, let go of the small,” the reforms sought to create national champions

in industries deemed strategically important (such as defense, utilities, energy, transport, and

banking). Since 2003, these national champions (often referred to as the “national team”) have

20
   A note on estimation is in order. This conditioning variable varies across firms in a given group, so to ensure that
we continue to estimate within-group capital allocations, we keep the group structure intact by estimating fully
interacted models. These allow each coefficient to vary with the characteristic in question while including group-
year fixed effects as before. Throughout the paper, we adopt this approach when conditioning on variables that vary
within-group/year.

                                                                                                                     14
been organized as state business groups that are controlled directly by the central SASAC in

Beijing. They enjoy the highest privileges in terms of monopolistic status, virtually zero

bankruptcy risk, and preferential access to capital. See Hsieh and Song (2015) for further details.

   SOEs in non-strategic industries – “the small” – were either closed down or transferred to the

oversight of local SASACs in China’s various administrative regions. The resulting locally

controlled state business groups were left to fend for themselves in the marketplace rather than

becoming national champions. Accordingly, they could not expect special treatment or budgetary

assistance from Beijing (though some may receive favors from their local SASAC).

   Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 estimate the average Q sensitivity separately for locally and

centrally controlled state groups, respectively. Both types of state groups are prone to allocating

internal capital from high-Q to low-Q member firms, but the negative Q sensitivity is nearly

three times as large for central groups as for local groups. This economically large difference

(with a p-value of 0.07) is consistent with China’s “national champions” being shielded from

capital market forces to a larger extent than are their locally controlled counterparts.

3.4 Economic Magnitudes and Consequences

   Having established that the negative Q sensitivity at state business groups likely is deliberate

rather than an artifact of measurement error or other randomness, we give a sense of the

economic magnitudes involved by comparing internal transfers at source and recipient firms to

their respective profits, investment budgets, and dividend payouts.

   We begin by sorting sample SOEs into quintiles based on the difference between their actual

net capital allocation in year t and the net capital allocation they would have received had their

business group applied the same internal capital allocation policy as the average private group in

column 2 of Table 2. Quintile 1 then consists of SOEs with the lowest (most negative) net capital

allocations relative to investment opportunities, which we call “source” firms. The “recipient”

firms in quintile 5 are those receiving the highest allocations relative to investment opportunities.

                                                                                                     15
   Table 4 reports average firm-level characteristics for each of the quintiles. Panel A focuses

on the year of the capital transfer while Panel B focuses on the year after. Not surprisingly, given

our findings so far, source firms have much higher Qs than do recipient firms: the average Q of

2.147 among source firms is 48% higher than the average of 1.451 at recipients.

   Despite having higher Qs, source firms transfer an average of 6.5% of their assets to other

group members. This amounts to 2.6 times their net income, 1.35 times their annual CAPEX, and

4.2 times their dividend (in each case scaled by total assets). In other words, source firms

experience sizeable capital outflows. Recipient firms receive 8.8% of their assets in internal

transfers, which amounts to 4 times their net income, 1.7 times their CAPEX, and 5.7 times their

dividend. Fully 88% of recipients receive transfers exceeding their previous year’s net income.

   One year later, source firms suffer a large and statistically significant fall in their Tobin’s Qs,

which decline by 11.8% to 1.894 on average (though they remain higher than in the other four

quintiles). Since the numerator of Q is the firm’s market capitalization, this suggests that source-

firm share prices fall. (We investigate this further in the next section.) Recipient firms’ Qs, by

contrast, do not increase significantly. Source firms continue to make sizeable transfers to sister

firms, and recipient firms continue to receive sizeable inflows, but the magnitudes are

significantly smaller than the year before, suggesting there are limits to how much capital a

source firm can spare. Consistent with the existence of such limits, we find that source firms

suffer a large and significant decline in their sales growth, down from 18.2% to 13.7%.

   What do recipient firms do with their capital inflows? They do not increase CAPEX, or pay

larger dividends, or reduce their borrowing. Recipient firms’ profitability and sales growth are

also little changed, so there is no evidence that their performance improves as a result of

receiving large capital transfers. The one metric in the table that does increase by a large (albeit

not statistically significant) amount is employment growth: recipients hire 12.7% more workers

one year after the capital inflow, up from 9.4% the year before.

                                                                                                     16
3.5 Are Minority Shareholders Harmed?

       The significant decline in the Tobin’s Qs of source firms found in Table 4 hints at the

possibility that minority shareholders are harmed when the firm they have invested in transfers

capital to sister companies with worse investment opportunities. To test whether minority

shareholders indeed suffer negative returns, we estimate standard calendar-time buy-and-hold

portfolio returns for a trading strategy based on deviations from “efficient” internal capital

allocations. This strategy echoes the sorting approach taken in Table 4, except that we ensure it is

tradable by requiring actual allocations to be known to investors before portfolios are formed.

       Each April, we sort group-affiliated SOEs into quintiles based on the deviation between their

actual capital allocations (as disclosed in their annual reports, usually filed in March) and the

predicted capital allocations had they followed the same allocation “rules” as those estimated for

private groups in column 2 of Table 2. We then hold each portfolio for 12 months before

resorting firms based on their next disclosure of capital allocations the following March.21

       We compute abnormal portfolio returns by estimating three-factor (Fama and French 1993)

or four-factor (Carhart 1997) alphas. These equal the intercept from a regression of the monthly

portfolio return less the risk-free rate on the monthly excess return of the market over the risk-

free rate and the return difference between small and large-capitalization stocks (SMB), high and

low book-to-market stocks (HML), and (for four-factor alphas) high and low price-momentum

stocks (MOM). See Appendix A for further details on how we construct these factors.

       Table 5 reports monthly alphas for each quintile as well as for a hedge portfolio that is long

firms receiving the highest net allocations relative to investment opportunities (quintile 5) and

short firms with the lowest (most negative) net allocations relative to investment opportunities


                                                    Rit x it /  i t 1 x it , where Rit is the month t return on stock i, nt is the number
21                                            nt                n
     The portfolio return in month t is
                                              i 1
of stocks in the portfolio, and xit is the compounded monthly return of stock i from the beginning of April through
month t–1. Assuming an equal investment in each stock, xit = 1 for all stocks at portfolio formation in April. This
gives an equal weighted portfolio return. To construct value-weighted portfolio returns, we set xit at portfolio
formation equal to stock i’s end of March market value divided by the sum of the values of all portfolio stocks.

                                                                                                                                         17
(quintile 1). Panel A reports equal weighted returns. The three bottom quintiles experience

significantly negative risk-adjusted returns, of around half a percent per month. The top quintile

earns zero abnormal returns on average. The hedge portfolio earns a three-factor alpha of 0.48%

per month (p=0.026), which means that recipient firms’ share prices outperform those of source

firms by an annualized 5.93% on a risk-adjusted basis. Including a momentum factor, shown in

Panel B, lowers the alpha a little, to 0.42% per month or 5.19% annualized (p=0.043).

     Interestingly, forming value-weighted portfolios each April, instead of equal weighted ones,

yields even larger annualized three- and four-factor alphas, of 10.24% and 10.85%, respectively.

This suggests that it is the larger member firms that suffer the most from sharing their capital

with their sister firms, perhaps because they have more capital to share and so make for more

tempting targets when the group parent decides on internal capital transfers.

     These patterns suggest that the firm making the transfer is not fairly compensated for it (at

least in investors’ opinion). 22 Internal capital allocation practices at state groups thus appear to
                                 2F




harm minority shareholders who invest in SOEs that transfer capital to sister firms despite having

better prospects themselves. Given that shareholders in recipient firms only break even (in risk-

adjusted terms), investors in SOEs collectively underperform the risk benchmarks we use. In

other words, internal capital allocation practices at state groups create losers without creating

winners, at least among their investors, and so destroy shareholder value overall.

3.6 Discussion

     The results in Tables 2 through 5 are consistent with the interpretation that state groups

allocate internal capital inefficiently in the neoclassical sense. Within state groups, internal

capital allocations favor low-Q firms over high-Q firms, the opposite of what we see among

private groups in China (or indeed in the U.S.). This tendency to allocate relatively more capital
                                                         23F




22
 The fact that the long-short portfolio alphas are economically and statistically significant suggests that investors
were surprised by the extent to which high-Q state owned enterprises were used as sources of capital.

                                                                                                                    18
to the firms with the relatively worst investment opportunities is stronger when the group parent

has greater control over the member firm and when the group is part of the “national team” and

so faces a particularly soft external budget constraint. The tendency is weaker when outside

investors own a larger slice of the member firm’s equity and among local state groups. Minority

shareholders of SOEs that transfer capital to sister companies with worse investment

opportunities suffer negative risk-adjusted returns as a result.

    We next turn to the question why state groups may allocate internal capital in this manner.

4. The State’s Objective Function

    The internal capital allocations we observe at state groups suggest that the state’s objective

function is not (or not only) to maximize profits or firm value. What objective function is being

pursued instead? Over much of our sample period, the Communist Party’s signature ideology

was centered around the concept of a “harmonious society,” introduced in 2005. This concept is

intended to maintain economic growth while avoiding social unrest and political instability

resulting from rising inequality and perceived economic injustices (Geis and Holt 2009). A

concrete objective that emerges from this, we conjecture, is the desire to avoid mass layoffs.

    We ground this conjecture in two observations. The first is our finding in Table 3 above that

internal capital allocations appear particularly distorted in centrally controlled state groups, i.e.,

in China’s “national champions.” This is noteworthy because the reforms that led to their

creation gave China’s “national champions” preferential access to capital and other privileges in

return for a commitment that the firms provide their employees with an “iron rice bowl,” that is,

guaranteed job security, steady income, and other benefits.

    The second observation is based on a comparison of diversified and focused state business

groups. As Table 6 shows, the tendency to allocate capital from high-Q to low-Q firms is

particularly pronounced in diversified state groups, especially those operating in three or more

industries. At focused groups, the tendency is economically weaker and not statistically

                                                                                                     19
significant. If labor is more mobile between firms that operate in the same industry (Cestone et

al. 2015), one interpretation of these patterns is that focused groups respond to changes in

investment opportunities by transferring employees across firms, whereas diversified groups

resort to propping up firms with stranded labor by way of internal capital allocations.

     If the party’s objective is indeed to maintain employment and thereby social stability, we

expect the CCP to incentivize managers accordingly. State groups’ key decision-makers have the

title of chairman (董事长). Like all top managers at China’s SOEs, group chairmen are party-

appointed civil servants (Li 1998). Their pay and benefits are largely determined by the civil-

service rank of their position, with the chairmanships of more important groups having higher

ranks. The CCP’s main incentive tool is to offer the prospect of a promotion (Li and Zhou 2005)

rather than increased pay or bonuses. For group chairmen, this means promotion to an office of

higher rank, whether at another state group, in the party (e.g., in the Politburo), or in

administration (e.g., a ministerial post or provincial governorship). Member-firm chairmen can

be promoted to the chairmanship of a larger SOE, a group chairmanship, or a government

position. As Deng et al. (2015) note, career success depends on “adherence to [CCP] policies.”

     Every three years, the CCP evaluates SOE managers for promotion (Du, Tang, and Young

2012). The CCP’s promotion criteria help shed light on the CCP’s objective function. Marks are

given both for “operational performance” (50%) and for “political qualities, coordination skills,

and personal integrity” (50%). 23 The former includes criteria that correlate with maximizing
                                    24F




profits, such as improving productivity and financial performance. The latter covers such areas

as “making politically responsible decisions”, “civic cohesion”, and “corporate social

responsibility” – criteria that are widely interpreted as avoiding layoffs. 24 Thus, at least on paper,
                                                                                     25F




23
   See the “Interim Provisions on Performance Evaluations for Executives of C-SOEs”, first issued by the Chinese
Communist Party’s Central Organization Department in 2003 and revised in 2006 and 2009.
24
   Clearly, these aims can be in conflict (maintaining overstaffing may make raising productivity difficult) and over
time may be incompatible (subsidizing unproductive jobs may divert resources away from creating productive ones).

                                                                                                                 20
SOE managers are incentivized, in part, to help maintain socio-political stability.

     To investigate how these promotion criteria are applied in practice, and so whether SOE

managers are indeed incentivized to pursue a mix of socio-political and economic objectives, we

empirically model each SOE manager’s career path during our sample period. For this, we hand-

collect data on the career progressions of each group and member-firm chairman from party and

government websites. Since member-firm chairmen report to the chairman of their group, while

group chairmen report to SASAC, we estimate separate models for member-firm chairmen and

group chairmen. Each position – whether at an SOE, in the CCP, or in administration – has a

unique rank in the civil-service hierarchy, so promotions and demotions can be identified without

requiring subjective coding on our part. A promotion is simply a move to a position of higher

rank according to the civil-service scale, and a demotion is a move to a position of lower rank. 25           26F




     Of the 353 group-level chairmen in our sample, 36 are promoted and 16 are demoted over

our sample period. (In addition, 51 reach the mandatory retirement age and leave, 7 move to the

private sector, and 5 are disciplined for misconduct.) Of the 1,222 member-firm chairmen, 55 are

promoted and 166 are demoted.

4.1 Group Chairmen’s Career Outcomes

     Table 7, Panel A focuses on the determinants of the likelihood that a group chairman is

promoted (columns 1-3) or demoted (columns 4-6). To capture the formal evaluation criteria laid

down by the CCP, we focus on key commercial events at the group, such as mass layoffs at one

or more member firms, large-scale hiring, productivity improvements or impairments, and large

changes in profitability. 26 To proxy for a chairman’s political or social connections, we include
                           27F




the log distance between group headquarters and the group’s principal (the Beijing SASAC in


25
   For example, the group chairmanship of China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) is administratively
equivalent to the rank of vice minister. On one occasion, CNOOC’s then chairman was moved to the position of
party secretary of Hainan province, the administrative equivalent of the rank of minister and hence a promotion.
26
   See Appendix A for details of how these events are coded.

                                                                                                                    21
the case of centrally controlled groups or the provincial SASAC in the case of locally controlled

ones). We estimate Cox proportional hazard models with time-varying covariates that also

control for group size (log total group assets) and the group chairman’s age.

     Chairing a larger group significantly increases the chance of promotion (p=0.005 in column

1) and reduces the risk of demotion (p=0.01 in column 4). Age also matters: group chairmen in

their 50s are significantly less likely to be promoted than those in their 40s. Those in their 60s

are nearly never promoted, a finding that reflects a mandatory retirement age of 65 for highly-

ranked offices coupled with the fact that such offices usually have a five-year term. 27 Proximity
                                                                                        28F




to SASAC does not help a chairman gain a promotion. It does, however, increase the risk of

demotion (p=0.012 in column 4), perhaps because it enables closer monitoring.

     Holding age, group size, and distance to SASAC constant, we find that both profit-related

and socio-political objectives affect group chairmen’s careers. The socio-political objectives

appear especially strong, consistent with the CCP’s emphasis on “social harmony.” In particular,

group chairs are rewarded for avoiding mass layoffs: doing so significantly increases the chance

of promotion (p=0.022 in column 1) and reduces the risk of demotion (p=0.002 in column 4).

The career impact is sizeable. This can best be seen by converting the coefficient estimates into

hazard ratios. For example, a group chairman’s chance of promotion falls by 71.8% after a year

in which a member firm laid off 10% or more of its workforce. Interestingly, this effect is

asymmetric: large scale hiring has no effect on career outcomes.

     To explore the CCP’s sensitivity to job losses further, Figure 1 plots the hazard ratios

associated with mass layoffs for different cut-offs ranging from 1% to 20% of the workforce.

Figure 1a reveals that a group chairman’s chance of promotion is quite sensitive to the size of the

job losses, declining monotonically from +6% to –71.8% as layoffs rise from 1% to 10% of the

27
  See Article 3, Paragraph 3 of the 1982 “Chinese Communist Party Central Committee’s Decision on the
Establishment of the Retirement System for Senior Party Cadres” (中共中央关于建立老干部退休制度的决定),
available in Chinese at http://cpc.people.com.cn/GB/64162/71380/71387/71591/4854975.html.

                                                                                                        22
workforce. Beyond 10%, it declines further, albeit not quite monotonically; for a chairman who

has presided over a jobs cut larger than 18%, the chance of promotion is reduced by around 86%,

all else equal. The effect becomes statistically significant beyond a 5% cut in jobs.

     Figure 1b shows the corresponding effect on the chairman’s risk of demotion. Starting at a

5% cut in jobs, the career hazard of presiding over mass layoffs becomes statistically significant.

It is also economically large: a 5% jobs cut increases the risk of demotion by a factor of 3.6, all

else equal, while a 10% jobs cut increases it by a factor of 4.7.

     The results for the profit-related objectives are more mixed. Presiding over a 10% improve-

ment in productivity boosts the chairman’s chance of promotion by an economically large 92.9%

in column 1 and reduces his risk of demotion by 68.1% in column 4, but both estimates are only

marginally statistically significant. (Figures 2a and 2b plot the corresponding effects for TFP

improvements ranging from 1% to 20%.) Boosting profitability does not help a chairman gain a

promotion, though there is weakly significant evidence in column 5 that it helps avoid demotion.

     The CCP’s evaluation criteria make no mention of internal capital allocations. To see if

group chairmen are nonetheless punished for misallocating capital, column 2 adds a measure of

the extent of a state group’s capital misallocation. 28 Interestingly, the measure has no effect on
                                                             29F




career outcomes. This non-result is consistent with the fact that the CCP does not evaluate group

chairmen on their capital efficiency. 29 The apparent absence of sanctions for misallocating
                                            30F




capital could, in turn, free group chairmen to allocate capital in a way that the CCP apparently

does care about: avoiding layoffs. We investigate this possibility in Section 4.4.




28
   The measure is estimated as follows. As in Tables 3 and 4, we compute deviations between actual and predicted
net capital allocations for each SOE member firm using the private-group estimates from column 2 of Table 2 as a
benchmark. To arrive at a group-level summary statistic of internal capital misallocation, we take the group-year
standard deviation of the estimated member-firm-level deviations. A small standard deviation indicates that a state
group’s internal capital allocations are quite close to those that would have obtained under private-group practices.
29
   Alternatively, the non-result could arise because the measure, though intuitive and based on our portfolio sorts in
Table 4, does a poor job of capturing the extent of capital misallocation.

                                                                                                                    23
4.2 Member-firm Chairmen’s Career Outcomes

     Given the presence of outside investors at member firms, group chairmen need to have a

mechanism for rewarding member-firm managers for ceding capital to less deserving sister

firms. After all, as Table 5 shows, doing so harms outside investors. One plausible mechanism is

to support compliant underlings’ bids for a promotion. Table 7, Panel B models the determinants

of the likelihood that the chairman of a state-owned member firm is promoted (columns 1-3) or

demoted (columns 4-6). The specifications mirror those shown for the group-chairman models in

Panel A, except that all variables are constructed at the member-firm (rather than group) level.

     The results show that chairmen of larger member firms are significantly more likely to be

promoted and less likely to be demoted, while the likelihood of a promotion decreases with age.

These results mirror those for group chairmen in Panel A. Proximity to group HQ significantly

improves a chairman’s chances of gaining a promotion. The effect is economically large: a one-

standard-deviation reduction in distance in column 1 is associated with a 44.6% increase in the

likelihood of promotion (p=0.011). Improving profitability or productivity has no effect on a

member-firm chairman’s chance of promotion or risk of demotion, though reductions in

profitability increase the risk of demotion (p=0.024 in column 6).

     Holding these factors constant, we find that capital transfers among member firms affect a

member-firm chairman’s career prospects asymmetrically: serving as a source of capital to sister

firms with worse investment opportunities than his own firm’s increases his chance of promotion

(p=0.045 in column 2) without affecting his risk of demotion (p=0.885 in column 5). 30 This            31F




finding is consistent with SOE chairmen being rewarded, by their superiors, with promotions for

ceding capital to less deserving sister firms.


30
  Following the sorting approach used in Table 4, the relevant variable, residual capital allocation, is the deviation
of a member firm’s actual net capital allocation from the allocation predicted had state groups allocated capital in
the same way as private groups. Thus, the negative coefficient in column 2 implies that being allocated less capital
(or transferring more capital) than is warranted by the firm’s Q improves the chairman’s chance of promotion.

                                                                                                                    24
4.3 Discussion

    We interpret these results as follows. Both on paper and in practice, the CCP incentivizes

group chairmen to pursue a mixture of commercial and socio-political objectives, with the latter

perhaps best characterized, for our purposes, as the avoidance of mass layoffs. Our finding that

member-firm managers are rewarded for allowing capital to be transferred to sister firms with

worse prospects, even though doing so harms the outside shareholders to whom they owe a

fiduciary duty, suggests that group chairmen view internal capital transfers as a tool to help

achieve the CCP’s objective and thereby advance their careers. What to a neoclassical economist

appears as “misallocation” could, in that sense, be efficient given the CCP’s objective. A testable

implication of this view is that capital allocations should favor certain types of firms – say, loss-

making ones or those employing a large workforce. We next test whether this is the case.

4.4 What SOEs are Favored in Capital Allocation Decisions?

    To see whether capital allocations favor SOEs that could pose a risk to socio-political

stability, we first allow the Q sensitivity of internal capital allocations to vary with profitability.

The results, shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 8, reveal a significantly more negative Q

sensitivity among loss-making member firms than among profitable ones. In other words, state

groups appear to “prop up” loss-making units that have poor prospects. One reason for doing so
                                                                            32F




may be to avoid job losses. When we allow the Q sensitivity to vary with a unit’s total factor

productivity, we find a large negative Q sensitivity of –0.694 among member firms with below-

average TFP (p=0.011, column 3) and a near-zero and statistically insignificant Q sensitivity of –

0.023 among member firms with above-average TFP (p=0.883, column 4). To the extent that low

productivity reflects overstaffing, these findings are consistent with a desire to avoid layoffs by

propping up units with poor prospects.

    To investigate this possibility further, we examine how internal capital allocations vary with

employment considerations. We first investigate the effect of local employment conditions. The

                                                                                                      25
results, shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 9, suggest that the local labor market plays a role in

capital allocation decisions. Groups headquartered in provinces whose unemployment rate

exceeds the national average are more prone to channeling internal capital from high-Q to low-Q

member firms than are groups headquartered in provinces with low unemployment. The

difference in Q sensitivities is not only statistically significant, with a p-value of 0.0008, but also

economically large: –2.94 (p<0.001) vs. –0.21 (p=0.035). 31           3F




     Next, we allow the Q sensitivity to vary with the number of young men entering the local

labor market. Under the “youth bulge” hypothesis, political scientists view large numbers of

unemployed young men as a potential source of social unrest (Goldstone 1991). To capture this,

we exploit the fact that Article 56 of China’s Military Service Law requires SOEs (and local

governments) to “give preference to” discharged conscripts who hail from rural areas and to

“place” those from cities or towns.32 The number of discharged conscripts entitled to a placement

per province and year is published in the Civil Affairs Statistics Yearbook (中国民政统计年鉴).

     Columns 3 and 4 of Table 9 show that the negative Q sensitivity is both economically and

statistically stronger among SOEs located in provinces that experience unusually large inflows of

young men into the local labor market (specifically, where the number of servicemen to be

placed exceeds the three-year moving average). Moreover, for SOEs in provinces with normal

inflows, the Q sensitivity, while still negative, is economically small and statistically zero.

     Our final proxy for employment considerations is the size of a firm’s workforce. The model

shown in columns 5 and 6 classifies a member firm as large if it employs more than 10,000

workers and as small otherwise. We find strong evidence that the Q sensitivity is significantly

more negative when the member firm has a large workforce. To illustrate, for every unit by


31
   The average (median) state business group operates in two (one) provinces. Results are little changed if we split
the sample according to whether a business group operates “predominantly” in high-unemployment provinces.
32
   Since the end of our sample period, SOEs have been ordered to reserve 5% of their vacancies for discharged
soldiers. See “China Orders SOEs to Hire Former Soldiers”, Financial Times, Dec. 29, 2015.

                                                                                                                   26
which its Q falls short of the group average, a firm with more than 10,000 workers receives an

additional 2.78% of assets in transfers from other group members (p<0.001); for a firm with

fewer workers, the effect is a much smaller (though still significant) 0.21% of assets (p=0.027).

These Q sensitivities are highly significantly different from each other (p<0.001).33

       Unlike state groups, private groups have no reason to pursue socio-political objectives. This

key difference allows us to use private groups as a placebo in a falsification test. Table IA.3 in

the Internet Appendix shows that the Q sensitivity of private groups – always positive – does not

vary with local employment conditions or the size of a member firm’s workforce.

5. Party Objectives, Managerial Incentives, And Interest Alignment

       The results reported in Section 4.4 are consistent with the interpretation that internal capital

allocation decisions at state groups are influenced by socio-political objectives – such as the

desire to prop up unproductive firms with large workforces but poor prospects, especially when

local unemployment rates are high and many young men enter the local labor market. These

patterns suggest that state groups allocate capital in ways the CCP appears to care about. We

next consider whether this occurs because group chairmen respond to their explicit career

incentives. Finding that it does, we end by asking whether the interests of the CCP (acting as the

principal) and of the group chairmen (the CCP’s agents) are aligned.

5.1 Do Promotion Incentives Affect Capital Allocations?

       To tie the observed capital allocation patterns directly to state group chairmen’s career

incentives, we first exploit the fact that the career incentives lose their bite when the group

chairman is older than 60: as we saw in Table 7, Panel A, the chances of a promotion then are

essentially nil, owing to mandatory retirement at 65 and fixed five-year terms for high-level

political offices. If it is their career incentives that induce group chairmen to allocate capital in a

way that ignores investment opportunities and harms minority shareholders, we therefore expect

33
     As Table IA.3 in the Internet Appendix shows, the difference becomes even larger for higher cutoffs.

                                                                                                            27
a greater degree of such “misallocation” before they turn 61 than after.

    Table 10 provides strong support for this prediction. Columns 1 and 2 estimate separate

allocation models for state groups whose chairmen are older or younger than 60, respectively.

This reveals a small positive Q sensitivity for groups headed by an old chairman – the first and

only time across all our models that state groups do not exhibit a negative Q sensitivity. For

groups headed by a young chairman, in contrast, the Q sensitivity is large and negative, at –0.423

(p=0.01). In other words, the tendency to reallocate internal capital from high-Q to low-Q

member firms is only observed among state groups whose chairmen are young enough to be

eligible for promotion to higher political office. This pattern suggests that the CCP’s promotion

incentives play a role in explaining internal capital allocations at Chinese state groups. 34               37F




    Further evidence along these lines comes from the evaluation cycle. As mentioned earlier,

the practice at state groups is for the CCP to evaluate the group chairman’s performance every

three years. This could induce horizon effects, such that internal capital is more severely

“misallocated” closer to the exogenous end of the cycle. Columns 3 and 4 test for such patterns,

focusing on “young” chairmen (the only ones with an incentive to impress party officials). While

we see a negative Q sensitivity both in the early part of the cycle and in the evaluation year, the

(absolute) magnitude of the effect is much larger (–0.922 vs. –0.295) in the evaluation year, and

the difference is marginally significant (p=0.099).

    In addition to their triennial managerial reviews, state group chairmen are also evaluated in

their capacity as political cadres. This political review typically takes place every five years in

connection with the CCP’s quinquennial party congress and could lead to similar horizon



34
   A potential caveat is that the identification strategy here is cross-sectional, so the pattern could be due to omitted
variables (say, “old” chairmen manage groups that, for whatever reason, optimally have a near-zero Q sensitivity).
To remove omitted variables, we would ideally estimate the effect within-chairman but our research design already
includes two sets of fixed effects and cannot accommodate a third. If we replace one or the other of our baseline
fixed effects with a set of person fixed effects, we find the results in Table 10 to be robust: as a group chairman
reaches age 61, his group’s negative Q sensitivity drops by around 75% and ceases to be statistically significant.

                                                                                                                       28
effects. 35 Columns 5 and 6 show that the tendency to allocate more internal capital to lower-Q
           38F




group members is concentrated in the two years leading up to the party congress; in the three

years after, the Q sensitivity remains negative but it is significantly smaller than before (–0.130

vs. –0.533) and not in fact significantly different from zero (p=0.192).

       These horizon effects further support our conclusion that the CCP’s promotion incentives

play a role in explaining how capital is allocated at state business groups in China.

5.2 Are Interests Aligned?

       Taken together, our evidence suggests that Chinese state groups allocate internal capital not

solely with a view to maximizing firm value, as private groups do, but with the aim of furthering

socio-political objectives such as avoiding layoffs. This approach to capital allocation appears to

reflect the preferences of the Chinese Communist Party, which provides policy-driven career

incentives to which state group chairmen appear responsive, at least until they are too old to

benefit from them. Capital allocations at state groups thus do not appear efficient in the

neoclassical sense of maximizing profits or group value. We end by considering whether they are

likely to be optimal in the sense of maximizing the CCP’s objective function.

       The principal-agent relationship between the CCP and state group chairmen could result in

allocation decisions that are privately optimal for the agent but do not maximize the principal’s

objective. Given their relatively short-term career horizons, group chairmen may allocate capital

in a way that is excessively focused on the short-term at the expense of long-term benefits to the

economy (and the CCP). For example, preserving jobs today may involve diverting capital from

investments that could have led to larger job creation (or larger job preservation) in the medium

term – by which time the group chairman, having impressed his triennial evaluation committee,

has been promoted to a higher position in the state apparatus. (See Stein (1988) for a signal-

jamming model in which managers rationally maximize their utility by acting myopically.)

35
     Piotroski, Wong, and Zhang (2015) find that Chinese SOEs suppress negative news ahead of the party congress.

                                                                                                                29
     Whether interests are aligned or diverge is clearly a tougher question to answer than

establishing that state-group capital allocations are inefficient in the neoclassical sense. For a

start, we cannot hope to observe what the dynamics of job creation and job preservation would

have been under alternative capital allocations, as we do not observe these counterfactuals.

Instead, we offer indirect evidence. If state group chairmen “game” the promotion system by

making allocation choices that are privately optimal but that run counter to the long-term

interests of the CCP, we expect group chairmen to moderate their self-serving behavior after an

increase in the risk of detection (or equivalently, in the intensity of monitoring).

     The final two columns of Table 10 provide indirect evidence of such gaming behavior

distorting capital allocation decisions. As an exogenous shock to the intensity with which SOE

managers believe they are monitored, we use corruption crackdowns targeting officials in the

group’s province. We do not include corruption probes of the SOE managers themselves, since

such probes could mechanically affect behavior at the SOEs concerned. Instead, we focus on

crackdowns targeting high government officials. We conjecture that corruption crackdowns of

this kind raise the risk to an SOE manager of being punished for self-serving behavior, both

because Beijing is paying particularly close attention to the goings-on in the manager’s province

and because investigations of government officials often ensnare the officials’ associates and

protégés outside government, including those running SOEs. As a result, SOE managers may

choose to be on their best behavior, reining in practices designed to help their careers at the

expense of the party.

     There were 92 cases of province-level crackdowns on high government officials over our

sample period. 36 Our identifying assumption is that these 92 purges form a staggered set of
                39F




exogenous shocks to the risk of being held accountable for self-serving behavior among the


36
  The data come from Tu (2011), who tracks corruption crackdowns over the period 2002-2011, supplemented with
information from a Wikipedia entry dedicated to tracking corruption cases in China (http://tinyurl.com/kv2tjq7).

                                                                                                             30
group chairmen whose groups are headquartered in the province targeted in the crackdown.

Column 7 of Table 10 shows that the Q sensitivity at state groups becomes significantly less

negative following a purge: in the years before a crackdown, it measures –0.516 (p=0.01); in the

years after, it measures a much smaller –0.147 (= –0.516+0.369; p=0.02). While still negative

(and thus far from perfect in a neoclassical sense), this is a remarkable improvement.

   Given that the purges are staggered across time and provinces, it is hard to see what other

reason than avoiding to be seen to act selfishly might induce group chairmen to moderate the

negative Q sensitivity. Nonetheless, to rule out that the crackdowns coincide in time and space

with some other reason why the Q sensitivity should improve, we use private groups as a

placebo. The intuition for this placebo test is that there is no reason to expect a crackdown on

political officeholders to have any effect on the way private groups allocate capital internally.

The estimates shown in column 8 of Table 10 confirm this prediction.

   While conclusive empirical proof is necessarily elusive, a reasonable interpretation of the

results in Table 10 is that the interests of the CCP and the group chairmen to whom the party

delegates capital allocation decisions are not necessarily aligned.

6. Conclusions

   We study the efficiency of internal capital markets at state-controlled and privately owned

business groups in China. Using highly granular data on within-group capital transfers, we

document stark differences. Private business groups allocate relatively more internal capital from

units with relatively worse investment opportunities to units with relatively better investment

opportunities. This is consistent with private business groups allocating capital efficiently, i.e., in

a way that increases overall group value. State groups do the opposite: on average, they

reallocate capital from firms with the best prospects to the firms with the worst prospects.

External monitoring by outside investors help discipline state groups’ tendency to allocate

internal capital inefficiently. Minority shareholders in SOEs that transfer capital to sister firms

                                                                                                      31
despite having better investment opportunities themselves earn negative risk-adjusted returns and

so appear to suffer economic harm.

    Our results suggest that state capitalism does a poor job of allocating capital efficiently, at

least in the context of China’s state business groups. This no doubt reflects the fact that the

principal (i.e., the Chinese Communist Party) does not desire its agents to maximize profits or

shareholder value above all else. As we document, its agents – the group chairmen – are instead

given incentives to pursue potentially conflicting goals, including raising productivity and

pursuing social objectives such as the preservation of jobs.

    Empirically, we find that a state group’s chairman is substantially more likely to be promoted

to higher political office if he avoids layoffs at group firms. Consistent with career concerns

affecting decision-making, we show that capital allocations are used to prop up large and

struggling employers in areas of high unemployment and when the local labor market faces an

unusually large inflow of young men. While perhaps desirable in the short-run, propping up

struggling group members in this way is unlikely to further the state’s interest in the long-run: all

else equal, a given amount of capital will likely create more jobs if allocated to a high-Q firm

than if allocated to a low-Q firm. Favoring low-Q firms with generous internal capital allocations

may thus avoid job losses in the short-run, but it is likely to do so at the expense of job creation

at high-Q firms. In our view, this approach is unlikely to maximize the overall number of jobs.

    Finally, we show that state groups allocate capital inefficiently only if the group chairman

has a realistic chance of being promoted and if the cost of self-interested behavior is not too high.

These findings suggest a possible misalignment between the state’s interests and the actions of

its agents.




                                                                                                      32
References

Aharoni, Y., 1986, The Evolution and Management of State Owned Enterprises, Cambridge,
   MA: Ballinger.
Ahn, S., D.J. Denis, and D.K. Denis, 2006, Leverage and investment in diversified firms,
   Journal of Financial Economics 79, 317–337.
Allen, F., J. Qian, and M.J. Qian, 2005, Law, finance, and economic growth in China, Journal of
   Financial Economics 77, 57–116.
Almeida, H., B. Kim, and C.S. Kim, 2014, Internal capital markets in business groups: Evidence
   from the Asian financial crisis, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Almeida, H., S. Park, M. Subrahmanyam, and D. Wolfenzon, 2011, The structure and formation
   of business groups: Evidence from Korean chaebols, Journal of Financial Economics 99,
   447–475.
Almeida, H., and D. Wolfenzon, 2006, A theory of pyramidal ownership and family business
   groups, Journal of Finance 61, 2637–2680.
Bae, G., Y. Cheon, and J.K. Kang, 2008, Intra-group propping: Evidence from the stock-price
   effects of earnings announcements by Korean business group, Review of Financial Studies
   21, 2015–2060.
Bae, K.H., J.K. Kang, and J.M. Kim, 2002, Tunneling or value added? Evidence from mergers
   by Korean business groups, Journal of Finance 57, 2695–2740.
Baek, J.S., J.K. Kang, and I. Lee, 2006, Business groups and tunneling: Evidence from private
   securities offerings by Korean Chaebols, Journal of Finance 61, 2415–2449.
Bai, C., Q. Liu, J. Lu, F.M. Song, and J. Zhang, 2004, Corporate governance and market
   valuation in China, Journal of Comparative Economics 32, 599–616.
Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan, 2003, Pyramids, Journal of the European Economic
   Association 1, 478–483.
Bertrand, M., P. Mehta, and S. Mullainathan, 2002, Ferreting out tunneling: An application to
   Indian business groups, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 121–48.
Billett, M.T., and D.C. Mauer, 2003, Cross-subsidies, external financing constraints, and the
    contribution of the internal capital market to firm value, Review of Financial Studies 16,
    1167–1201.
Cao, J., X. Pan, and G. Tian, 2011, Disproportional ownership structure and pay-performance
   relationship: Evidence from China’s listed firms, Journal of Corporate Finance 17, 541–554.
Carhart, M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57–82.
Cestone, G., C. Fumagalli, F. Kramarz, and G. Pica, 2015, Insurance within groups: The role of
   internal labor markets, Unpublished working paper, City University London.
Chen, S.M., Z. Sun, S. Tang, and D.H. Wu, 2011, Government intervention and investment
   efficiency: Evidence from China, Journal of Corporate Finance 17, 259–271.



                                                                                                 33
Claessens, S., S. Djankov, J. Fan, and L.H.P. Lang, 2002, Disentangling the incentive and
   entrenchment effects of large shareholdings, Journal of Finance 57, 2741–2771.
Deng, Y., R. Morck, J. Wu, and B. Yeung, 2015, China’s pseudo-monetary policy, Review of
   Finance 19, 55–93.
Du, F., G. Tang, and S.M. Young, 2012, Influence activities and favoritism in subjective
   performance evaluation: Evidence from Chinese state owned enterprises, Accounting Review
   87, 1555–1588.
Fama, E.F., 1998, Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance, Journal of
   Financial Economics 49, 283–306.
Fama, E.F., and K. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns of stocks and bonds,
   Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fan, J.P.H., T.J. Wong, and T.Y. Zhang, 2013, Institutions and organizational structure: The case
   of state-owned corporate pyramids, Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 29, 1217–
   1252.
Geis, J.P., and B. Holt, 2009, Harmonious society: Rise of the new China, Strategic Studies
   Quarterly 3, 75–94.
Gertner, R., A.E. Powers, and D. Scharfstein, 2002, Learning about internal capital markets from
   corporate spin-offs, Journal of Finance 57, 2479–2506.
Goldstone, J.A., 1991, Revolution and Rebellion in the Early Modern World, Berkeley, CA:
   University of California Press.
Gopalan, R., V. Nanda, and A. Seru, 2007, Affiliated firms and financial support: Evidence from
   Indian business groups, Journal of Financial Economics 86, 759–795.
Gul, F.A., J. Kim, and A.A. Qiu, 2010, Ownership concentration, foreign shareholding, audit
   quality, and stock price synchronicity: Evidence from China, Journal of Financial
   Economics 95, 425–442.
Gupta, N., 2005, Partial privatization and firm performance, Journal of Finance 60, 987–1015.
Hsieh, C.T., and Z. Song, 2015, Grasp the large, let go of the small: The transformation of the
   state sector in China, NBER Working Paper no. 21006.
Jian, M., and T.J. Wong, 2010, Propping through related-party transactions, Review of
    Accounting Studies 15, 70–105.
Jiang, G.H., C.M.C. Lee, and H. Yue, 2010, Tunneling through inter-corporate loans: The China
    experience, Journal of Financial Economics 98, 1–20.
Khanna, N., and S. Tice, 2001, The bright side of internal capital markets, Journal of Finance
   56, 1489–1528.
Khanna, T., and K. Palepu, 2000, Is group affiliation profitable in emerging markets? An
   analysis of diversified Indian business groups, Journal of Finance 55, 867–891.
Kornai, J., E. Maskin, and G. Roland, 2003, Understanding the soft budget constraint, Journal of
   Economic Literature 41, 1095–1136.



                                                                                                  34
La Porta, R., and F. Lopez-de-Silanes, 1999, The benefits of privatization: Evidence from
   Mexico, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1193–1242.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world,
   Journal of Finance 54, 471–517.
Lamont, O., 1997, Cash flow and investment: Evidence from internal capital markets, Journal of
   Finance 52, 83–109.
Li, D., 1998, Changing incentives of the Chinese bureaucracy, American Economic Review 88,
    393–397.
Li, H., and L. Zhou, 2005, Political turnover and economic performance: The incentive role of
    personnel control in China, Journal of Public Economics 89, 1743–1762.
Li, X., X.W. Liu, and Y. Wang, 2014, A model of China’s state capitalism, Unpublished
    Working Paper, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Li, Z.Q., Z. Sun, and Z.W. Wang, 2004, Tunneling and ownership arrangements: Evidence from
    the fund appropriation by the controlling shareholder in Chinese listed companies (in
    Chinese), Accounting Studies 12, 3–13.
Lin, C., Y. Ma, P. Malatesta, and Y. Xuan, 2011, Ownership structure and the cost of corporate
   borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics 100, 1–23.
Megginson, W.L., and J.M. Netter, 2001, From state to market: A survey of empirical studies on
  privatization, Journal of Economic Literature 39, 321–389.
Motta, A., 2003, Managerial incentives and internal capital markets, Journal of Finance 58,
  1193–1220.
Musacchio, A., and S.G. Lazzarini, 2012, Leviathan in business: Varieties of state capitalism and
  their implications for economic performance, Unpublished working paper, Harvard Business
  School.
Olley, G.S., and A. Pakes, 1996, The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications
   equipment industry, Econometrica 64, 1263–1297.
Ozbas, O., and D. Scharfstein, 2010, Evidence on the dark side of internal capital markets,
   Review of Financial Studies 23, 581–99.
Peyer, U.C., and A. Shivdasani, 2001, Leverage and internal capital markets: Evidence from
   leveraged recapitalizations, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 477–515.
Piotroski, J.D., T.J. Wong, and T.Y. Zhang, 2015, Political incentives to suppress negative
    information: Evidence from Chinese listed firms, Journal of Accounting Research,
    forthcoming.
Rajan, R., H. Servaes, and L. Zingales, 2000, The cost of diversity: The diversification discount
   and inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 35–80.
Scharfstein, D., 1998, The dark side of internal capital markets II: Evidence from diversified
   conglomerates, NBER Working Paper no. 6352.
Scharfstein, D., and J.C. Stein, 2000, The dark side of internal capital markets: Divisional rent-
   seeking and inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 2537–2564.

                                                                                                 35
Shin, H.H., and Y.S. Park, 1999, Financing constraints and internal capital markets: Evidence
   from Korean chaebols, Journal of Corporate Finance 5, 169–191.
Shin, H.H., and R.M. Stulz, 1998, Are internal capital markets efficient?, Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 113, 531–552.
Shleifer, A., 1998, State versus private ownership, Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, 133–
   150.
Shleifer, A., and R.W. Vishny, 1998, The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and Their
   Cures, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Stein, J.C., 1988, Takeover threats and managerial myopia, Journal of Political Economy 96, 61–
    80.
Stein, J.C., 1997, Internal capital markets and the competition for corporate resources, Journal of
    Finance 52, 111–134.
Stein, J.C., 2003, Agency, information and corporate investment, in: George Constantinides,
    Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Amsterdam:
    Elsevier Science.
Sun, Q., and W.H.S. Tong, 2003, China share issue privatization: The extent of its success,
   Journal of Financial Economics 70, 183–222.
Toninelli, P.A., 2000, The rise and fall of public enterprise: The framework, in: P.A. Toninelli
   (ed.), The Rise and Fall of Public Enterprise in the Western World, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Tu, Q., 2011, An empirical study of corruption cases on China’s provincial level officials:
    Evidence from 72 corruption convictions since the 16th Party Congress (in Chinese),
    Contemporary China Politics Studies, 222–246.
Wei, Z., F. Xie, and S. Zhang, 2005, Ownership structure and firm value in China’s privatized
  firms: 1991-2001, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40, 87–108.
Xuan, Y., 2009, Empire-building or bridge-building? Evidence from new CEOs’ internal capital
   allocation decisions, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4919–4948.




                                                                                                  36
Appendix A. Variable Definitions.

Summary statistics and capital allocation models

State groups are identified as follows. Since 2004, the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) requires
listed companies to disclose their ultimate controlling shareholder in Item 25 of their annual reports. We obtain these
disclosures from the China Listed Firm Shareholder Research Database of CSMAR. Variable S0701b_en lists the
ultimate controlling shareholder’s name, while variable S0702b decodes the ultimate controlling shareholder’s status.
If the ultimate controlling shareholder is a state-related entity, the status code begins with 11 or 21, otherwise with
12 or 30. In a few instances where S0702b contains missing values, we obtain ownership data from Peking
University’s China Center for Economic Research.

Net capital allocation follows Li, Sun, and Wang (2004) and is defined as [(accounts payable + notes payable +
advances from other group members + other accounts payable) – (accounts receivable + notes receivable +
advances to other group members + other accounts receivable)]/lagged total assets, with each variable in the
numerator reflecting transfers among group members only (i.e., not including transactions with external entities,
such as customers or suppliers). This variable is positive for a firm receiving capital transfers from other group
members and negative for a firm transferring capital to other group members. Our baseline measure includes related-
party transactions between the following group members: the group parent, a subsidiary of the listed firm, a sister
company (i.e., another enterprise controlled by the same parent), any firm that exercises joint control over a member
firm, and any firm that can exercise significant influence over the member firm. Collectively, these account for
65.9% of all related-party transactions (by value) over our sample period; most internal transfers involve the parent
(23.4%) or a sister company (29.7%). Alternative measures that also include related-party transactions involving
joint ventures with the listed company and associates of the listed company are explored in the Internet Appendix.
The data come from the CSMAR database.

“Orec” is Jiang, Lee, and Yue’s (2010) “other receivables” measure. It is defined as (other accounts payable – other
accounts receivable)/lagged total assets, with each variable in the numerator reflecting transactions among group
members only. This variable is positive for a firm receiving capital transfers from other group members and negative
for a firm transferring capital to other group members. Our baseline measure includes the following group members:
the group parent, any of the parent’s subsidiaries, other enterprises controlled by the same parent, any firm that
exercises joint control over a member firm, and any firm that can exercise significant influence over the member
firm. The data come from the CSMAR database.

Related lending follows Jian and Wong (2010) and is defined as [(funds payable + notes payable + advance
receipts + payable debts + other accounts payable) – (funds receivable + notes receivable + accounts prepaid +
receivable investment + other accounts receivable)]/lagged total assets, with each variable in the numerator
reflecting transactions among group members only. This variable is positive for a firm receiving capital transfers
from other group members and negative for a firm transferring capital to other group members. Our baseline
measure includes the following group members: the group parent, any of the parent’s subsidiaries, other enterprises
controlled by the same parent, any firm that exercises joint control over a member firm, and any firm that can
exercise significant influence over the member firm. The data come from the CSMAR database.

Equity issues / lagged assets is the total amount a firm raises on the stock market via seasoned equity issues or
rights offers, scaled by beginning-of-year total assets. The data come from the CSMAR database.

Bond issues / lagged assets is the total amount a firm raises via bond issues (variable c330) according to the firm’s
cash flow statement, scaled by beginning-of-year total assets. The data come from the CSMAR database.

Net external funding / lagged assets is the aggregate amount a firm raises from external sources, net of debt
repayments, according to the firm’s cash flow statement, scaled by beginning-of-year total assets. Specifically, it
equals the subtotal of cash inflow from financing activities less the subtotal of cash outflow from financing activities,
net of financing activities involving other group members. The data come from the CSMAR database.

Total assets is the book value of the firm’s assets in RMB million, using data from the CSMAR database.


                                                                                                                      37
Size is log total assets, using data from the CSMAR database.

Sales is the firm’s total sales in RMB million, using data from the CSMAR database. Sales growth is the year-on-
year change in sales.

Employees is defined as the total number of employees who are on the firm’s regular payroll. The data come from
the CSMAR database. Employment growth is the year-on-year change in employment.

Tobin’s Q is CSMAR’s variable number T61601. It equals the sum of the firm’s market value of equity plus the
book value of its debt divided by the firm’s total assets, all evaluated in December. Before China’s 2005 reform,
SOEs had a split-share structure consisting of tradable and non-tradable shares. Chen et al. (2011) show that non-
tradable shares were priced close to book value in over-the-counter trading. Accordingly, we follow Chen et al. and
compute a firm’s market value of equity as the end-of-year share price times the number of tradable shares plus the
net asset value of non-tradable shares, with the latter term dropping out as a firm implements the 2005 reform.

Return on assets (ROA) is measured as the ratio of net income to total assets, using data from the CSMAR database.

Total factor productivity (TFP) is measured using Olley and Pakes’ (1996) semi-parametric approach. This assumes
that at the beginning of every year, firms choose investment and variable input factors which together with the
firm’s current capital stock determine the firm’s capital stock next year. We use log sales to measure output, log
investment to proxy for unobserved productivity, and log employees, log inventories, and the log net value of fixed
assets to capture the firm’s other factor inputs. We include two state variables (firm age and log equity), an indicator
variable set equal to one if a firm is delisted, and a set of industry-year fixed effects.

Firm has ‘ST’ status is an indicator set equal to one if the firm is in ‘special treatment’ (ST), a label China’s stock
exchanges assign to firms at risk of delisting. The data come from the WIND database.

Leverage is defined as the sum of the firm’s long-term debt and debt in current liabilities divided by total assets. The
data come from the CSMAR database.

Collateral is defined as net property, plant, and equipment plus inventories scaled by total assets, using data from
the CSMAR database.

Voting rights refers to the ultimate parent’s control rights over the listed subsidiary, determined as the parent’s
ownership stake at the weakest link of the pyramidal chain. This follows La Porta et al. (1999) and Claessens et al.
(2002). For example, suppose that firm A owns fraction b of firm B’s stock, which in turn owns fraction c of firm C.
Then firm A’s control rights in firm C is the weakest link in the pyramidal chain, i.e., min(b, c). Where multiple
parallel chains exist, we take the sum of the ultimate parent’s control rights across these chains. The data come from
the CSMAR database.

Cash flow rights refers to the ultimate parent’s cash flow rights in a listed firm. Following La Porta et al. (1999) and
Claessens et al. (2002), this is calculated by multiplying the ownership percentage of each link of the pyramidal
chain. For example, suppose that firm A owns fraction b of firm B’s stock, which in turn owns fraction c of firm C.
Firm A’s cash flow rights in firm C then is (b × c). Where multiple parallel chains exist, we take the sum of the
ultimate parent’s cash flow rights across these chains. The data come from the CSMAR database.

Cash flow wedge is defined as the difference between the ultimate parent’s voting rights and cash flow rights.

Institutional ownership is defined as the fraction of the firm’s ownership that is held by institutional investors. The
data come from the CSMAR database.

CEO owns stock is an indicator set equal to one if the CEO owns shares in the firm, and zero otherwise. The data
come from the CCER database.




                                                                                                                       38
Abnormal portfolio returns (Table 5)

Market risk premium equals the value-weighted average return of all China-listed A shares minus the risk-free rate
of return. Share price data come from CSMAR. The risk-free rate of return is measured using the three-month
interbank repo rate, obtained from Bloomberg.

SMB and HML are the returns on the small-minus-large and the high-minus-low portfolio, respectively. Their
construction follows Fama and French (1993). Specifically, at the end of each June, we construct six portfolios as
the intersection of two portfolios sorted on size (using the market value of equity, ME) and three portfolios sorted on
the ratio of book equity to market equity (BE/ME). The size breakpoint for year t is the median market value of
equity across all Chinese stocks at the end of June of year t. BE/ME for June of year t is book equity per share
divided by ME per share as of December of t-1. The BE/ME breakpoints are the 30th and 70th percentiles. For each
of the six portfolios, we compute the monthly value-weighted average return with dividends reinvested. SMB then
equals the difference between the equal weighted average return on the three small portfolios (the small value, small
neutral, and small growth portfolios) and the equal weighted average return on the three big portfolios (the big
value, big neutral, and big growth portfolios). HML equals the difference between the equal weighted average return
on the two value portfolios (the small value and large value portfolios) and the equal weighted average return on the
two growth portfolios (the small growth and big growth portfolios). Share price data, ME, and BE come from
CSMAR.

MOM is constructed following the methodology described on Kenneth French’s website. Each month, we construct
six portfolios as the intersection of two portfolios sorted on size (using the market value of equity, ME) and three
portfolios sorted on prior return over months -12 to -2. The size breakpoint is the median market value of equity
across all Chinese stocks. The prior-return breakpoints are the 30th and 70th percentiles. For each of the six
portfolios, we compute the monthly value-weighted average return with dividends reinvested. MOM equals the
difference between the equal weighted average return on the two winner portfolios (the small winner and large
winner portfolios) and the equal weighted average return on the two loser portfolios (the small loser and big loser
portfolios). Share price data and ME come from CSMAR.


Promotion and demotion models at the group level (Table 7, Panel A)

Promotion is an indicator set equal to one if in year t+1, the chairman of a state business group is promoted to a
political office with a higher administrative ranking than his chairman position, and zero otherwise.

Demotion is an indicator set equal to one if in year t+1, the chairman of a state business group is demoted to a
political office with a lower administrative ranking than his chairman position, and zero otherwise.

Log distance to SASAC is the natural logarithm of one plus the geodesic distance (in miles) between group
headquarters and either Beijing (for centrally controlled state business groups) or the provincial capital (for locally
controlled state business groups).

Mass layoff is an indicator set equal to one if one or more of the listed subsidiaries of a state business group laid off
10% or more of its workforce in year t, and zero otherwise.

Large scale hiring is an indicator set equal to one if one or more of the listed subsidiaries of a state business group
increased its workforce by at least 10% in year t, and zero otherwise.

TFP improvement is an indicator set equal to one if one or more of the listed subsidiaries of a state business group
improved total factor productivity by at least 10% in year t, and zero otherwise.

TFP impairment is an indicator set equal to one if one or more of the listed subsidiaries of a state business group
suffered a fall in total factor productivity of at least 10% in year t, and zero otherwise.

ROA improvement is an indicator set equal to one if one or more of the listed subsidiaries of a state business group
increased its return on assets by at least five percentage points in year t, and zero otherwise.

                                                                                                                       39
ROA impairment is an indicator set equal to one if one or more of the listed subsidiaries of a state business group
suffered a fall in its return on assets of at least five percentage points in year t, and zero otherwise.

Internal capital misallocation is estimated as follows. First, we generate predicted values for how state groups
would have allocated capital had they followed the same rules as those estimated for private groups in column 2 of
Table 2. We then take deviations between actual and predicted net capital allocations for each SOE member firm.
Finally, to arrive at a group-level summary statistic of internal capital misallocation, we take the group-year standard
deviation of the estimated member-firm-level deviations.


Promotion and demotion models at the member-firm level (Table 7, Panel B)

Promotion is an indicator set equal to one if in year t+1, the chairman of a state owned enterprise is promoted within
the state sector, either to a political office with a higher administrative ranking than his chairman position or to a
higher-ranked position at a state owned enterprise, and zero otherwise.

Demotion is an indicator set equal to one if in year t+1, the chairman of a state business group is demoted within the
state sector, either to a political office with a lower administrative ranking than his chairman position or to a lower-
ranked position at a state owned enterprise, and zero otherwise.

Log distance to group HQ is the natural logarithm of one plus the geodesic distance (in miles) between the member
firm’s headquarters and group headquarters.

Mass layoff is an indicator set equal to one if the SOE cut its workforce by at least 10% in year t, and zero
otherwise.

Large scale hiring is an indicator set equal to one if the SOE increased its workforce by at least 10% in year t, and
zero otherwise.

TFP improvement is an indicator set equal to one if the SOE improved its total factor productivity by at least 10%
in year t, and zero otherwise.

TFP impairment is an indicator set equal to one if the SOE suffered a fall in its total factor productivity of at least
10% in year t, and zero otherwise.

ROA improvement is an indicator set equal to one if the SOE increased its return on assets by at least five
percentage points in year t, and zero otherwise.

ROA impairment is an indicator set equal to one if the SOE suffered a fall in its return on assets of at least five
percentage points in year t, and zero otherwise.

Residual capital allocation is estimated as follows. First, we generate predicted values for how state groups would
have allocated capital had they followed the same rules as those estimated for private groups in column 2 of Table 2.
The residual net capital allocation is the deviation between actual and predicted net capital allocations for each SOE
member firm.


Conditioning variables (Tables 5, 8-10)

Diversified is an indicator set equal to one if a member firm is part of a group whose listed members operate in
multiple broadly defined industries. We use the “CSRC Guidelines for the Industry Classification of Listed
Companies” to define industries. Similar to one-digit SIC codes in the U.S., the Guidelines group economic activity
into the following thirteen industries: agriculture, forestry, livestock rearing, and fishing; mining; manufacturing;
electric power, gas, and water; construction; transport and storage; information technology; wholesale and retail
trade; finance and insurance; real estate; social services; communication and cultural industries; and miscellaneous.

                                                                                                                      40
Firms that are not part of a diversified business group are coded as being part of a focused business group.

Loss-making is an indicator set equal to one if a member firm had strictly negative net income in the previous year,
and zero otherwise.

Profitable is an indicator set equal to one if a member firm had positive net income in the previous year, and zero
otherwise.

Below-average TFP is an indicator set equal to one if a member firm’s total factor productivity was at or below the
average in its industry in the previous year, and zero otherwise.

Above-average TFP is an indicator set equal to one if a member firm’s total factor productivity was above the
average in its industry in the previous year, and zero otherwise.

High unemployment is an indicator set equal to one if a group is headquartered in a province whose unemployment
rate in the previous year exceeded the national average, and zero otherwise.

Low unemployment is an indicator set equal to one if a group is headquartered in a province whose unemployment
rate in the previous year is below the national average, and zero otherwise.

Large inflow of young men is an indicator set equal to one if the number of discharged conscripts in a province in a
given year exceeds the three-year moving average in that province, and zero otherwise.

Normal inflow of young men is an indicator set equal to one if the number of discharged conscripts in a province in
a given year does not exceed the three-year moving average in that province, and zero otherwise.

Large (> N employees) is an indicator set equal to one if a member firm employed more than N workers in the
previous year, and zero otherwise.

Small (up to N employees) is an indicator set equal to one if a member firm employed no more than N workers in
the previous year, and zero otherwise.

Old is an indicator set equal to one if the age of the chairman of a state business group is strictly above 60, and zero
otherwise.

Young is an indicator set equal to one if the age of the chairman of a state business group is 60 or below, and zero
otherwise.

Early in evaluation cycle is an indicator set equal to one if the chairman of a state business group is in years 1 or 2
of the three-year job-performance evaluation cycle, and zero otherwise.

Last year before evaluation is an indicator set equal to one if the chairman of a state business group is in year 3 of
the three-year job-performance evaluation cycle, and zero otherwise.

Post party congress is an indicator set equal to one in the first three fiscal years that are reported after the Chinese
Communist Party’s quinquennial congress, and zero otherwise. The congress usually takes place in October, in years
ending in 2 or 7. To illustrate the coding using the October 2007 congress as an example, fiscal years 2007, 2008,
and 2009 are coded as “post party congress” as they are reported in March 2008, March 2009, and March 2010,
respectively.

Run-up to party congress is an indicator set equal to one in the last two fiscal years that are reported before the
Chinese Communist Party’s quinquennial congress, and zero otherwise. The congress usually takes place in October,
in years ending in 2 or 7. To illustrate the coding using the October 2007 congress as an example, fiscal years 2005
and 2006 are coded as occurring in the “run-up to party congress” as they report in March 2006 and March 2007.




                                                                                                                       41
Figure 1. Effect of Mass Layoffs on Career Outcomes.
The figure plots the effect of mass layoffs, for different cut-offs ranging from 1% to 20% of the workforce, on the probability that a group chairman is promoted to
higher office (Fig. 1a) or demoted (Fig 1b) in the following year. The effects of mass layoffs on promotions and demotions are estimated using Cox proportional hazard
models with time-varying covariates using specifications analogous to those shown in columns 1 and 4 of Table 7, Panel A, respectively. (The estimates reported in that
table assume a 10% cut in the workforce.) The figure plots hazard ratios (the bold line) rather than coefficient estimates. A hazard ratio of 1 indicates that mass layoffs
have no effect on career outcomes. Statistical significance is hence computed relative to a hazard ratio of 1 and illustrated in the figure using 90% and 95% confidence
bands (the dashed and dotted lines, respectively). Following convention, confidence intervals around hazard ratios are obtained by exponentiating the confidence
intervals around the corresponding Cox coefficient estimates. This ensures that the confidence band is bounded below by zero, as a hazard ratio cannot be negative. As a
result, confidence bands around hazard ratios need not be symmetric.

 2.5

                                                                                                                                               14



  2                                                                                                                                            12



                                                                                                                                               10

 1.5

                                                                                                                                               8



  1                                                                                                                                            6



                                                                                                                                               4

 0.5

                                                                                                                                               2



  0                                                                                                                                            0
      %

             %

                    %

                           %

                                  %

                                         %

                                                %

                                                       %

                                                              %

                                                                    0%

                                                                           1%

                                                                                  2%

                                                                                         3%

                                                                                                4%

                                                                                                       5%

                                                                                                              6%

                                                                                                                     7%

                                                                                                                            8%

                                                                                                                                   9%

                                                                                                                                          0%




                                                                                                                                                  %

                                                                                                                                                        %

                                                                                                                                                              %

                                                                                                                                                                    %

                                                                                                                                                                          %

                                                                                                                                                                                %

                                                                                                                                                                                      %

                                                                                                                                                                                            %

                                                                                                                                                                                                  %

                                                                                                                                                                                                         0%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0%
   -1

          -2

                 -3

                        -4

                               -5

                                      -6

                                             -7

                                                    -8

                                                           -9




                                                                                                                                                -1

                                                                                                                                                      -2

                                                                                                                                                            -3

                                                                                                                                                                  -4

                                                                                                                                                                        -5

                                                                                                                                                                              -6

                                                                                                                                                                                    -7

                                                                                                                                                                                          -8

                                                                                                                                                                                                -9
                                                                  -1

                                                                         -1

                                                                                -1

                                                                                       -1

                                                                                              -1

                                                                                                     -1

                                                                                                            -1

                                                                                                                   -1

                                                                                                                          -1

                                                                                                                                 -1

                                                                                                                                        -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                    Figure 1a : Promotions                                                                                                                Figure 1b: Demotions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              42
Figure 2. Effect of TFP Improvements on Career Outcomes.
The figure plots the effect of TFP improvements, for different cut-offs ranging from 1% to 20%, on the probability that a group chairman is promoted to higher office
(Fig. 2a) or demoted (Fig 2b) in the following year. The effects of TFP improvements on promotions and demotions are estimated using Cox proportional hazard models
with time-varying covariates using specifications analogous to those shown in columns 1 and 4 of Table 7, Panel A, respectively. (The estimates reported in that table
assume a 10% improvement in TFP.) The figure plots hazard ratios (the bold line) rather than coefficient estimates. A hazard ratio of 1 indicates that TFP improvements
have no effect on career outcomes. Statistical significance is hence computed relative to a hazard ratio of 1 and illustrated in the figure using 90% and 95% confidence
bands (the dashed and dotted lines, respectively). Following convention, confidence intervals around hazard ratios are obtained by exponentiating the confidence
intervals around the corresponding Cox coefficient estimates. This ensures that the confidence band is bounded below by zero, as a hazard ratio cannot be negative. As a
result, confidence bands around hazard ratios need not be symmetric.

 7                                                                                             6



 6
                                                                                               5



 5
                                                                                               4


 4

                                                                                               3

 3


                                                                                               2
 2



                                                                                               1
 1



 0                                                                                             0
     1%   2%   3%   4%   5%   6%   7%    8%   9% 10% 11% 12% 13% 14% 15% 16% 17% 18% 19% 20%       1%   2%   3%   4%   5%   6%   7%   8%   9% 10% 11% 12% 13% 14% 15% 16% 17% 18% 19% 20%


                                        Figure 2a : Promotions                                                                    Figure 2b: Demotions




                                                                                                                                                                                            43
Table 1. Summary Statistics.
The sample comprises 211 state business groups consisting of 660 state owned enterprises (SOEs) that are listed in China and 76 private business groups
consisting of 166 private enterprises, also listed in China. The sample starts in 2004 and ends in 2013. In total, we have 4,120 firm-years for SOEs and 893 firm-
years for private enterprises. The table reports summary statistics at the firm-year level. Each pairwise difference in means or fractions between state and private
enterprises is statistically significant at the 5% level or better, with the exception of the differences in overall net capital allocations, the three external funding
measures, and collateral. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All financial ratios are winsorized 1% in the tails.

                                                               State business groups                                          Private business groups
                                                                                 percentile                                                      percentile
                                              mean or                                                         mean or
                                              fraction     st. dev.       10th        50th         90th       fraction     st. dev.       10th        50th         90th
net capital allocations (in %)                  0.622       7.468      -3.695        0.009       6.104           0.328       6.159      -1.502       0.000       2.424
 net users of internal capital                  3.944       6.915       0.048        1.105      10.694           2.654       5.929       0.009       0.254       9.515
 net sources of internal capital               -3.855       6.871     -11.105       -1.052      -0.037          -2.801       7.169      -5.434      -0.470      -0.006
external fundraising (in %)
 equity issues                                  1.083       4.811        0.000       0.000       0.000           1.192       5.354       0.000       0.000       0.000
 bond issues                                    0.464       2.085        0.000       0.000       0.000           0.603       2.488       0.000       0.000       0.000
 net external funding                           2.026      13.416       -9.005       0.000      16.664           1.433      12.815     -10.005      -0.050      14.931
total assets (RMB million)                     83,718     818,539         735        3,053      23,221         11,425     103,420          546       2,015       9,972
sales (RMB million)                            15,909     104,194         368        2,022      18,008          3,378      11,077          176       1,150       5,976
employees                                       9,883      39,600         475        2,547      14,521          4,423      11,300          214       1,785       9,067
Tobin’s Q                                       1.616       1.665        0.923       1.245       2.560           1.939       2.354       0.942       1.365       3.243
return on assets                                0.029       0.088       -0.012       0.031       0.093           0.040       0.181      -0.007       0.034       0.097
total factor productivity                       2.210       0.662        1.445       2.161       3.030           1.971       0.674       1.273       1.949       2.806
firm has ‘ST’ status?                           0.019                                                            0.024
leverage                                        0.547       0.276        0.252       0.547       0.797           0.519       0.292       0.227       0.505       0.726
collateral                                      0.443       0.188        0.202       0.445       0.690           0.414       0.183       0.184       0.401       0.662
voting rights                                   0.423       0.155       0.212        0.422       0.623           0.323       0.153       0.147       0.290       0.556
cash flow rights                                0.366       0.173       0.149        0.354       0.601           0.200       0.156       0.039       0.168       0.436
cash flow wedge                                 0.057       0.085       0.000        0.000       0.199           0.123       0.090       0.000       0.110       0.241
institutional ownership                         0.093       0.159       0.000        0.031       0.273           0.082       0.128       0.000       0.027       0.250
CEO owns stock?                                 0.222                                                            0.284




                                                                                                                                                                    44
Table 2. Q Sensitivity of Internal and External Capital Allocations.
Columns 1-4 report tests of the sensitivity of internal capital allocations within a business group to investment opportunities as measured by Tobin’s Q. The unit
of observation is a group-member-firm/year. To estimate how a given group allocates its internal capital across its members in a given year, we include group-
year fixed effects. We remove time-varying industry shocks using industry-year fixed effects. Internal capital allocations are measured as defined in Appendix A.
This measure is based on internal capital transfers between and among the parent, any of its subsidiaries (whether listed or unlisted), other enterprises controlled
by the parent, and any firm who exercises significant control over the member firm. For specifications using alternative measures that (i) widen or narrow the set
of entities whose capital transfers are included and that (ii) vary the types of transfers included, see Tables IA.1 and IA.2 in the Internet Appendix. Columns 5-7
report tests of the sensitivity of external capital raises to Tobin’s Q. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications
are estimated using OLS with group-year fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the group level
are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                                                                        Equity        Bond        Net ext.
                                                                       Net capital allocation                           issues        issues      funding
                                                     all groups        private           state business groups                state business groups
                                                         (1)             (2)                (3)          (4)              (5)           (6)         (7)
        Tobin’s Q                                      0.520***         0.498***             -0.228**    -0.320**       0.083         0.002         0.006
                                                       0.189            0.189                 0.102       0.154         0.058         0.030         0.004
          … x SOE                                     -0.784***
                                                       0.215
          … x (=1 if year > 2008)                                                                        0.137
                                                                                                          0.183
        Controls
         ROA                                           0.013            0.055                -0.039      -0.038         0.029**       0.001         0.099
                                                       0.031            0.051                 0.045       0.045         0.012         0.005         0.072
          log total assets                            -0.560***        -0.676                -0.541***   -0.539***     -0.100         0.253***     -0.272
                                                       0.152            0.472                 0.169       0.169         0.099         0.053         0.287
          leverage                                     0.046**          0.058**              0.040*      0.040*         0.006         0.000         0.042**
                                                       0.019            0.025                 0.022       0.022         0.004         0.001         0.017
          collateral                                   0.049***         0.023                0.058***    0.058***       0.005         0.000        -0.002
                                                       0.011            0.027                 0.012       0.009         0.008         0.003         0.023
          voting rights                               -0.002           -0.006                0.003       0.003          0.008        -0.006         0.050**
                                                       0.011            0.025                 0.012       0.010         0.008         0.004         0.024
          cash flow wedge                              0.031            0.015                0.031       0.031         -0.017        -0.010        -0.035
                                                       0.023            0.044                 0.026       0.026         0.016         0.008         0.044
          institutional ownership                     -0.006           -0.007                -0.004      -0.004         0.005         0.002         0.008
                                                       0.012            0.028                 0.013       0.013         0.010         0.003         0.022
          =1 if CEO is shareholder                    -0.259           -0.494                -0.236      -0.238         0.199         0.135         0.282
                                                       0.347            0.873                 0.387       0.387         0.253         0.120         0.773
          =1 if firm has ‘ST’ status                   0.876            2.122                0.567       0.551         -0.510         0.022         0.155
                                                       1.693            3.603                 1.960       1.960         0.372         0.133         2.445
        Diagnostics
        R2                                            49.4%            72.6%                 47.9%       47.9%         40.3%         44.7%         42.2%
        F-test: equal sensitivity to Q?                                           14.59***
        No. of firms                                    807               166                  660         660            660           660           660
        No. of business groups                          287                76                  211         211            211           211           211
        No. of observations                           5,013               893                4,120       4,120          4,120         4,120         4,120
                                                                                                                                                                  45
Table 3. Mitigating and Enabling Factors: Monitoring and Soft Budget Constraints.
The table tests how external monitoring by outside investors and access to a soft budget constraint affect the
tendency of state business groups to allocate internal capital from high-Q to low-Q member firms. To capture the
influence of outside investors, columns 1-2 allow the Q sensitivity of internal capital allocations to depend on
whether the group parent has a large or small equity stake in the member firm (evaluated at the sample median).
Note that this conditioning variable varies within-group. To ensure that we continue to estimate within-group capital
allocations, we keep the group structure in columns 1-2 intact by estimating a fully interacted model allowing each
coefficient to vary with the characteristic in question and including (as in Table 2) group-year fixed effects and
industry-year fixed effects. In other words, columns 1-2 are estimated as a single model. To capture access to a soft
budget constraint, we distinguish between locally and centrally controlled state business groups. The latter (often
called the “national team” or “national champions”) enjoy preferential access to external capital. This conditioning
variable varies across but not within groups, so columns 3 and 4 are estimated as separate models. For variable
definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated using OLS with group-
year fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the
group level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                  Net capital allocation
                                                  below-         above-            locally     centrally
                                                  median         median          controlled   controlled
                                                 cash flow      cash flow         business     business
                                                   rights         rights           groups       groups
                                                     (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)

               Tobin’s Q                          -0.167*           -0.830***     -0.208**         -0.591***
                                                   0.091            0.266         0.105            0.226
               Controls
                ROA                               -0.040            -0.015        0.034            -0.094*
                                                   0.053            0.063         0.058            0.057
                log total assets                  -0.666***         -0.650***     -1.026***        -0.312*
                                                   0.177            0.167         0.310            0.172
                leverage                           0.028            0.066***      0.105***         0.001
                                                   0.025            0.016         0.021            0.019
                collateral                         0.052***         0.065***      0.038*           0.071***
                                                   0.015            0.015         0.020            0.015
                voting rights                      0.027            0.000         0.033*           -0.008
                                                   0.035            0.000         0.020            0.015
                cash flow wedge                    0.059            -0.077        -0.014           0.035
                                                   0.045            0.050         0.048            0.030
                institutional ownership            0.003            0.004         0.031            -0.009
                                                   0.017            0.018         0.022            0.015
                =1 if CEO is shareholder          -0.115            -0.212        -0.466           0.183
                                                   0.524            0.501         0.677            0.486
                =1 if firm has ‘ST’ status         1.725            -0.939        0.962            -0.172
                                                   2.919            2.489         3.599            2.244
               Diagnostics
               R2                                          48.8%                  61.6%            41.0%
               F-test: equal sensitivity to Q?             6.16**                          2.19*
               No. of firms                          451              368           343              325
               No. of business groups                192              177            78              133
               No. of observations                          4,120                 1,936            2,184




                                                                                                                  46
Table 4. Characteristics of Source and Recipient Firms.
The table reports average firm-level characteristics for stock market listed state owned enterprises in our sample
according to whether they are “source” or “recipient” firms in their respective group’s internal capital market. We
sort firms into quintiles based on the difference between their actual net capital allocation in year t and the net
capital allocation they would have received had their group applied the same internal capital allocation policy as the
average private group. (In other words, we use the coefficient estimates from the private-group regression reported
in column 2 of Table 2 to predict net capital allocations for SOEs and then rank SOEs by the difference between
actual and predicted allocation.) Quintile 1 consists of SOEs with the lowest (most negative) net capital allocations
relative to their investment opportunities. In Panel A, Tobin’s Q is measured at the start of year t while the
remaining variables are measured over the course of year t. In Panel B, Tobin’s Q is measured at the start of year t+1
while the remaining variables are measured over the course of year t+1. Panel C takes the differences over time
between the variables reported in Panels A and B and reports significance levels using ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                          Source firms                                      Recipient firms
                                          quintile 1   quintile 2     quintile 3    quintile 4   quintile 5

          Panel A: Levels year t
          Tobin’s Q                         2.147         1.610        1.487         1.369         1.451
          net capital allocation           -0.065        -0.003        0.003         0.008         0.088
          return on assets                  0.025         0.026        0.034         0.035         0.022
          CAPEX                             0.048         0.061        0.066         0.060         0.053
          dividends                         0.015         0.013        0.016         0.017         0.015
          leverage                          0.566         0.570        0.527         0.482         0.595
          sales growth                      0.182         0.174        0.181         0.175         0.199
          employment growth                 0.057         0.068        0.114         0.110         0.094

          Panel B: Levels year t+1
          Tobin’s Q                         1.894         1.630        1.541         1.454         1.490
          net capital allocation           -0.039         0.003        0.005         0.009         0.063
          return on assets                  0.022         0.021        0.032         0.034         0.026
          CAPEX                             0.046         0.056        0.058         0.058         0.049
          dividends                         0.015         0.012        0.014         0.016         0.014
          leverage                          0.567         0.579        0.537         0.496         0.597
          sales growth                      0.137         0.157        0.173         0.158         0.199
          employment growth                 0.057         0.096        0.108         0.102         0.127

          Panel C: Changes year t to year t+1
          Tobin’s Q                     -0.254***         0.020        0.054**       0.085***      0.040
          net capital allocation          0.026***        0.006***     0.002         0.001        -0.025***
          return on assets              -0.002           -0.005***    -0.002        -0.002         0.004
          CAPEX                         -0.002           -0.004**     -0.007***     -0.002        -0.003*
          dividends                      -0.001          -0.001***    -0.002***     -0.002***     -0.001***
          leverage                        0.002           0.008***     0.009***      0.017***      0.002
          sales growth                  -0.047***        -0.019       -0.008        -0.015         0.001
          employment growth             -0.001            0.027**     -0.006        -0.008         0.033




                                                                                                                  47
Table 5. Are Minority Shareholders Harmed?
This table reports monthly abnormal portfolio returns for a trading strategy based on deviations from efficient
internal capital allocations. State owned enterprises are grouped into quintiles at the beginning of April based on the
deviation between their actual net capital allocations (as reported in their annual reports filed in March) and the
predicted net capital allocations had they followed the same capital allocation rules as those estimated for private
groups in column 2 of Table 2. (The sorting algorithm thus differs from the one used in Table 4 by requiring actual
capital allocations to be known to investors before portfolios are formed at the beginning of April. This ensures that
the strategy is, in principle, tradable.) The hedge portfolio is long firms receiving the highest net capital allocations
relative to their investment opportunities (quintile 5) and short firms with the lowest (most negative) net capital
allocations relative to their investment opportunities. Portfolios are rebalanced every April, such that each position is
held for 12 months until the next annual report is released. Panel A assumes equal investment in portfolio companies
at portfolio formation. Panel B assumes investment in proportion to each company’s market value of equity at the
beginning of April. We compute abnormal portfolio returns by estimating three-factor (Fama and French 1993) or
four-factor (Carhart 1997) alphas. These equal the intercept from a regression of the monthly portfolio return less
the risk-free rate on the monthly excess return of the market over the risk-free rate and the return difference between
small and large-capitalization stocks (SMB), high and low book-to-market stocks (HML), and (for four-factor
alphas) high and low price-momentum stocks (MOM). See Appendix A for further details on how we construct these
factors. Following Fama (1998), we estimate weighted least squares regressions by weighting each monthly
observation by the number of portfolio constituents. Standard errors are clustered by month.

                                               Three-factor alpha           Four-factor alpha
                             portfolio          coeff.     p-value           coeff.     p-value

                        Panel A: Equal weighted portfolios
                           quintile 1       -0.45%        0.066             -0.42%         0.092
                           quintile 2       -0.50%        0.021             -0.54%         0.012
                           quintile 3       -0.54%        0.018             -0.54%         0.019
                           quintile 4       -0.15%        0.540             -0.16%         0.525
                           quintile 5        0.03%        0.897              0.00%         0.995

                          quintiles 5 – 1        0.48%        0.026          0.42%         0.043
                           annualized            5.93%                       5.19%

                        Panel B: Value-weighted portfolios
                           quintile 1       -0.75%         0.018            -0.76%         0.020
                           quintile 2       -0.69%         0.010            -0.72%         0.007
                           quintile 3       -0.45%         0.123            -0.42%         0.151
                           quintile 4        0.13%         0.668             0.18%         0.560
                           quintile 5        0.06%         0.823             0.10%         0.721

                          quintiles 5 – 1       0.82%         0.083          0.86%         0.076
                           annualized          10.24%                       10.85%




                                                                                                                     48
Table 6. Diversified vs. Focused State Business Groups.
The table compares internal capital allocations at diversified and focused state business groups. We classify business
groups by the number of broadly defined industries their listed member firms operate in. We use the “CSRC
Guidelines for the Industry Classification of Listed Companies,” which group economic activity into 13 industries as
follows: agriculture, forestry, livestock rearing, and fishing; mining; manufacturing; electric power, gas, and water;
construction; transport and storage; information technology; wholesale and retail trade; finance and insurance; real
estate; social services; communication and cultural industries; and miscellaneous. In column 1, we code a business
group as being diversified if its listed member firms operate in two or more broad industries. In column 3, we code a
business group as being diversified if its listed member firms operate in three or more broad industries. For variable
definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated using OLS with group-
year fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the
group level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                        Net capital allocation
                                                     diversified                       diversified
                                                     (operating                        (operating      focused
                                                       in 2 or        focused            in 3 or     (operating
                                                        more        (operating            more        in up to 2
                                                        broad       in 1 broad            broad         broad
                                                     industries)     industry)         industries)   industries)
                                                         (1)            (2)                (3)            (4)

         Tobin’s Q                                    -0.227**          -0.165         -1.240***      -0.131
                                                       0.109             0.245          0.466          0.093
         Controls
          ROA                                         -0.080            0.092           0.001         -0.045
                                                       0.051             0.081          0.112          0.051
          log total assets                            -0.613***         -0.522**       -1.040***      -0.464**
                                                       0.229             0.233          0.330          0.190
          leverage                                     0.025            0.092***        0.070***       0.033
                                                       0.023             0.019          0.026          0.025
          collateral                                   0.066***         0.045*          0.080***       0.057***
                                                       0.014             0.024          0.023          0.014
          voting rights                               -0.005            0.019           0.022          0.000
                                                       0.014             0.020          0.024          0.000
          cash flow wedge                              0.057*           -0.031          0.058          0.012
                                                       0.030             0.045          0.047          0.032
          institutional ownership                     -0.010            0.007          -0.012          0.004
                                                       0.016             0.020          0.031          0.014
          =1 if CEO is shareholder                    -0.249            -0.209          1.169         -0.722
                                                       0.476             0.661          0.871          0.451
          =1 if firm has ‘ST’ status                   1.852            -0.562         -3.033          1.121
                                                       2.682             2.695          3.376          2.379
         Diagnostics
         R2                                           49.2%             47.7%          34.6%       53.0%
         F-test: equal sensitivity to Q?                         0.06                         4.92**
         No. of firms                                    454               346            175          583
         No. of business groups                          131               130             26          205
         No. of observations                           2,418             1,702            735        3,385




                                                                                                                   49
Table 7, Panel A: Promotions and Demotions at the Group Level.
We estimate Cox proportional hazard models of the determinants of a state-business-group chairman’s promotion to
a political office of higher rank (columns 1 to 3) or demotion to a lower-ranked position (columns 4 to 6). The Cox
models are estimated with time-varying covariates and allow for right-censoring due to our sample period ending
before every chairman’s subsequent career moves are observed as of the end of our sample period. Exits due to
death, retirement, illness, criminal prosecution, or a move to the private sector are treated as events that remove a
chairman from the risk pool. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. Note that the
table reports coefficients rather than hazard ratios. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are shown in italics
underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
(two-sided), respectively.

                                                  Promotions                                  Demotions
                                         (1)         (2)            (3)              (4)         (5)            (6)

 Group/chairman characteristics
 group size                            0.247***      0.273***     0.297***        -0.633***     -0.546**     -0.561**
                                        0.089        0.091        0.094            0.246         0.242        0.237
 log distance to SASAC                 -0.028       -0.055       -0.044           -0.359**      -0.329**     -0.333*
                                        0.074        0.080        0.080            0.143         0.142        0.189
 =1 if chairman is in his/her 50s      -0.788**     -0.933**     -0.972***        -0.580        -0.601       -0.334
                                        0.367        0.368        0.373            0.630         0.643        0.647
 =1 if chairman is in his/her 60s      -2.290**     -2.311**     -2.353**          1.244*        1.027        1.163*
                                        0.928        0.922        0.931            0.684         0.655        0.643
 Socio-political objectives
 =1 if mass layoffs                    -1.265**     -1.251**                       1.558***      1.764***
                                        0.551        0.539                         0.507         0.516
 =1 if large scale hiring                                        -0.144                                       0.153
                                                                  0.354                                       0.531
 Profit-related objectives
 =1 if TFP improvement                 0.657*        0.546                        -1.144*       -1.505*
                                        0.339        0.339                         0.652         0.777
 =1 if TFP impairment                                             0.241                                       0.457
                                                                  0.428                                       0.589
 =1 if ROA improvement                 -0.299       -0.331                        -0.976        -1.713*
                                        0.351        0.373                         0.780         1.037
 =1 if ROA impairment                                            -0.131                                      -0.743
                                                                  0.384                                       0.760
 Capital allocations
 internal capital misallocation                      0.020        0.007                          0.023       -0.001
                                                     0.039        0.038                          0.032        0.034
 Diagnostics
 Pseudo R2                             6.5%          6.9%         4.5%            21.9%        24.1%         12.2%
 No. of subjects                         353           337          337              353          337           337
 No. of promotions/demotions              36            34           34               16           15            15
 Time at risk (no. subject-years)      1,412         1,302        1,302            1,412        1,302         1,302




                                                                                                                      50
Table 7, Panel B: Promotions and Demotions at the Member-firm Level.
We estimate Cox proportional hazard models of the determinants of an SOE chairman’s promotion (columns 1 to 3)
or demotion within the state sector (columns 4 to 6). Positions in the state sector include government or political
appointments and appointments at state owned enterprises. The Cox models are estimated with time-varying
covariates and allow for right-censoring due to our sample period ending before every chairman’s subsequent career
moves are observed as of the end of our sample period. Exits due to death, retirement, illness, criminal prosecution,
or a move to the private sector are treated as events that remove a chairman from the risk pool. For variable
definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. Note that the table reports coefficients rather than
hazard ratios. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates.
We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                  Promotions                                  Demotions
                                         (1)         (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)           (6)

 Firm/chairman characteristics
 firm size                             0.248***     0.269***      0.272***        -0.193***    -0.192***    -0.197***
                                       0.070         0.071        0.069            0.056        0.056        0.054
 log distance to group HQ             -0.145**      -0.145**     -0.149**         0.111***      0.111***     0.110***
                                       0.057         0.058        0.058            0.034        0.033        0.034
 =1 if chairman is in his/her 50s     -0.803***     -0.796***    -0.791**         0.083         0.082        0.085
                                       0.309         0.309        0.312            0.157        0.157        0.158
 =1 if chairman is in his/her 60s     -1.339*       -1.358**     -1.362**         -0.035       -0.036       -0.026
                                       0.704         0.690        0.695            0.401        0.401        0.399
 Socio-political objectives
 =1 if mass layoffs                    0.184        0.180                         -0.016       -0.015
                                       0.403         0.406                         0.225        0.225
 =1 if large scale hiring                                        -0.221                                      0.232
                                                                  0.320                                      0.156
 Profit-related objectives
 =1 if TFP improvement                 0.230        0.218                         -0.036       -0.038
                                       0.362         0.362                         0.197        0.200
 =1 if TFP impairment                                            -0.057                                     -0.092
                                                                  0.502                                      0.297
 =1 if ROA improvement                 0.006        -0.029                        0.138         0.137
                                       0.471         0.475                         0.227        0.227
 =1 if ROA impairment                                             0.347                                      0.466**
                                                                  0.431                                      0.206
 Capital allocations
 residual net capital allocation                    -0.042**     -0.043**                      -0.002       -0.002
                                                     0.021        0.020                         0.012        0.012
 Diagnostics
 Pseudo R2                             4.1%         4.7%         4.7%             1.3%          1.3%         1.6%
 No. of subjects                       1,222        1,222        1,222            1,222         1,222        1,222
 No. of promotions/demotions              55           55           55              166           166          166
 Time at risk (no. subject-years)      3,814        3,814        3,814            3,814         3,814        3,814




                                                                                                                     51
Table 8. Profitability and Productivity.
The table allows the Q sensitivity of internal capital allocations at state business groups to depend on two member-
firm characteristics: the member firm’s profitability (ROA) and its total factor productivity (TFP). To ensure that we
continue to estimate within-group capital allocations, we keep the group structure intact by estimating fully
interacted models allowing each coefficient to vary with the characteristic in question and including (as in Table 2)
group-year fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. For example, columns 1 and 2 are estimated as a single
model. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated
using OLS. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the group level are shown in italics underneath
the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided),
respectively.

                                                                      Net capital allocation
                                                                                      below-       above-
                                                       loss-                          average      average
                                                      making        profitable          TFP          TFP
                                                        (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)

           Tobin’s Q                                  -0.735**          -0.218**     -0.694**         -0.023
                                                       0.338            0.098         0.272            0.154
           Controls
            ROA                                       -0.079            0.050         0.008            0.016
                                                       0.092            0.053         0.042            0.068
            log total assets                          -0.886            -0.539***    -1.275***        -0.432**
                                                       0.627            0.183         0.280            0.203
            leverage                                   0.026            0.048**       0.093***         0.058***
                                                       0.038            0.024         0.018            0.015
            collateral                                 0.082*           0.053***      0.042**          0.062***
                                                       0.050            0.012         0.019            0.017
            voting rights                             -0.014            0.006        -0.006            0.022
                                                       0.046            0.012         0.018            0.015
            cash flow wedge                            0.091            0.017        -0.013            0.016
                                                       0.101            0.026         0.035            0.031
            institutional ownership                    0.113            -0.017        0.011            0.002
                                                       0.085            0.013         0.018            0.017
            =1 if CEO is shareholder                  -0.706            -0.234        0.568           -0.494
                                                       1.873            0.374         0.533            0.462
            =1 if firm has ‘ST’ status                -6.415            2.114        -0.225           -0.328
                                                      -6.415            1.977         2.651            2.723
           Diagnostics
           R2                                                  51.7%                          50.4%
           F-test: equal sensitivity to Q?                      2.20*                         4.85**
           No. of firms                                  254              649          412              508
           No. of business groups                        135              211          185              196
           No. of observations                                  4,120                         4,053




                                                                                                                  52
Table 9. Employment Considerations.
The table allows the Q sensitivity of internal capital allocations at state business groups to depend on local employment conditions (columns 1 and 2), the number
of young men entering the local labor market (columns 3 and 4), and the size of the firm’s workforce (columns 5 and 6). To ensure we continue to estimate
within-group capital allocations, we keep the group structure intact by estimating fully interacted models allowing each coefficient to vary with the splitting
variable and including (as in Table 2) group-year fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. For variable definitions and details of their construction see
Appendix A. All specifications are estimated using OLS with group-year fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the group level
are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                                          Net capital allocation
                                                           high            low             large         normal           large          small (up
                                                        unemploy-       unemploy-        inflow of      inflow of       (>10,000         to 10,000
                                                          ment            ment          young men young men            employees)       employees)
                                                            (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)
                Tobin’s Q                                -2.945***          -0.210**     -0.847***        -0.129         -2.778***          -0.211**
                                                          0.806             0.099         0.315           0.089           0.666             0.096
                Controls
                 ROA                                      0.321**           -0.059       -0.055           -0.037         -0.111             -0.030
                                                          0.132             0.045         0.058           0.062           0.072             0.046
                 log total assets                        -1.155**           -0.561***    -0.890***        -0.498**       -0.235             -0.651***
                                                          0.479             0.184         0.304           0.204           0.219             0.230
                 leverage                                 0.099***          0.037         0.033           0.042          -0.047             0.041*
                                                          0.038             0.023         0.033           0.027           0.029             0.023
                 collateral                               0.078*            0.054***      0.067***        0.050***        0.053***          0.058***
                                                          0.043             0.013         0.020           0.016           0.017             0.013
                 voting rights                            0.012             0.003         0.019           -0.002         -0.006             0.003
                                                          0.038             0.013         0.020           0.015           0.026             0.013
                 cash flow wedge                         -0.142**           0.049*        0.042           0.022           0.047             0.039
                                                          0.057             0.028         0.046           0.031           0.044             0.028
                 institutional ownership                  0.022             -0.004        0.014           -0.005          0.008             -0.004
                                                          0.024             0.014         0.021           0.015           0.021             0.014
                 =1 if CEO is shareholder                -0.961             -0.251       -0.422           -0.028         -2.142**           0.216
                                                          0.930             0.429         0.660           0.435           0.868             0.428
                 =1 if firm has ‘ST’ status              -2.689             1.057        -0.006           0.944           n.a.              0.129
                                                          4.926             1.946         1.933           2.991                             1.994
                Diagnostics
                R2                                                  49.5%                         50.2%                             48.6%
                F-test: equal sensitivity to Q?                     11.35***                       4.70***                          14.98***
                No. of firms                                130                640          501              634           135                 595
                No. of business groups                       51                203          180              208            97                 208
                No. of observations                                 4,120                         4,120                             4,120



                                                                                                                                                              53
Table 10. Career Objectives.
The table tests whether the group chairman’s career objectives affect how state business groups allocate internal capital among member firms. Columns 1 and 2
split the sample according to whether the group chairman is above or below 60 years of age. Given mandatory retirement at 65 and fixed five-year terms for
political office, career objectives should only influence internal capital allocation when the group chairman is below 60. Party officers evaluate the job
performance of group chairmen every three years. Columns 3 and 4 test for differences in the way “young” group chairmen allocate internal capital over the
course of their individual evaluation cycle. Group chairmen are reviewed every five years in their role as party cadres, in connection with the quinquennial
congress of the Chinese Communist Party. Columns 5 and 6 test for differences in the way “young” group chairmen allocate internal capital in the run-up to the
party congress. Columns 7 and 8 test for changes in the Q sensitivity of internal capital allocations following crackdowns on political corruption in the province
in which the group’s headquarters are located. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated using
OLS with group-year fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects and include the same control variables as in Table 2 (not shown to conserve space).
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the group level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                                           Net capital allocation
                                             state group chairman                          state business groups
                                                                            early in     last year                       run-up to
                                                                          evaluation      before           post party      party           state        private
                                                                             cycle      evaluation         congress      congress        business      business
                                               old         young          (years 1-2)    (year 3)         (years 1-3)   (years 4-5)       groups        groups
                                               (1)          (2)               (3)           (4)               (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)

Tobin’s Q                                    0.026        -0.423***        -0.295*       -0.922**          -0.130        -0.533***       -0.516***      0.560***
                                             0.111         0.163            0.164         0.458             0.100         0.206           0.199         0.099
  x post-corruption crackdown                                                                                                             0.369**      -0.232
                                                                                                                                          0.188         0.498
Diagnostics
R2                                          63.2%         47.5%            55.0%          47.1%           49.4%          48.5%           48.0%        72.6%
F-test: equal sensitivity to Q?                      5.39**                          1.66*                          3.08**
F-test: Tobin’s Q = 0 post-crackdown                                                                                                      3.21*         0.40
No. of firms                                  220           645              573           634              631            576             660           166
No. of business groups                         62           208              191           207              207            194             211            76
No. of observations                           489         3,624            1,079         2,545            2,700          1,420           4,120           893




                                                                                                                                                                54
      INTERNET APPENDIX



(NOT INTENDED FOR PUBLICATION)
Table IA.1. Baseline Models with Alternative Measures of Internal Capital Allocations.
The table reports robustness tests of our baseline models shown in Table 2 using two alternative measures of internal
capital allocations that strip out ordinary-course-of-business cash flows among group members: Jiang, Lee, and
Yue’s (2010) orec measure and Jian and Wong’s (2010) related lending measure. For variable definitions and
details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated using OLS with group-year fixed
effects and industry-year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the group level are
shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                      Orec (Jiang, Lee, and          Related lending (Jian
                                                             Yue 2010)                  and Wong 2010)
                                                       private       state            private       state
                                                      business     business          business     business
                                                       groups       groups            groups       groups
                                                         (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)

         Tobin’s Q                                      0.501***     -0.202***         0.510**     -0.209**
                                                        0.177        0.068             0.206        0.083
         Controls
          ROA                                           0.043        -0.006            0.032       -0.017
                                                        0.045        0.031             0.067        0.037
           log total assets                            -0.719*       -0.818***        -0.653       -0.919***
                                                        0.434        0.126             0.482        0.147
           leverage                                     0.051**      0.041***          0.052*       0.052***
                                                        0.022        0.016             0.030        0.019
           collateral                                   0.022        0.021***          0.025        0.028***
                                                        0.022        0.008             0.026        0.010
           voting rights                                0.012        0.014            -0.007        0.014
                                                        0.022        0.009             0.025        0.011
           cash flow wedge                             -0.004        0.005             0.015       -0.002
                                                        0.035        0.015             0.043        0.022
           institutional ownership                     -0.014        0.004            -0.006        0.007
                                                        0.026        0.008             0.027        0.011
           =1 if CEO is shareholder                    -0.305        -0.212           -0.399       -0.414
                                                        0.688        0.287             0.738        0.349
           =1 if firm has ‘ST’ status                   0.759        0.377             1.435        0.110
                                                        2.811        1.427             2.959        1.823
         Diagnostics
         R2                                           70.3%         51.6%            68.8%        47.7%
         F-test: equal sensitivity to Q?                      18.47***                      13.99***
         No. of firms                                     166           660             166           660
         No. of business groups                            76           211              76           211
         No. of observations                              893         4,120             893         4,120




                                                                                                                     2
Table IA.2. Baseline Models with Capital Transfers for Alternative Sets of Group Entities.
The table reports robustness tests for our baseline model shown in column 1 of Table 2 using alternative measures
that widen or narrow the set of entities whose capital transfers are included in the net capital allocation measure. For
variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated using OLS
with group-year fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered
at the group level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                      Net capital allocation
                                                        parent,        + firm      + firm with
                                                      subsidiary,    exercising    significant
                                                        or other        joint       impact on           +
                                                          firm        control      listed firm     associates
                                                      controlled     over listed     + JV w/          of the
                                                       by parent        firm       listed firm    listed firms
                                                           (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)

         Tobin’s Q                                      0.497***       0.497***      0.534***       0.552***
                                                        0.185          0.186          0.188         0.190
           … x SOE                                     -0.752***      -0.753***      -0.797***     -0.865***
                                                        0.208          0.209          0.213         0.235
         Controls
          ROA                                           0.016          0.015         0.016          0.010
                                                        0.029          0.029          0.031         0.032
           institutional ownership                     -0.561***      -0.561***      -0.567***     -0.577***
                                                        0.145          0.145          0.151         0.159
           log total assets                             0.052***       0.052***      0.046**        0.042**
                                                        0.015          0.015          0.019         0.019
           leverage                                     0.044***       0.044***      0.050***       0.051***
                                                        0.011          0.011          0.011         0.011
           voting rights                                0.003          0.003         -0.002         0.002
                                                        0.010          0.010          0.011         0.012
           cash flow wedge                              0.029          0.029         0.038          0.037
                                                        0.022          0.022          0.023         0.023
           collateral                                  -0.001         -0.001         -0.008        -0.003
                                                        0.012          0.012          0.012         0.013
           =1 if CEO is shareholder                    -0.198         -0.185         -0.177        -0.160
                                                        0.335          0.335          0.350         0.370
           =1 if firm has ‘ST’ status                   0.521          0.515         0.794          0.733
                                                        1.527          1.527          1.691         1.787
         Diagnostics
         R2                                            49.6%         49.5%          50.0%          49.6%
         F-test: Q sensitivity of SOEs = 0?             6.64***       6.66***        6.54**         4.74**
         No. of firms                                      807           807            807            807
         No. of business groups                            287           287            287            287
         No. of observations                             5,013         5,013          5,013          5,013




                                                                                                                      3
Table IA.3. Alternative Size Cut-offs and Placebo Tests.
Columns 1 and 2 report robustness tests for our Table 9 specification that conditions a state business group’s Q sensitivity on the size of each member firm’s
workforce. Columns 3 through 8 re-estimate the Table 9 specifications using private business groups as placebos. To ensure we continue to estimate within-
group capital allocations, we keep the group structure intact by estimating fully interacted and including (as in Table 2) group-year fixed effects and industry-
year fixed effects. For variable definitions and details of their construction see Appendix A. Standard errors clustered at the group level are shown in italics
underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
                                                                                          Net capital allocation
                                         state business groups                                            Private business groups
                                          large       small (up              high         low               large        normal         large          small (up
                                        (>50,000      to 50,000           unemploy-    unemploy-          inflow of     inflow of      (>1,000          to 1,000
                                       employees) employees)                ment         ment            young men young men          employees)      employees)
                                           (1)            (2)                 (3)          (4)                (5)           (6)          (7)               (8)
Tobin’s Q                                -7.066**             -0.227**     3.195           0.454**        0.370           0.598***       0.194             0.574**
                                          3.288                 0.102      4.953           0.207          0.606           0.198          0.551             0.245
Controls
 ROA                                     -0.276               -0.037       0.139**         0.027         -0.029           0.061          0.099**           0.013
                                          0.463                 0.045      0.058           0.065          0.127           0.054          0.049             0.082
 log total assets                         0.508               -0.568***    3.648           -0.889**      -1.683**         -0.330        -0.427            -0.139
                                          0.357                 0.186      4.480           0.389          0.782           0.662          0.557             0.590
 leverage                                -0.173               0.040*       0.063           0.066**        0.124***        0.056*         0.077***          0.045
                                          0.110                 0.022      0.048           0.026          0.048           0.031          0.026             0.035
 collateral                              -0.015               0.060***     0.094           0.006         -0.032           0.029          0.020            -0.009
                                          0.044                 0.012      0.136           0.028          0.032           0.038          0.034             0.045
 voting rights                           -0.055               0.005       -0.106           0.000          0.019           -0.003        -0.002            -0.025
                                          0.063                 0.012      0.198           0.025          0.036           0.035          0.024             0.055
 cash flow wedge                          0.018               0.030       -0.001           0.016         -0.017           0.022          0.029             0.041
                                          0.142                 0.027      0.266           0.043          0.073           0.059          0.044             0.105
 institutional ownership                 -0.029               -0.003       0.128           0.005         -0.036           0.025         -0.001             0.020
                                          0.031                 0.013      0.484           0.029          0.054           0.036          0.027             0.066
 =1 if CEO is shareholder                -4.735               -0.124       2.032           -0.247        -0.715           -0.216         0.513            -3.247**
                                          4.290                 0.383      5.101           0.934          1.283           1.167          1.042             1.542
 =1 if firm has ‘ST’ status               n.a.                0.495       -4.473           2.460         -1.622           1.738          3.686            -1.935
                                                                1.947      4.601           3.661          3.848           6.431          4.418             4.234
Diagnostics
R2                                                     48.3%                       76.7%                          74.7%                            74.6%
F-test: equal sensitivity to Q?                       4.33***                       0.31                           0.12                             0.52
No. of firms                                     25               643         33             165            122             161            127               72
No. of business groups                           21               211         16              75             68              75             70               55
No. of observations                                   4,120                          893                            893                             893


                                                                                                                                                                     4
