                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             PREMATURE DEINDUSTRIALIZATION

                                               Dani Rodrik

                                         Working Paper 20935
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20935


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2015




I am grateful to Elias Sanchez-Eppler and Russell Morton for expert research assistance, Robert Lawrence
and Arvind Subramanian for useful conversations, and Jesus Felipe for sharing his data set. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Premature Deindustrialization
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 20935
February 2015
JEL No. O14

                                            ABSTRACT

I document a significant deindustrialization trend in recent decades, that goes considerably beyond
the advanced, post-industrial economies. The hump-shaped relationship between industrialization
(measured by employment or output shares) and incomes has shifted downwards and moved closer
to the origin. This means countries are running out of industrialization opportunities sooner and at
much lower levels of income compared to the experience of early industrializers. Asian countries and
manufactures exporters have been largely insulated from those trends, while Latin American countries
have been especially hard hit. Advanced economies have lost considerable employment (especially
of the low-skill type), but they have done surprisingly well in terms of manufacturing output shares
at constant prices. While these trends are not very recent, the evidence suggests both globalization
and labor-saving technological progress in manufacturing have been behind these developments. Premature
deindustrialization has potentially significant economic and political ramifications, including lower
economic growth and democratic failure.


Dani Rodrik
School of Social Science
Institute for Advanced Study
Einstein Drive
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
drodrik@ias.edu
I. Introduction

       Our modern world is in many ways the product of industrialization. It was the industrial

revolution that enabled sustained productivity growth in Europe and the United States for the

first time, resulting in the division of the world economy into rich and poor nations. It was

industrialization again that permitted catch‐up and convergence with the West by a relatively

smaller number of non‐Western nations – Japan starting in the late 19th century, South Korea,

Taiwan and a few others after the 1960s. For countries that still remain mired in poverty, such

as those in sub‐Saharan Africa, future economic hopes rest in large part on fostering new

manufacturing industries.

       Industrialization shaped the modern world in ways beyond economic. It fostered

urbanization and the creation of new social categories and habits. It created a working class and

a capitalist class, trade unions, and political movements that challenged the dominance of

traditional agrarian elites. These social and political developments bequeathed us today’s

modern states, based on mass franchise and (regulated) market economies.

       This is old news for most of the advanced economies of the world, which long ago

moved into a new, post‐industrial phase of development. These economies have been de‐

industrializing for decades, a trend that is particularly noticeable when one looks at the

employment share of manufacturing. In terms of output, deindustrialization has been less

striking and uniform, a pattern that has been obscured by the use often of nominal rather than

real values in policy discussions.

       For example, in the United States manufacturing industries’ share of total employment

has steadily fallen since the 1950s, coming down from around a quarter of the workforce to less
                                                       ‐2‐


than a tenth today. Meanwhile, manufacturing value‐added (MVA) has remained a constant

share of GDP at constant prices – a testament to differentially rapid labor productivity growth

in this sector. In Great Britain, to cite an example from the other end of the spectrum,

deindustrialization has been both more rapid and thorough. Manufacturing’s share of

employment has fallen from a third in the 1970s to slightly above 10 percent today, while real

MVA (at 2005 prices) has declined from around a quarter of GDP to less than 15 percent.1

Across the developed world as a whole, real manufacturing output has held its own rather well

once we control for changes in income and population.

        The term deindustrialization is used today to refer to the experience mainly of these

advanced economies. In this paper, I focus on a less noticed trend over the last three decades,

which is an even more striking, and puzzling, pattern of deindustrialization in low‐ and middle‐

income countries. With some exceptions, confined largely to Asia, developing countries have

experienced falling manufacturing shares in both employment and real value added, especially

since the 1980s. For the most part, these countries had built up during the 1950s and 1960s

modest manufacturing industries behind protective walls and policies of import substitution.

These industries have been shrinking significantly since then. Since I control for income and

demographic trends in the statistical work, these declines cannot be explained by the fact that

manufacturing typically experiences an inverted U‐shaped relationship over the course of

development. The low‐income economies of Sub‐Saharan Africa have been affected nearly as

much by these trends as the middle‐income economies of Latin America – though there was

less manufacturing to begin with in the former group of countries.

1
 These numbers come from Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries (2014), which is the principal data source I will use in
the paper.
                                                        ‐3‐


           What developing countries are experiencing today is appropriately called “premature

deindustrialization,” a term that seems to have been first used by Dasgupta and Singh (2006). In

most of these countries, manufacturing began to shrink (or is on course for shrinking) at levels

of income that are a fraction of those at which the advanced economies started to de‐

industrialize.2 These developing countries are turning into service economies without having

gone through a proper experience of industrialization.

           The conventional explanation for employment deindustrialization is based on

differential rates of technological progress (Lawrence and Edwards, 2013). Typically,

manufacturing experiences more rapid productivity growth than the rest of the economy. This

results in a reduction in the share of the economy’s labor employed by manufacturing when the

elasticity of substitution between manufacturing and other sectors is less than unity (                  1).

The output share of manufacturing, however, moves in the opposite direction (assuming, again,

differential technical progress in manufacturing). To get both employment and output

deindustrialization, we need to make additional assumptions: that the trade deficit in

manufactures worsens or that there is a secular demand shift away from manufactures. (The

math is worked out in section VII of the paper.) Since the more pronounced story in the

advanced countries is employment rather than output deindustrialization, a technology‐based

story does reasonably well to account for the patterns there. The evidence also suggests that a

particular type of technological progress, of the unskilled‐labor saving type, is responsible for

the bulk of the labor displacement from manufacturing (section V).




2
    See also Amirapu and Subramanian (2015), who document premature deindustrialization within Indian states.
                                                ‐4‐


       For developing countries, however, it is less evident that the technology argument

applies in quite the same way. Crucially, the mechanism briefly described above relies on

adjustments in domestic relative prices. Differential technological progress in manufacturing

depresses the relative price of manufacturing. In the case where       1, this decline is

sufficiently large that it ensures demand for labor in manufacturing is lower in the new

equilibrium. The big difference in developing countries is that they are small in world markets

for manufactures, where they are essentially price takers. In the limit, when relative prices are

fixed, more rapid productivity growth in domestic manufacturing actually produces

industrialization, not deindustrialization (in terms of both employment and output). So the

culprit for deindustrialization in developing countries must be found elsewhere.

       The obvious alternative is trade and globalization. A plausible story would be the

following. As developing countries opened up to trade, their manufacturing sectors were hit by

a double whammy. Those without a strong comparative advantage in manufacturing became

net importers of manufacturing, reversing a long process of import‐substitution. In addition,

developing countries “imported” deindustrialization from the advanced countries, because they

became exposed to the relative price trends produced in the advanced economies. The decline

in the relative price of manufacturing in the advanced countries put a squeeze on

manufacturing everywhere, including the countries that may not have experienced much

technological progress. This account is consistent with the strong reduction in both

employment and output shares in developing countries (especially those that do not specialize

in manufactures).
                                                 ‐5‐


       In sum, while technological progress is no doubt a large part of the story behind

employment deindustrialization in the advanced countries, in the developing countries trade

and globalization likely played a comparatively bigger role.

       Deindustrialization has been long been a concern in rich nations, where it is associated

with the loss of good jobs, rising inequality, and decline in innovation capacity. For all these and

many other reasons, it should be a much bigger problem for developing countries. Premature

deindustrialization has serious consequences, both economic and political.

       On the economic front, it reduces the economic growth potential and the possibilities

for convergence with income levels of the advanced economies. Formal manufacturing tends to

be technologically the most dynamic sector, exhibiting unconditional convergence (Rodrik

2013). Deindustrialization removes the main channel through which rapid growth has taken

place in the past. On the political front, premature deindustrialization makes democratization

less likely and more fragile. Mass political parties have traditionally been a by‐product of

industrialization. Without the discipline and coordination that an organized labor force provides,

the bargains between the elite and non‐elite needed for democratic transitions and

consolidation are less likely to take place. I will elaborate on these questions in the final section

of the paper (section VIII).



II. The inverse U‐shaped curve in manufacturing: data, measures and trends

       There is a variety of industrialization/deindustrialization measures in the literature.

Some studies focus on manufacturing employment (as a share of total employment), while

others use manufacturing output (MVA as a share of GDP). MVA shares in turn can be
                                                           ‐6‐


calculated at constant or current prices. Different measures yield different trends and results.

For completeness I will use all three measures in this paper, denoting them as manemp

(manufacturing employment share), nommva (MVA share at current prices), and realmva (MVA

share at constant prices). I will focus in later sections on the real magnitudes manemp and

realmva as it is not clear that changes in nommvaI, on their own, have any economic

significance.

           My baseline results are based on data from the Groningen Growth and Development

Center (GGDC, Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries, 2014). These data span the period between the

late 1940s/early 1950s through the early 2010s and cover 42 countries, both developed and

developing. The major economies in Latin America, Asia, and sub‐Saharan Africa are included

alongside advanced economies. (For more details on the data set, see the Appendix.) Constant‐

price series are at 2005 prices.3 For robustness checks and further analysis, I will supplement

this data with two other sources. The Socio‐economic Accounts of the World Input‐Output

Database (Timmer, 2012) provide a disaggregation of sectoral employment by three skill

categories for 40, mainly advanced economies. And researchers at the Asian Development Bank

have recently put together manufacturing employment and output series for a much larger

group of countries using a variety of sources, including the ILO, U.N., and World Bank, though

these data start from 1970 at the earliest (Felipe, Mehta, and Rhee, 2014).4 I will combine these

various sources on manufacturing with income and population data from Maddison (2009),



3
  The only exception is West Germany, for which there are no data after 1991 and constant‐price series are at 1991
prices. Since all my regressions include country fixed effects, this difference in base year will be absorbed into the
fixed effect for the country.
4
    I am grateful to Jesus Felipe for making these data available to me.
                                                 ‐7‐


updated using the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. The income figures are at 1990

international dollars.

       Figure 1 shows the simulated relationship between the three measures of

industrialization and income per capita. The figure is based on a quadratic estimation using

country fixed effects and controlling for population size and period dummies. The curves are

drawn for a “representative” country with the median population in the sample (of around 27

million). Period and country effects are all averaged to obtain a typical relationship for the

sample and full time span covered. Both of the quadratic terms are statistically highly

significant in all three manufacturing indicators (see regressions in Table 1, cols. (1)‐(3) for

specifications and results). The share of manufacturing first rises and then tends to fall over the

course of development.

       However, the turning points differ significantly. In particular, manemp peaks much

earlier than realmva. The employment share of manufacturing starts to fall past an income level

of around $5,500 (in 1990 US$), after having reached an estimated maximum close to 20

percent. Manufacturing output at constant prices peaks very late in the development process.

The estimated income level at which it begins to fall is in fact higher than any of the incomes

observed in the data set (above $70,000 in 1990 US$). As we shall see in section VI, post‐1990

data indicate a much earlier decline, at less than half the pre‐1990 income level. (Note that the

peak shares themselves are is less meaningful in the case of output, as they depend on the base

year selected for converting current prices to constant prices.)

       The literature focuses on two possible explanations for why manufacturing’s share

eventually falls (Ngai and Pissarides, 2004; Buera and Kaboski, 2009; Foellmi and Zweimuller,
                                                 ‐8‐


2008; Lawrence and Edwards, 2013; Nickell, Redding, and Swaffield, 2008). One is demand‐

based, and relies on a shift in consumption preferences away from goods and towards services.

This on its own would not produce the timing difference in peaks, as a pure demand shift would

have similar effects on manufacturing quantities (output and employment). The second

explanation is technological, and relies on more rapid productivity growth in manufacturing

than in the rest of the economy. As long as the elasticity of substitution is less than one, this

produces a decline in the share of manufacturing employment, but not in the share of

manufacturing output. We need a combination of supply‐ and demand‐side reasons to explain

both the decline in manufacturing’s share and the later turnaround in output compared to

employment. An added complication is that the effects of technology and demand shocks

depend crucially on whether the economy is open to trade or not (Matsuyama, 2009). For the

moment, I leave these questions aside. I will develop the analytical results linking technology,

demand, and trade to deindustrialization in section VII.

       As Figure 1 shows, nommva also peaks much earlier than realmva, though not so early

as manemp. The explanation for this difference has to do with relative price changes over the

course of development. The relative price of manufacturing tends to decline as countries get

richer, tending to depress the share of MVA at current prices. Figure 2 displays the pattern for

four of the countries in our sample. The relative price of manufacturing has more than halved in

the United States since the early 1960s. Great Britain has experienced a somewhat smaller

decline. In South Korea, which has grown extremely rapidly, manufacturing’s relative price has

come down by a whopping 250 percent. In Mexico, meanwhile, relative prices have remained

more or less flat.
                                                ‐9‐


         These trends are also consistent broadly with a technology‐based explanation for the

manufacturing hump. More rapid productivity growth in manufacturing reduces the relative

price of manufactured goods through standard supply‐demand channels. This in turn causes

nommva to reach an earlier peak than realmva as shown in Figure 1.



III. Deindustrialization over time

         As Figure 1 makes clear, deindustrialization is the common fate of countries that are

growing. My interest here is to check whether deindustrialization has been more rapid in recent

periods. For this purpose, I use a basic specification that controls for the effect of demographic

and income trends (with quadratic terms for log population and GDP per capita) as well as

country fixed effects. Country fixed‐effects allow me to take into account any country‐specific

features (geography, endowments, history) that create a difference in the baseline conditions

for manufacturing industry across different nations. My main focus is on trends over time,

which are captured using period dummies for the 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, and post‐2000

years. (The post‐2000 dummy covers the period 2000 through the final year in the sample,

2012.) The estimated coefficients on these dummies allow us to gauge the effects of common

shocks felt by manufacturing in each of the time periods, relative to the excluded, pre‐1960

years.

         Table 1 shows two versions of the baseline results for each of our three measures of

manufacturing industry, manemp, nommva, and reamva. Columns (1)‐(3) are restricted to a

common sample so that the results are directly comparable across the measures. Columns (4)‐
                                              ‐10‐


(6) employ the largest sample possible. The common samples have 1,995 observations, while

the others range from 2,128 to 2,302.

       The results for manemp and nonmva are very similar across the two specifications. In

both cases, we find a sizable and significant negative trend over time, larger for manemp than

for nonmva. Using the estimates from the common sample, the average country in our sample

had a level of manemp that stood 11.7 percentage points lower than in the 1950s, and 8.8

percentage points (0.117 ‐ 0.029) lower than in the 1960s. The corresponding reductions for

nommva are 8.5 and 7.4 percentage points, respectively.

       The declines in realmva are smaller, and in the common sample show up significantly

only for the post‐1990 period. Depending on whether we use the common or largest sample,

the post‐2000 negative shock is 3.5‐5.9 percentage points relative to the pre‐1960 period.

       Figures 3a, 3b and 3c provide a visual sense of the results. They plot the estimated

coefficients for the period dummies, along with a 95% confidence interval around them. The

figures show a steady decrease over time in manufacturing shares after controlling for income

and demographic trends. The decline is most dramatic for employment; it is less pronounced,

but still evident after 1990 for real MVA. Manufacturing employment and activity have gone

missing in a big way.

       The samples in Table 1 provide good coverage across developed and developing regions,

but the number of countries is limited to 42. To make sure that the results are representative of

developments other countries as well, I turn to the ADB dataset which includes a much larger

group of countries (up to 87 for manemp and 124 for nommva and realmva). The limitation in

this case is that coverage begins in 1970 (Felipe, Mehta, and Rhee, 2014). So I include dummies
                                                ‐11‐


for the 1980s, 1990s, and post‐2000 years only, with the 1970s as the excluded period. Note

that the ADB data set provides two alternative series for MVA, one using U.N. sources and the

other using World Bank data. I run regressions with both. The results are presented in Table 2,

and are quite similar to the previous ones.

       Once again, the strongest downward trend over time is for manemp, a reduction of 6.5

percentage points compared to the 1970s. (This matches up well with the corresponding

number of 7.3 percentage points (0.117 – 0.044) from Table 1.) The decline in nommva is 3.0 or

5.2 points over the 1970s, depending on which series is used. Finally, the decline for realmva is

0.9‐2.4 points.



IV. Deindustrialization in differenty country groups

       We can obtain some insight about the causes of these trends by looking at

deindustrialization patterns in different country groups separately. This is done in Tables 3, 4,

and 5, for manemp, nommva, and realmva, respectively. In each table, the baseline regression

is run for the following groups: (a) developed countries; (b) Latin American countries; (c) Asian

countries; (d) sub‐Saharan African countries; and (e) sub‐Saharan African countries excluding

Mauritius. Note that since there are no data for the 1950s for sub‐Saharan Africa, the period

dummies for that region start from the 1970s.

       The results point to important regional differences. First, even though developed

countries have experienced big losses in manemp and nommva, they have done surprisingly

well in realmva. The estimated coefficients for the period dummies for realmva are in fact

positive (but statistically insignificant) for the developed countries in recent decades (Table 5).
                                                ‐12‐


This is to be compared with significant negative estimates for Latin America and Africa (once

Mauritius is excluded). To be clear, this does not mean that the rich nations have not

experienced reductions in real manufacturing output shares in GDP. It simply means that their

experience can be well explained by income and demographic trends, with little unexplained

(output) deindustrialization left to account for in recent decades.

       The results for Asia are even more striking. Asia is the only region for which recent

period dummies are not negative for manemp (once again, if Mauritius is excluded from the

sub‐Saharan sample). And the period estimates for realmva are actually positive and

statistically significant. These results suggest that Asia has not only bucked the global trend in

manufacturing employment, it has managed to maintain stronger manufacturing performance

than would be expected on the basis of its income and demography.

       The region that has done the worst is Latin America, which has the most negative period

effects for manemp and realmva. The effects for nommva are not as pronounced, suggesting

that relative prices have not moved there against manufacturing nearly as much as in other

regions. Finally, the estimates for sub‐Saharan Africa depend heavily on whether Mauritius – a

strong manufactures exporter – is included in the sample or not. Without Mauritius in the

sample, sub‐Saharan African countries emerge as large losers on all three measures of

industrialization. Their output deindustrialization in recent decades looks especially dramatic in

light of the strong showing for realmava in the 1970s (captured by a positive and significant

coefficient for dum1970s in Table 5). Since sub‐Saharan countries are still very poor and widely

regarded as the next frontier of labor‐intensive export‐oriented manufacturing, these are

disappointing findings.
                                               ‐13‐


       The results with respect to Asia and the difference that the inclusion of Mauritius makes

to the African performance strongly suggests that these variations in outcomes are related to

patterns of comparative advantage, and, in particular, how well or poorly countries have done

in global trade in manufactures. To test this idea, I divide our sample of countries into two

groups: (a) manufactures exporters, and (b) non‐manufactures exporters. I use two criteria to

split the sample based on the composition of trade. The first classifies countries as

manufactures exporters if the share of manufactures in exports exceeds 75 percent, the second

if the share of manufactures in exports exceeds the corresponding share in imports.

       The results, shown in Table 6, support the comparative‐advantage hypothesis.

Regardless of the criterion used, the employment loss in manufactures exporters is smaller.

Whereas the period effects for realmva are strongly negative and significant for manufactures

non‐exporters, they change sign and are occasionally significant for manufactures exporters.

Regressions using ADB data, with broader country coverage, produce very similar results (Table

7). The period effects for manemp are not distinguishable between the two groups with this

sample, but the realmva results show even stronger asymmetries.

       In sum, the geographical patterns of deindustrialization seem closely linked to

globalization. Countries with a strong comparative advantage in manufactures have managed

to avoid declines in real MVA shares, and employment losses, where they have occurred, have

been less severe. Interestingly, on the output side it appears that the main brunt of

globalization and the rise of Asian exporters has been borne by other developing countries,

rather than the advanced economies. What is particularly striking is the magnitude of adverse

employment effects in Latin America, which is even larger than in developed economies.
                                                ‐14‐




V. Employment deindustrialization by skill groups

       As the results above make clear, deindustrialization shows up most clearly and in its

strongest form in employment. The only countries that have managed to avoid a steady decline

in manufacturing employment in recent decades (as a share of total employment) are those

with a strong comparative advantage in manufacturing. The Socio Economic Accounts of the

World Input‐Output Database (WIOD, Timmer 2012) allow us to dig a bit deeper on the

employment impacts. These data provide a breakdown of manufacturing employment by three

worker types: low‐skill, medium‐skill, and high‐skill. The data span the years 1995‐2009 and

include 40 countries, with the coverage biased heavily towards Europe. (For the list of countries

included see the Appendix.)

       I run essentially the same regression as before, with two differences. First, the

dependent variable is manufacturing’s share of the economy’s total employment of workers of

a particular skill type. Second, since the data start from 1995, I use annual dummies rather than

decade dummies. (As before, there is a full set of country fixed effects.) This gives us three

regressions, one for each skill type.

       Figure 4 plots the estimated coefficients for the year dummies. The results are quite

striking, in that virtually the entire reduction over time in employment comes in the low‐skill

category. Manufacturing’s share of low‐skill employment has come down by 4 percentage

points between 1995 and 2009, a decline that is statistically highly significant. The decline in

medium‐skill employment is miniscule by comparison, while manufacturing’s share of high‐skill

employment has actually slightly increased over the same period. The chart underscores in a
                                                     ‐15‐


dramatic fashion that it is low‐skill workers who have borne the lion’s share of the impact of

recent changes in trade and technology on manufacturing.



VI. Premature deindustrialization

            Our results so far suggest that late industrializers will reach peak levels of

industrialization, as measured by manemp and realmva, that are quite a bit lower than those

experienced by early industrializers. Let us denote these peak levels by manemp* and realmva*.

There is evidence that suggests these peak levels are reached at lower levels of income as well.

Denote that level of income by y*. Our baseline regressions capture the downward shift in the

manufacturing hump over time, but not the possibility that the curve may be moving closer to

the origin as well. Figure 5 suggests that manemp* and y* are in fact both lower for more

recent industrializers. Compare the two sets of countries at the opposite ends of the chart.

Industrialization peaked in Western European countries such as Britain, Sweden, and Italy at

income levels of around $14,000 (in 1990 dollars). India and many sub‐Saharan African

countries appear to have reached their peak manufacturing employment shares at income

levels of $700.5 (I have determined these peak levels by looking at each country individually

and identifying visually the year at which manemp begins to decline.)

            To check this more systematically, I run regressions that drop the period dummies and

interact the income and income squared terms with a dummy for the post‐1990 period. Using

the 1990 year as a break‐point is somewhat arbitrary. But it ensures a sufficient number of

observations on either side, and is also useful as a demarcation of the period in which


5
    For a similar chart, see Felipe et al., 2014.
                                                    ‐16‐


globalization gathered speed. The results are shown in Table 8. The estimated coefficients on

both interaction terms are statistically highly significant for manemp and realmva alike.

Moreover, the signs confirm the pattern noted in Figure 5.

        Figures 6 and 7 plot the simulated industrialization levels against income for pre‐ and

post‐1990, based on the estimates in Table 8. We can see how the hump‐shaped curves have

moved closer to the origin in the latter period, in a particularly noticeably way for

employment.6 Using the same estimates, we can calculate manemp* and realmva*, and the

corresponding y* for each sub‐period. These are displayed in Table 9 and show dramatic

differences. To summarize, since 1990 countries have reached peak manufacturing

employment at incomes that are around a third of the levels experienced before 1990. For MVA

at constant prices, the corresponding ratio is less than a half.



VII. Some analytics

        To see how demand, technology, and trade shape the size of the manufacturing sector, I

consider a simple two‐sector model. Let the economy be divided into manufacturing (m) and

non‐manufacturing (n), with a constant labor force fixed at unity. The share of employment in

the manufacturing sector (manemp) is denoted by α. Production functions in the two sectors

exhibits diminishing marginal returns to labor and are written as follows:

(1)

(2)                                                 1          ,



6
 Amirapu and Subramanian (2015) present similar charts, using industrial employment data from the World
Development Indicators.
                                                        ‐17‐


where          and        are the quantities supplied of manufactures and non‐manufactures,

respectively,         and      are parameters capturing the productivity of the two sectors, and

and       are technological constants between 0 and 1.

          It is convenient to represent the demand side in rates of change form, with a “hat”

above a variable denoting proportional changes (                   / ):

(3)                                                            ̂       ̂ ,

where      is the elasticity of substitution in consumption between the two goods. There are two

goods‐market clearing equations:

(4)

(5)                                                 ,

where      stands for the net exports of the manufactured good. (For notational simplicity, I

assume balanced trade in non‐manufactures.) Labor is fully employed and mobile between the

two sectors. This gives us our final equation, which is the labor‐market equilibrium equation:

(6)                                                                1

This equation equates the value marginal product of labor in the two sectors.

          Since we can only determine relative prices, let’s take the non‐manufactured good to be

the numeraire, fixing           at unity. We are left with seven endogenous variables:

 ,    ,    ,    ,     ,      and . We would need an additional, global market‐clearing equation to

determine            and    simultaneously. This in turn requires modeling the rest of the world as well.

Here I will take a short‐cut and make one of two extreme assumptions. In one case, prices are

determined endogenously by developments in the home economy and net trade flows are

exogenous. In the second case, the economy is sufficiently small that it remains a price take in
                                                 ‐18‐


world markets (so that     is endogenous and       is a parameter). These two characterizations

are meant to capture the situations in the large developed and the developing countries,

respectively.

         Consider first the advanced economy case. Doing the comparative statics for the

employment share of manufacturing, we get

(7)                                                            ,

where

                                    1             1                                    0

and

                                .

         A lower trade surplus, or bigger trade deficit, in manufacturing (   < 0) results in a

smaller employment share in manufacturing, which is not surprising. Note that a reduction in

is formally analogous to an adverse demand shock for manufactures, such as a secular shift in

demand towards services and other non‐manufactures. In both cases, the manufacturing sector

shrinks.

         The relationship between technological progress (     ,    and , on the other hand,

depends critically on the size of the elasticity of substitution in demand between manufactures

and non‐manufactures. Suppose for the moment that net trade in manufactures is small so that

      1. Then if demand is inelastic (    1),   is decreasing in technological progress in

manufactures (      ) and increasing in technological progress in non‐manufactures (       ). More

rapid TFP growth in manufacturing, which is the usual case, results in employment
                                                ‐19‐


deindustrialization. Intuitively, the technological progress‐induced reduction in the relative

price of manufacturing does not spur demand for manufactures sufficiently, so that the net

result is a squeeze in manufactures employment. These results are reversed when demand is

elastic (    1). This is the same as the finding in Ngai and Pissarides (2004).

        The effect of technological progress in manufacturing, however, is also mediated

through , the ratio of supply to demand in manufacturing. This is something that has not been

emphasized in the earlier literature, which typically assumes a closed economy. Consider the

case where a country is a large net importer of manufactures ( <<1). As can be seen from (7),

as long as       > 0 the coefficient that multiplies    is positive. This is possible even when

     1 and demand for manufactures is inelastic. So we have a reversal of the result that

inelastic demand and rapid technological progress in manufacturing produce (employment)

deindustrialization.

        The intuition behind this is as follows. The lower the share of domestic supply in total

consumption, the smaller the effect of TFP in domestic manufactures on relative prices. When

manufacturing experiences rapid productivity growth, it experiences less decline in relative

prices (compared to a country where domestic supply is a large share of domestic

consumption). Consequently, domestic output and employment are larger in equilibrium. In the

limit, when technological progress has no effect on domestic relative prices, manufacturing

employment is always boosted by TFP growth in manufactures. This is indeed the case in our

other benchmark example, a small open economy which takes its relative prices from world

markets.
                                                ‐20‐


       Before we turn to that case, however, let us also look at the output share of

manufacturing and how it is affected by trade and technology. Denote the real value added

share of manufacturing (realmva) by      :

                                                    .

We can now relate output‐deindustrialization (          ) to employment deindustrialization (     ) as

follows:

(8)                               1                                              .

This shows that when the main shock comes from trade or demand (with                      0), the

two measures of industrialization always move in the same way. However, when employment

deindustrialization is due to differential TFP growth in manufacturing (              0), it is

possible for the output share of manufacturing to move very little, or even to increase.

       To see this in greater detail, consider the case where the economy does not trade at all

so that = 1. In this case, the output share of manufacturing must in fact rise. We can read this

off readily from the demand‐side relationship (3). Differential productivity growth in

manufacturing depresses the relative price of manufacturing, and this implies

  , and therefore      > 0. Or, substituting (7) into (8) and solving, we get:


                          1                                            .


Since the term in curly brackets is positive when       < 1,   must move in the same direction as

differential productivity growth in manufacturing. This establishes that in an economy where

trade plays a small role, rapid technological progress in manufacturing produces employment

deindustrialization, but not output deindustrialization.
                                               ‐21‐


       Let us look now at the small‐open economy case. For this case, we treat price changes

parametrically and take   to be endogenous. The comparative statics yields:

(9)                             1                1              ̂             .

Technological progress in manufacturing now has an unambiguously positive effect on .

Technological progress in non‐manufacturing has an unambiguously negative effect. And an

increase in the relative price of manufacturing works just like technological progress in

manufacturing. Moreover, the result does not depend on        or its magnitude, as trade has the

effect of de‐linking the supply side of the economy from the demand side. For the same reason,

adverse domestic demand shocks would not produce deindustrialization in the small open

economy; domestic producers can sell the surplus output on world markets. As Matsuyama

(2009) has previously emphasized, the relationship between productivity growth and

industrialization depends crucially on whether we treat prices to be determined domestically or

in the global economy.

       This last set of results is important in interpreting the experience of developing

countries that have experienced rapid deindustrialization. These countries tend to be small in

global markets for manufacturing, so we can take treat them as price takers. What equation (9)

shows is that employment deindustrialization in those countries cannot have been the

consequence of differentially rapid TFP growth in manufacturing at home. That kind of

technological progress would have fostered industrialization, rather than the reverse. In this

respect, developing countries are quite different from the advanced countries where there is

considerable evidence technological progress was the culprit.
                                                  ‐22‐


        As price takers, however, these developing countries may have “imported”

deindustrialization from the abroad. As (9) shows, a decline in the relative price of

manufactures on world markets ( ̂ < 0) would have had the same effect as technological

regress in manufacturing. Even with more rapid TFP growth in manufacturing, these countries

would find themselves de‐industrializing in employment terms.

        Putting it differently, employment industrialization in the developing world requires

more than differentially rapid TFP growth in manufacturing. It requires that the productivity

growth differential between manufacturing and non‐manufacturing also exceed the decline in

manufactures’ relative prices on world markets. Our empirical results suggest that only very

few developing countries managed this feat consistently.

        The configuration of analytical results under different assumptions about economic

closure and the nature of the shocks is summarized in the table below.



Effects of trade, technology, and demand on different measures of industrialization

    A. “Closed” economy (with     < 1)

                              Technology shock:              Trade shock:         Adverse domestic demand
Effect on:                                                                         shock on manufacturing
                                           0                         0
manemp (     )
                                         ‐                         ‐                         ‐
realmva (    )
                                         +                         ‐                         ‐


    B. Small open economy

                              Technology shock:          External price shock:    Adverse domestic demand
Effect on:                                                                         shock on manufacturing
                                           0                     ̂     0
manemp (     )
                                         +                         ‐                        0
realmva (    )
                                         +                         ‐                        0
                                               ‐23‐




VIII. Concluding remarks: economic and political consequences

       Premature deindustrialization is not good news for developing nations. It blocks off the

main avenue of rapid economic convergence in low‐income settings, the shift of workers from

the countryside to urban factories where their productivity tends to be much higher.

Industrialization contributes to growth both because of this reallocation effect and because

manufacturing tends to experience relatively stronger productivity growth over the medium to

longer term. In fact, organized, formal manufacturing appears to exhibit unconditional

convergence (Rodrik 2013), which makes it special and an engine of growth. Since low‐income

countries tend to start with small manufacturing sectors, the dynamic within manufacturing

initially plays a small role, overshadowed by the reallocation effect. But over time, the within‐

manufacturing effect becomes a more potent force as the manufacturing sector becomes larger.

Premature deindustrialization throws sand in the wheels of both engines (Rodrik 2013, 2014).

       The consequences are already visible in the developing world. In Latin America, as

manufacturing has shrunk informality has grown and economy‐wide productivity has suffered.

In Africa, urban migrants are crowding into petty services instead of manufacturing, and despite

growing Chinese investment there are as yet few signs of a real resurgence in industry. Where

growth occurs, it is driven largely by capital inflows, transfers, or commodity booms, raising

questions about its sustainability.

       In the absence of sizable manufacturing industries, these economies will need to

discover new growth models. One possibility is services‐led growth. Many services, such as IT

and finance, are high productivity and tradable, and could play the escalator role that
                                                          ‐24‐


manufacturing has traditionally played. However, these service industries are typically highly

skill‐intensive, and do not have the capacity to absorb – as manufacturing did – the type of

labor that low‐ and middle‐income economies have in abundance. The bulk of other services

suffer from two shortcomings. Either they are technologically not very dynamic. Or they are

non‐tradable, which means that their ability to expand rapidly is constrained by incomes (and

hence productivity) in the rest of the economy.

         The political consequences of premature deindustrialization are more subtle, but could

be even more significant. Historically, industrialization played a foundational role in Europe and

North America in creating modern states and democratic politics. Its relative absence in today’s

developing societies could well be the source of political instability, fragile states, and illiberal

politics. I am on speculative grounds here, but it is worth considering some of the possibilities.

         Political stability, as Huntington (1968) explained long ago, rests on a shaky balance

between political participation and political institutionalization. When political institutions are

weak, mass politics is a recipe for instability. Industrialization fosters political participation, but

the development of class‐based solidarity and the rise of labor‐based political movements ‐‐

trade unions and political parties ‐‐ provide a countervailing stabilizing force. So early

democracies in Western Europe eventually developed the political institutions that served to

channel – and therefore diffuse – the demands of the working class.7 Through its political

representatives, the labor movement was able to negotiate with the new elites – the capitalist

class – and reach political bargains that gave them a stake in the system. The result was social




7
 As Scott (2014, xviii) puts it, “Mass defiance, precisely because it threatens the institutional order, gives rise to
organizations that try to channel that defiance into the flow of normal politics, where it can be contained.”
                                                      ‐25‐


democracy, with its social insurance programs, transfers, and regulations, and the eventual

morphing of the working class into a middle class.

        What enables such bargains to be struck, and prevents political instability, is

coordination among the elites and non‐elites. In the Acemoglu‐Robinson (2009) account of how

democracy comes about, for example, the elites offer non‐elites political rights in return for the

latter’s promise not to revolt. This presumes that the parties to the bargain can present a

unified front and make commitments on behalf of large numbers of political actors. Class‐based

politics certainly facilitates such coordination. Working‐class solidarity enables discipline,

organization, and convergence around a common list of political demands.

        Politics looks very different when urban production is organized largely around

informality, a diffuse set of small enterprises and petty services. Common interests among the

non‐elite are harder to define, political organization faces greater obstacles, and personalistic

or ethnic identities dominate over class solidarity. Elites do not face political actors that can

claim to represent the non‐elites and make binding commitments on their behalf. Moreover,

elites may prefer – and have the ability – to divide and rule, pursuing populism and patronage

politics, and playing one set of non‐elites against another.8 Furthermore, elites themselves may

be much more divided, based on clans or other loyalties. Consequently, grand political bargains

become less likely. Political institutions remain fragile and personalized.

        In short, premature deindustrialization may hamper both the development of middle‐

class values and the emergence of political settlements that allowed the consolidation of

democracy in today’s advanced countries.

8
 See Makatos and Xefteris (2014) for a model in which the rich exploits the heterogeneity among the non‐rich to
sustain policies that are biased towards their own interests.
                                                       ‐26‐


        On the face of it, this conclusion appears to be contradicted by the spread of democracy

around the world. More countries in the developing world are formally democratic today than

has ever been the case. However, upon closer look, political life in many if not most of these

countries is marred by civil rights abuses and popular discontent that periodically erupts in

protests and riots. Governments pursue an illiberal brand of politics and are democratic only in

name. For the most part, democracy in the developing world remains either a within‐elite affair

or takes the form of populism. Such political systems have been described and analyzed by

political scientists under various headings such as “illiberal democracy” (Zakaria, 2007),

“competitive authoritarianisms” (Levitsky and Way, 2010), and other types of “hybrid regimes”

(Karl, 1995).9 Diamond (2015) talks of a “democratic recession” around the world.

        Whether these syndromes of democratic malfunction are really linked with the trends

of premature industrialization I have identified in this paper remains to be demonstrated. The

arguments I have just made are no more than hypotheses. But they seem sufficiently plausible

to warrant further scrutiny.




9
  We can see the disappointment in the tenor of articles published in the Journal of Democracy over the course of
its existence. When the journal was inaugurated in 1990, the editors’ introduction in the first issue was “animated
by the view that democracy was experiencing a ‘remarkable worldwide resurgence.’” Twenty‐five year later, the
journal’s anniversary issue in January 2015 carried a symposium titled “Is Democracy in Decline?” (Plattner, 2015).
                                              ‐27‐


REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, and James Robinson, Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York, 2009.

Amirapu, Amrit, and Arvind Subramanian, “Manufacturing or Services? An Indian Illustration of
a Development Dilemma,” Center for Global Development and Peterson Institute, Washington,
DC, January 2015.

Buera, Francisco J., and Joseph P. Kaboski, “Can Traditional Theories of Structural Change Fit
the Data?” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(2–3), April–May 2009, pp. 469–477

Dasgupta, Sukti, and Ajit Singh, “Manufacturing, Services and Premature Deindustrialization in
Developing Countries: A Kaldorian Analysis,” UNU‐WIDER, United Nations University Research
Paper, No. 2006/49, 2006.

Diamond, Larry, “Facing Up to the Democratic Recession,” Journal of Democracy, 26.1, January
2015, pp. 141‐155.

Felipe, Jesus, Aashish Mehta, and Changyong Rhee, “Manufacturing Matters… but It’s the Jobs
That Count,” Asian Development Bank Economics Working Paper Series, No. 420, November
2014.

Foellmi, Reto, and Josef Zweimuller, “Structural Change, Engel’s Consumption Cycles and
Kaldor’s Facts of Economic Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 2008, pp. 1317–1328.

Huntington, Samuel P., Political Order in Changing Societies, Yale University Press, New Haven,
1968.

Karl, Terry L., “The Hybrid Regimes of Central America,” Journal of Democracy, 6(3), 1995, pp.
72–86.

Lawrence, Robert Z., and Lawrence Edwards, “US Employment Deindustrialization: Insights
from History and the International Experience,” Peterson Institute for International Economics,
Policy Brief No. PB13‐27, October 2013.

Levitsky, Steven, and Lucan A. Way, Competitive Authoritarianism: Hybrid Regimes After the
Cold War, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York, 2010.

Maddison, Angus, Statistics on World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP, 1‐2008 AD, 2009,
available for download at http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/oriindex.htm.

Makatos, Konstantinos, and Dimitrios Xefteris, “Divide and Rule: Redistribution in a Model with
Differentiated Candidates,” London School of Economics, September 2014.
                                              ‐28‐



Matsuyama, Kiminori, “Structural Change in an Interdependent World: A Global View of
Manufacturing Decline,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(2–3), April–May 2009,
pp. 478–486.

Ngai, L. Rachel, and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Structural Change in a Multi‐Sector Model of
Growth,” Center for Economic Performance, London School of Economics, April 2004.

Nickell, Stephen, Stephen Redding, and Joanna Swaffield, “The Uneven Pace of
Deindustrialization in the OECD,” Center for Economic Performance, London School of
Economics, May 2008.

Plattner, Marc F, “Is Democracy in Decline?” Journal of Democracy, 26.1, January 2015, pp. 5‐10.

Rodrik, Dani, “Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
128 (1), February 2013, 165‐204.

Rodrik, Dani, “The Past, Present, and Future of Economic Growth,” in Franklin Allen and others,
Towards a Better Global Economy: Policy Implications for Citizens Worldwide in the 21st
Century, Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York, 2014.

Scott, James C., Two Cheers for Anarchism: Six Easy Pieces on Autonomy, Dignity, and
Meaningful Work and Play, Princeton University Press, Princeton and London, 2014.

Timmer, Marcel P., G.J. de Vries, and K. de Vries, “Patterns of Structural Change in Developing
Countries,” Groningen Growth and Development Center Research Memorandum 149, 2014.

Timmer, Marcel P., ed., “The World Input‐Output Database (WIOD): Contents, Sources and
Methods,” WIOD Working Paper Number 10, 2014.

Zakaria, Fareed, The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and Abroad, revised
edition, W.W. Norton, New York and London, 2007.
                                          ‐29‐


APPENDIX


A. Country and variable coverage in the GGDC 10‐Sector Database

Acronym        Country          Value Added in      Value Added in     Employment by
                                current prices      constant prices        sector
sub‐Saharan Africa
BWA      Botswana            1964‐2010           1964‐2010            1964‐2010
ETH      Ethiopia            1961‐2010           1961‐2010            1961‐2010
GHA      Ghana               1960‐2010           1960‐2010            1960‐2010
KEN      Kenya               1960‐2010           1964‐2010            1969‐2010
MWI      Malawi              1960‐2010           1966‐2010            1966‐2010
MUS      Mauritius           1960‐2010           1970‐2010            1970‐2010
NGA      Nigeria             1960‐2010           1960‐2010            1960‐2011
         Nigeria (2014 GDP                       2010‐2013 (in 2010
NGA(alt)                     2010‐2013
         revision)                               prices)
SEN      Senegal             1960‐2010           1970‐2010            1970‐2010
ZAF      South Africa        1960‐2010           1960‐2010            1960‐2010
TZA      Tanzania            1960‐2010           1960‐2010            1960‐2010
ZMB      Zambia              1960‐2010           1965‐2010            1965‐2010
North Africa
EGY      Egypt               1960‐2013           1960‐2012            1960‐2012
MOR      Morocco             1970‐2012           1960‐2012            1960‐2012
Asia
CHN      China               1952‐2011           1952‐2010            1952‐2011
HKG      Hong Kong           1970‐2011           1974‐2011            1974‐2011
IND      India               1950‐2012           1950‐2012            1960‐2010
IDN      Indonesia           1966‐2012           1960‐2012            1961‐2012
JPN      Japan               1953‐2011           1953‐2011            1953‐2012
KOR      South Korea         1953‐2011           1953‐2011            1963‐2011
MYS      Malaysia            1970‐2011           1970‐2011            1975‐2011
PHL      Philippines         1971‐2012           1971‐2012            1971‐2012
SGP      Singapore           1970‐2012           1960‐2012            1970‐2011
TWN      Taiwan              1951‐2012           1961‐2012            1963‐2012
THA      Thailand            1951‐2011           1951‐2011            1960‐2011
Latin America
                                               ‐30‐


ARG     Argentina               1950‐2011             1950‐2011               1950‐2011
BOL     Bolivia                 1958‐2011             1950‐2011               1950‐2010
BRA     Brazil                  1990‐2011             1950‐2011               1950‐2011
CHL     Chile                   1950‐2011             1950‐2011               1950‐2012
COL     Colombia                1950‐2011             1950‐2011               1950‐2010
CRI     Costa Rica              1950‐2011             1950‐2011               1950‐2011
MEX     Mexico                  1950‐2011             1950‐2011               1950‐2012
PER     Peru                    1950‐2011             1950‐2011               1960‐2011
VEN     Venezuela               1960‐2012             1950‐2012               1950‐2011
North America
        United States of
USA                             1947‐2010             1947‐2010               1950‐2010
        America
Europe
                                                      1950‐1991 (1991
DEW       West Germany          1968‐1991                                     1950‐1991
                                                      prices)
DNK       Denmark               1970‐2011             1947‐2009               1948‐2011
ESP       Spain                 1970‐2011             1947‐2009               1950‐2011
FRA       France                1970‐2011             1950‐2009               1950‐2011
GBR       United Kingdom        1960‐2011             1949‐2009               1948‐2011
ITA       Italy                 1970‐2011             1951‐2009               1951‐2011
NLD       The Netherlands       1970‐2011             1949‐2009               1950‐2011
SWE       Sweden                1970‐2011             1950‐2009               1950‐2011


Source: Timmer et al. (2014). See http://www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/data/10‐sector‐database.


B. Countries included in the Socioeconomic Accounts of the World Input‐Output Database
   (WIOD).

Austria, Germany, Netherlands, Canada, China, Belgium, Greece, Poland, United
States, India, Bulgaria, Hungary, Portugal, Japan, Cyprus, Ireland, Romania, South
Korea, Czech Republic, Italy, Slovak Republic, Australia, Denmark, Latvia, Slovenia,
Brazil, Taiwan, Estonia, Lithuania, Spain, Mexico, Turkey, Finland, Luxembourg,
Sweden, Indonesia, France, Malta, United Kingdom, Russia.

Source: Timmer (2012), latest update available at
http://www.wiod.org/protected3/data/update_sep12/SEA%20Sources_June2014.pd
f.
           ‐31‐




Figure 1
                                                                     ‐32‐




                                            4
   relative price deflator of manufacturing
                 2      1      3




                                                1960   1970   1980           1990         2000   2010
                                                                      Year

                                                                USA                 GBR
                                                                KOR                 MEX


Figure 2
                                   ‐33‐



                Estimated period coefficients: manemp
                      (with 95% confidence intervals)

    0
            1960s      1970s         1980s         1990s   2000+
 ‐0.02


 ‐0.04


 ‐0.06


 ‐0.08


  ‐0.1


 ‐0.12


 ‐0.14

Figure 3a
                                   ‐34‐



                Estimated period coefficients: nommva
                      (with 95% confidence intervals)

    0
            1960s      1970s         1980s         1990s   2000+
 ‐0.02


 ‐0.04


 ‐0.06


 ‐0.08


  ‐0.1


 ‐0.12


 ‐0.14

Figure 3b
                                   ‐35‐



                Estimated period coefficients: realmva
                      (with 95% confidence intervals)

    0
            1960s      1970s         1980s         1990s   2000+
 ‐0.02


 ‐0.04


 ‐0.06


 ‐0.08


  ‐0.1


 ‐0.12


 ‐0.14

Figure 3c
                                                               ‐36‐


                Estimated year coefficients for employment of different skill types
 0.005



    0
         1996   1997     1998      1999         2000   2001   2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009

‐0.005



 ‐0.01



‐0.015



 ‐0.02



‐0.025

                low‐skill employment

 ‐0.03          intermediate‐skill employment

                high‐skill employment
‐0.035



 ‐0.04



‐0.045

Figure 4
                                                        ‐37‐



   .4


                                                                                                       GBR 1961
                                                               MUS 1990
                                                                                                            SWE 1961
   .3




                                                                                                               ITA 1980
                                                                                            KOR 1989           DNK 1962
                                                                 ARG 1958     MYS 1997                      JPN 1969
                                                                                                         USANLD
                                                                                                              1953
                                                                                                                 1964
                                                         CHL 1954                                              FRA 1974
                                                                                                       ESP 1975

                                                                 CRI 1992
   .2




                                                                                      MEX 1980
                      NGA 1982
                                                                                 ZAF 1981
                                                                            BRA 1986
               GHA 1978                                   PER 1971
                                       IDN 2001   COL 1970
                      IND 2002
   .1




                            ZMB 1985
   0




           6                      7                 8                9                                            10
                          income at which manufacturing employment peaks (logs)

                   peak manufacturing employment share                                       Fitted values


Figure 5
                                                                                          ‐38‐


                                              Simulated manufacturing employment shares
 0.25



                        pre‐1990


  0.2                   post‐1990




 0.15




  0.1




 0.05




   0
        6




                                    7




                                                                 8




                                                                                              9




                                                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                                           11




                                                                                                                                                                                            12
            6.2

                  6.4

                        6.6

                              6.8



                                        7.2

                                               7.4

                                                     7.6

                                                           7.8



                                                                     8.2

                                                                           8.4

                                                                                 8.6

                                                                                        8.8



                                                                                                  9.2

                                                                                                        9.4

                                                                                                              9.6

                                                                                                                    9.8



                                                                                                                               10.2

                                                                                                                                      10.4

                                                                                                                                             10.6

                                                                                                                                                    10.8



                                                                                                                                                                11.2

                                                                                                                                                                       11.4

                                                                                                                                                                              11.6

                                                                                                                                                                                     11.8
                                                                                       ln 1990 US $

Figure 6
                                                                                        ‐39‐


                                                    Simulated manufacturing ouput shares
                                                                    (MVA/GDP at constant prices)
  0.3


                        pre‐1990

 0.25
                        post‐1990



  0.2




 0.15




  0.1




 0.05




   0
        6

            6.2

                  6.4

                        6.6

                              6.8

                                    7

                                        7.2

                                              7.4

                                                    7.6

                                                          7.8

                                                                8

                                                                     8.2

                                                                           8.4

                                                                                 8.6

                                                                                       8.8

                                                                                             9

                                                                                                 9.2

                                                                                                       9.4

                                                                                                             9.6

                                                                                                                   9.8

                                                                                                                         10

                                                                                                                              10.2

                                                                                                                                     10.4

                                                                                                                                            10.6

                                                                                                                                                   10.8

                                                                                                                                                          11

                                                                                                                                                               11.2

                                                                                                                                                                      11.4

                                                                                                                                                                             11.6

                                                                                                                                                                                    11.8

                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                       ln 1990 US $
‐0.05

Figure 7
Table 1: Baseline regressions

                                    manemp         nommva    realmava         manemp        nommva      realmava
                                                common sample                            largest sample
ln population                         0.115*       0.142*          ‐0.113*    0.122*        0.192*      ‐0.039
                                      (0.021)       (0.029)        (0.028)     (0.021)       (0.027)     (0.025)

ln population squared                 ‐0.000       ‐0.002*         0.005*     ‐0.001        ‐0.004*     0.003*
                                      (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)

ln GDP per capita                     0.321*       0.230*          0.204*     0.316*        0.266*      0.262*
                                      (0.027)       (0.031)        (0.025)     (0.026)       (0.031)     (0.027)

ln GDP per capita squared            ‐0.018*       ‐0.013*         ‐0.009*    ‐0.018*       ‐0.014*     ‐0.012*
                                      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)

1960s                                ‐0.029*      ‐0.011***        ‐0.008     ‐0.018*      ‐0.010***    ‐0.028*
                                      (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.005)     (0.004)       (0.006)     (0.007)

1970s                                ‐0.044*       ‐0.021*         ‐0.004     ‐0.033*      ‐0.014**     ‐0.026*
                                      (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.006)     (0.005)       (0.007)     (0.008)

1980s                                ‐0.066*       ‐0.033*        ‐0.011***   ‐0.054*       ‐0.028*     ‐0.034*
                                      (0.007)       (0.008)        (0.007)     (0.006)       (0.008)     (0.009)

1990s                                ‐0.086*       ‐0.052*        ‐0.017**    ‐0.074*       ‐0.049*     ‐0.040*
                                      (0.009)       (0.009)        (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.009)     (0.010)

2000s+                               ‐0.117*       ‐0.085*         ‐0.035*    ‐0.105*       ‐0.085*     ‐0.059*
                                      (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.009)     (0.009)       (0.010)     (0.011)

country fixed effects                   yes          yes             yes        yes           yes         yes

number of countries                     42            42             42         42            42          42

number of observations                1,995         1,995           1,995      2,209         2,128       2,302


Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Levels of statistitical signficance: *: 99%; **: 95%; ***: 90%.
Table 2: Alternative data sets

                                    manemp               nommva                 realmva
                                    ADB/ILO         ADB/UN   ADB/WB         ADB/UN ADB/WB

ln population                         0.196*         0.194*       0.260*     0.008      ‐0.044
                                      (0.043)         (0.026)     (0.031)    (0.019)    (0.029)

ln population squared                ‐0.004*         ‐0.004*      ‐0.007*    0.001     0.002**
                                      (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)

ln GDP per capita                     0.693*         0.238*       0.146*    0.060*     0.057*
                                      (0.052)         (0.016)     (0.019)    (0.015)    (0.017)

ln GDP per capita squared            ‐0.039*         ‐0.013*      ‐0.008*   ‐0.002** ‐0.002***
                                      (0.003)         (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)

1980s                                ‐0.023*         ‐0.011*      ‐0.002    ‐0.006*     0.000
                                      (0.002)         (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.002)

1990s                                ‐0.043*         ‐0.029*      ‐0.010*   ‐0.016*     ‐0.003
                                      (0.004)         (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.003)

2000s+                               ‐0.065*         ‐0.052*      ‐0.030*   ‐0.024*    ‐0.009**
                                      (0.005)         (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.003)

country fixed effects                   yes            yes         yes        yes        yes

number of countries                     87             124         119        124        112

number of observations                1,947           4,378       3,691      5,070      3,312



Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Levels of statistitical signficance: *: 99%; **: 95%; ***: 90%.
Table 3: Country groups, manemp



                                                                                                      Sub‐
                                                                                         Sub‐      Saharan
                                       all       developed         Latin               Saharan    Africa (excl.
                                    countries    countries        America     Asia      Africa    Mauritius)

ln population                         0.122*       ‐0.652*        0.191*     0.789*    0.199*       0.178*
                                      (0.021)       (0.122)        (0.032)   (0.102)    (0.019)      (0.014)


ln population squared                 ‐0.001       0.017*         ‐0.003*    ‐0.025*   ‐0.005*      ‐0.004*
                                      (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.001)      (0.000)


ln GDP per capita                     0.316*       1.070*         0.902*     0.912*    0.190*       0.148*
                                      (0.026)       (0.088)        (0.071)   (0.071)    (0.024)      (0.018)


ln GDP per capita squared            ‐0.018*       ‐0.057*        ‐0.052*    ‐0.051*   ‐0.014*      ‐0.011*
                                      (0.002)       (0.005)        (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.002)      (0.001)


1960s                                ‐0.018*        ‐0.004        ‐0.027*    ‐0.003      n.a.          n.a.
                                      (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)   (0.013)


1970s                                ‐0.033*       ‐0.021*        ‐0.050*    0.016      0.002        ‐0.003
                                      (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.006)   (0.016)    (0.004)      (0.003)


1980s                                ‐0.054*       ‐0.052*        ‐0.079*    0.022      0.004       ‐0.021*
                                      (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.008)   (0.019)    (0.007)      (0.005)


1990s                                ‐0.074*       ‐0.072*        ‐0.096*    0.013      0.007       ‐0.033*
                                      (0.008)       (0.009)        (0.010)   (0.022)    (0.012)      (0.007)


2000s+                               ‐0.105*       ‐0.096*        ‐0.131*    0.004      0.007       ‐0.035*
                                      (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.012)   (0.026)    (0.014)      (0.008)


country fixed effects                   yes          yes            yes       yes        yes          yes

number of countries                     42            10             9         11        11            10

number of observations                2,209          575            545       519        524          481




Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Levels of statistitical signficance: *: 99%; **: 95%; ***: 90%.
Table 4: Country groups, nommva



                                                                                                        Sub‐
                                                                                           Sub‐      Saharan
                                       all       developed         Latin                 Saharan    Africa (excl.
                                    countries    countries        America      Asia       Africa    Mauritius)

ln population                         0.192*       0.752**         0.223*      1.009*    0.552*       0.519*
                                      (0.027)       (0.309)        (0.046)     (0.081)    (0.049)      (0.045)


ln population squared                ‐0.004*      ‐0.016**         ‐0.007*    ‐0.029*    ‐0.017*      ‐0.014*
                                      (0.001)       (0.008)        (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.001)      (0.001)


ln GDP per capita                     0.266*       1.024*         0.308***     0.877*     0.047        0.027
                                      (0.031)       (0.139)        (0.157)     (0.054)    (0.061)      (0.056)


ln GDP per capita squared            ‐0.014*       ‐0.059*        ‐0.016***   ‐0.050*     ‐0.007       ‐0.006
                                      (0.002)       (0.008)        (0.009)     (0.003)    (0.005)      (0.004)


1960s                               ‐0.010***       ‐0.003         ‐0.001      0.008       n.a.          n.a.
                                      (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.008)     (0.007)


1970s                                ‐0.014**      ‐0.035*         ‐0.006      0.032*    0.030*       0.017*
                                      (0.007)       (0.010)        (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.005)      (0.005)


1980s                                ‐0.028*       ‐0.054*         ‐0.002      0.036*    0.029*        ‐0.008
                                      (0.008)       (0.011)        (0.014)     (0.014)    (0.008)      (0.009)


1990s                                ‐0.049*       ‐0.062*         ‐0.010     0.033***    0.010       ‐0.050*
                                      (0.009)       (0.013)        (0.018)     (0.018)    (0.010)      (0.013)


2000s+                               ‐0.085*       ‐0.079*        ‐0.039**     0.032      ‐0.004      ‐0.079*
                                      (0.010)       (0.015)        (0.020)     (0.022)    (0.012)      (0.016)


country fixed effects                   yes          yes             yes        yes        yes          yes

number of countries                     42            10             9           11         11           10

number of observations                2,128          451            498         576        565          512




Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Levels of statistitical signficance: *: 99%; **: 95%; ***: 90%.
Table 5: Country groups, realmva

                                                                                                       Sub‐
                                                                                          Sub‐      Saharan
                                       all       developed         Latin                Saharan    Afirca (excl.
                                    countries    countries        America     Asia       Afirca    Mauritius)

ln population                         ‐0.039       ‐4.564*         0.263*     0.251*    0.062**     0.053***
                                      (0.025)       (0.776)        (0.027)    (0.084)    (0.029)      (0.031)


ln population squared                 0.003*       0.113*         ‐0.004*    ‐0.011*     ‐0.001       ‐0.000
                                      (0.001)       (0.019)        (0.001)    (0.003)    (0.001)      (0.001)


ln GDP per capita                     0.262*       0.778*         ‐0.135**    0.737*    0.123*       0.106*
                                      (0.027)       (0.129)        (0.059)    (0.040)    (0.025)      (0.024)


ln GDP per capita squared            ‐0.012*       ‐0.036*        0.006***   ‐0.038*    ‐0.009*      ‐0.008*
                                      (0.002)       (0.008)        (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.002)      (0.002)


1960s                                ‐0.028*      ‐0.021***       ‐0.011*    0.011***     n.a.          n.a.
                                      (0.007)       (0.011)        (0.004)    (0.006)


1970s                                ‐0.026*        0.007         ‐0.017*     0.027*    0.017*       0.012*
                                      (0.008)       (0.015)        (0.006)    (0.010)    (0.005)      (0.004)


1980s                                ‐0.034*        0.006         ‐0.052*    0.034**    0.015**       ‐0.004
                                      (0.009)       (0.018)        (0.007)    (0.013)    (0.006)      (0.006)


1990s                                ‐0.040*        0.013         ‐0.078*    0.041**     0.011       ‐0.022*
                                      (0.010)       (0.023)        (0.008)    (0.017)    (0.009)      (0.008)


2000s+                               ‐0.059*        0.021         ‐0.101*    0.044**     ‐0.003      ‐0.042*
                                      (0.011)       (0.027)        (0.010)    (0.020)    (0.011)      (0.010)


country fixed effects                   yes          yes            yes        yes        yes          yes

number of countries                     42            10             9          11         11           10

number of observations                2,302          592            556        577        530          487




Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Levels of statistitical signficance: *: 99%; **: 95%; ***: 90%.
Table 6: Results by manufacturing specialization
                                            non‐manufactures exporters                                manufactures exporters


                                                                  share of manufactured                          share of manufactured
                                    manufactured exports <          exports < share of    manufactured exports >   exports > share of
                                            75%                   manufactured imports            75%            manufactured imports
                                    manemp        realmva         manemp      realmva     manemp       realmva    manemp       realmva
ln population                         0.202*       0.146*         0.174*       0.130*       0.326*      0.034     0.444*        0.184*
                                      (0.025)       (0.031)        (0.028)     (0.035)      (0.031)     (0.034)    (0.025)      (0.033)

ln population squared                ‐0.003*      ‐0.001***       ‐0.002**     ‐0.001      ‐0.009*     ‐0.002**   ‐0.014*      ‐0.007*
                                      (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)

ln GDP per capita                     0.172*       0.314*         0.161*       0.314*       0.704*      0.645*    0.772*        0.627*
                                      (0.021)       (0.051)        (0.022)     (0.051)      (0.043)     (0.021)    (0.042)      (0.025)

ln GDP per capita squared            ‐0.010*       ‐0.018*        ‐0.009*     ‐0.017*      ‐0.039*     ‐0.033*    ‐0.042*      ‐0.032*
                                      (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.001)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.001)    (0.003)      (0.002)

1960s                                ‐0.032*       ‐0.055*        ‐0.028*     ‐0.057*       ‐0.004      0.004      ‐0.002      0.007***
                                      (0.004)       (0.011)        (0.004)     (0.011)      (0.006)     (0.003)    (0.005)      (0.004)

1970s                                ‐0.057*       ‐0.070*        ‐0.054*     ‐0.073*       ‐0.004      0.024*     ‐0.002       0.030*
                                      (0.005)       (0.013)        (0.005)     (0.013)      (0.008)     (0.005)    (0.008)      (0.005)

1980s                                ‐0.080*       ‐0.087*        ‐0.078*     ‐0.091*      ‐0.025*     0.014**    ‐0.020**      0.022*
                                      (0.006)       (0.015)        (0.006)     (0.015)      (0.009)     (0.007)    (0.009)      (0.007)

1990s                                ‐0.093*       ‐0.097*        ‐0.093*     ‐0.101*      ‐0.057*      0.013     ‐0.050*      0.019**
                                      (0.007)       (0.016)        (0.008)     (0.017)      (0.011)     (0.008)    (0.011)      (0.009)

2000s+                               ‐0.120*       ‐0.123*        ‐0.123*     ‐0.128*      ‐0.089*      0.012     ‐0.079*       0.014
                                      (0.009)       (0.018)        (0.009)     (0.019)      (0.013)     (0.010)    (0.013)      (0.011)

country fixed effects                   yes          yes            yes          yes         yes         yes        yes          yes
number of countries                     26            26             26          26           16          16        16           16
number of observations                1,315         1,374          1,327       1,373         801         834        789          835


Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Levels of statistitical signficance: *: 99%; **: 95%; ***: 90%.
Table 7: Results by manufacturing specialization (ADB/ILO/WB data)
                                            non‐manufactures exporters                                manufactures exporters


                                                                  share of manufactured                            share of manufactured
                                   manufactured exports <           exports < share of    manufactured exports >     exports > share of
                                           75%                    manufactured imports            75%              manufactured imports
                                    manemp        realmva         manemp      realmva     manemp       realmva     manemp      realmva

ln population                         0.139*      ‐0.094**         0.130*     ‐0.131*       ‐0.336     0.136**       0.022      0.116*
                                      (0.049)       (0.040)        (0.046)     (0.050)      (0.130)     (0.053)     (0.1135)    (0.043)

ln population squared                 ‐0.002       0.004*          ‐0.002      0.006*       0.001      ‐0.005*      ‐0.001     ‐0.004*
                                      (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.001)

ln GDP per capita                     0.525*       0.065*          0.528*      0.078*       0.825*      0.173*      0.817*      0.102*
                                      (0.056)       (0.017)        (0.061)     (0.018)      (0.008)     (0.032)     (0.069)     (0.031)

ln GDP per capita squared            ‐0.030*       ‐0.003*         ‐0.030*    ‐0.004*      ‐0.045*     ‐0.008*      ‐0.045*     ‐0.003
                                      (0.003)       (0.001)        (0.003)     (0.001)      (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.002)

1980s                                ‐0.028*       ‐0.008*         ‐0.028*    ‐0.007*      ‐0.018*      0.018*      ‐0.019*     0.010*
                                      (0.003)       (0.002)        (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)

1990s                                ‐0.042*       ‐0.016*         ‐0.042*    ‐0.013*      ‐0.049*      0.023*      ‐0.049*    0.009**
                                      (0.004)       (0.003)        (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.004)

2000s+                               ‐0.066*       ‐0.028*         ‐0.166*    ‐0.026*      ‐0.069*      0.034*      ‐0.071*     0.015*
                                      (0.006)       (0.004)        (0.006)     (0.0049)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)

country fixed effects                   yes          yes             yes         yes         yes         yes          yes         yes
number of countries                     55            80             52          73           32          32          35          39
number of observations                1,058         2,411           1,028      2,238         889         901         919        1,074



Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Levels of statistitical signficance: *: 99%; **: 95%; ***: 90%.
Table 8: Regressions with interaction terms for post‐1990

                                                 manemp           realmava
ln population                                      0.166*          ‐0.016
                                                   (0.019)         (0.025)

ln population squared                             ‐0.005*          0.001
                                                   (0.001)         (0.001)

ln GDP per capita                                  0.326*          0.273*
                                                   (0.018)         (0.029)

ln GDP per capita squared                         ‐0.018*         ‐0.013*
                                                   (0.001)         (0.002)

ln GDP per capita X post‐1990                      0.031*          0.015*
                                                   (0.002)         (0.002)

ln GDP per capita squared X post‐1990             ‐0.004*         ‐0.002*
                                                   (0.000)         (0.000)

country fixed effects                               yes             yes
Number of countries                                  42              42
number of observations                             2,209           2,302


Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Levels of statistitical signficance: *: 99%; **: 95%; ***: 90%.
Table 9: Maximum industrialization levels, pre‐ and post‐1990

                                        manemp                       realmva
                                  pre‐1990   post‐1990        pre‐1990     post‐1990

maximum share                         21.5%      18.9%            27.9%        24.1%

reached at income level
(GDP per capita, in 1990      $      12,088 $    4,447    $      49,021 $     22,026
international $)

Source: Author's calculations; see text.
