NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPERFECT INFORMATION, CREDIT
MARKETS AND UNEMPLOYMENT

Bruce C. Greenwald
Joseph E. Stiglitz

Working Paper No. 2093

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1986

Invited paper presented at the European Economic Association
Meetings, Vienna, Austria, August 28—31, 1986. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in Economic
Fluctuations and Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #2093
December 1986

Imperfect Information, Credit Markets and Unemployment

ABSTRACT

This paper describes how imperfect information in both
capital and 1abor markets can, in a context of maximizing firms

and perfectly flexible prices and wages, give rise to cyclical
variations in unemployment whose character closely resembles that
of observed business cycles.

Bruce C. Greenwald
Bell Communications Research

Morristown, NJ 07960

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Princeton University

Princeton, NJ 08544

The central problem of macro-economics is to explain the level and variability of unemployment.
Over the past decade, a consensus has developed that Keynesian explanations are, at best, incomplete, at

worst, misleading. It is commonly viewed that Keynes' central assumption was the rigidity of money
wages, for which no adequate theoretical justification was provided. In fact, money wages are not rigid -they fell by a third in the Great Depression, and there were wage cuts in many industries in the early 80's.

Moreover, unemployment is observed in inflationary economies -- where the constraint on wages not falling

is presumably not binding -- and indeed, there is little convincing evidence that industries with greater
wage and price flexibility (such as construction) exhibit less variability in employment.'
A consensus has not developed, however, on an alternative explanation -- but perhaps that is because

unemployment is a complex phenomena, and no single theory will explain all of its facets. We present here
a new theory, based on informational imperfections in the capital market. We show how this theory, when
accompanied by efficiency wage models (based in part on informational problems within the labor market)

can go a long way towards providing a theoretical justification for a number of heretofore unexplained
aspects of unemployment.2

What Is To Be Explained
A theory of unemployment must be able to explain the level, variability, form (that is temporary
lay-offs vs. reduced hours), and pattern of unemployment (both across sectors and types of individuals).3

For instance, in the presence of wage and price rigidities, if the economy is constrained, variations in
employment entail the existence of exogenous, unexplained shocks to the marginal product of labor.4 It is
hard to identify changes in technology which are sufficiently large to account for the observed variability
in employment, and neoclassical theories of consumption and investment suggest there are strong economic

forces that ought to smooth out demand fluctuations. We shall show that informational imperfections
provide a set of explanations for both the nature and apparent magnitudes of these shocks, as well as of
the pattern, level, and form of unemployment.

Unemployment, like cancer, is not a single disease, but an assortment of maladies. The nature of
unemployment (and its variability) differs in the primary as opposed to secondary sectors. Primary sector

jobs typically involve substantial job-related training, large potential variation in individual job performance, and hence a demand for relatively high quality workers, long term career relationships between
workers and firms, and relatively high wages. Secondary sector jobs in contrast are associated with little

-2training, high turnover, and relatively low wages. Not surprisingly, then, the variability in unemployment
in these two sectors differs. Given these differences, which are presumably rooted in the technologies of the

jobs in question, the determinants of both levels and variations in unemployment in the two sectors are
likely to be different. We argue that although informational imperfections provide explanations for unemployment in both sectors, the models and factors involved will naturally differ between sectors.

Explanation of Variations in the Demand for Labor
One central function of capital markets is to distribute the risks associated with any particular enterprise among a large number of highly diversified investors. The most familiar vehicle for doing this is the

sale of common stock. However, as in the case of most other insurance markets (health, life, etc.), infor-

mational imperfections (e.g. moral hazard, adverse selection) will interfere with the operation of these
financial mechanisms.5 For example, if a company's management with superior "inside" information about

the company's likely future prospects is willing to sell common stock to relatively less well-informed "out-

side" investors at the current market price, then one obvious inference is that this market price does not
undervalue and probably overvalues the company. As a result, financial markets should (and do) react to

stock issue announcements by lowering the common stock prices of the companies in question. This, in

turn, will inhibit the issue of equity and company managements will be forced to seek other means of
insuring against the risks associated with their operations. Whether for this or other reasons, the assump-

tion of limited equity markets appears to provide a good working hypothesis for most countries at most
times.

Accumulation of "equity" over time by retained earnings is one means of accommodating these risks

in the longer run. However, in the short run, restrictions in the level of company operations may be the
only way of doing so. In the absence of complete futures markets,7 any output decision, involving as it
does investments in both working and fixed capital before output is sold, is inherently a risky investment

decision. Consequently changes in the economy which either increase the risks associated with a given
level of output or deplete the stock of firm equity (working) capital will be accompanied by a reduction in
the level of output and investment. If firms tend to hold real assets and nominal liabilities (i.e. fixed nominal debt contracts), then shocks which lead either to a decrease in the general price level (money shocks) or
the prices of good sold by each firm (relative demand shocks) will reduce the real equity levels of firms and,

accordingly, reduce output and investment. Increased uncertainty about factor prices (e.g. "oil shocks"),

relative price variations (associated, for example, with more rapid inflation) or the direction of public

-3policy will also reduce output. And, government interventions (e.g. in labor markets) which reduce the
flexibility of firms' responses to changing market conditions will have a similar effect.8

These increases in risk, relative to equity levels, increase the "risk premium" associated with any
increase in output and hence reduce the "effective" or "risk adjusted" marginal product of labor. Thus,
without relying on any artificial rigidities in prices, informational imperfections in capital markets can give

rise to potentially large fluctuations in the "effective" marginal product of labor in response to changing
conditions that in an economy with perfect markets would be absorbed with little or no impact on overall

economic activity. Moreover an asymmetric distribution of information between borrowers and lenders
may reinforce these basic effects (especially in response to monetary policy shifts) both as borrowers antici-

pate the possibility of having credit rationed in the future and as current credit constraints, by limiting
working capital investments, effectively reduce the marginal product of labor.9

Assume for simplicity that the utility of a firm's decision-makers (whether owner-entrepreneurs or
hired managers) is a function of end of period equity. Looking forward from the beginning of the period
(when decisions are made), end-of-period equity is a random variable,

=
where

f(t)

—

w1€

+ a_1

(1)

is the uncertain end-of-period price at which

the firm's output will be sold,
is the level of labor input,

f

is a production function of the usual sort,

we

is the wage paid to workers and

ac_i

is the beginning of period equity that the firm
inherits from period i—i.

With perfect capital markets, we would have to add new equity sales to the right-hand side of equation (1).

However, as argued above, informational imperfections in capital markets will limit these sales and for
simplicity we will assume that such equity sales are zero.10" Thus, equation (1) implicitly embodies the
informational imperfections in the capital market.

We will assume formally that in making decisions at the beginning of period t, a firm's decision
makers

max

-4where the utility function u is characterized by decreasing absolute risk aversion.
The first order condition determining the optimal level of employment by a firm facing a wage w5 is,
(2)

Rearrangement of terms and use of the fact that Eju'] = E[ü'5]E[755] + Cov[ii'5,5) yields the result

that

f'() (i + Cov[t',IJ= w5
where, by choosing suitable normalizations and units, E[ti'gl =

(3)

E[I = 1. On the left hand side of equa-

tion (3), the covariance of price levels and marginal utilities is negative as long as u is characterized by
aversion to risk in some degree. Thus, the impact of capital market imperfections is in general to reduce

the risk-adjusted marginal product of labor and consequently employment. Moreover, after a negative
demand shock (or moneta y disturbance) which impairs the equity base of a firm, as_i will be reduced and,

if u is characterized by decreasing absolute risk aversion, the negative covariance term will increase in
magnitude. If at the same time policy or other uncertainties increase the variance of the future price distribution, this effect will be reinforced and the demand for labor reduced further.
Lay-olTs

In the context of long-term employment relationships, lay-offs from which workers return to their
original employers are one kind of unemployment to which these fluctuations in demand may give rise.

Assume that a firm has a labor force, £, under long term contract at the beginning of period t and that
the marginal disutility of labor for these workers is w0 12

If the risk-adjusted marginal product of labor

falls far enough so that

j'() (i + Cov[ti'ss1) <w0 .

(4)

then a firm offering long term contracts will find it optimal to lay-off workers. The temporary nature of
these lay-offs, which would ensure that the workers involved not seek employment elsewhere, rests on the

possibility that the firm will ultimately restore its equity level through the accumulation of retained earnings over time. As its equity base increases the "risk" of increased output will decline, the effective marginal product of labor will rise and laid-off workers will be called back.13

-5There are several possible senses in which these temporary lay-offs represent involuntary unernployment. Most familiarly, but perhaps least importantly, workers who look only at the average wages implied

by their long term employment relationships would be willing to work at that average wage during the
period they are laid off. They may not see that the average wage is calculated to smooth out temporary
variations in the marginal product of labor and is not the appropriate standard for assessing incremental
employment opportunities. A second more significant sense in which these temporary lay-offs are "involun-

tary" is that they represent a Pareto inefficiency. With an appropriate mechanism for spreading the risks
associated with increased output and investment (or for circumventing credit rationing constraints), both
firms and workers could profit from the employment of laid-off workers. If firms offered (and workers were

willing to accept) equity shares in future output in lieu of current wages, then lay-offs could, in theory, be

avoided. However, the firms willing to do this are likely to be those whose future equity values are low
relative to their observable characteristics. And workers, just like outside equity investors, ought to avoid

such offers. Thus, informational failures are as likely to interfere with employment contracts that distribute risk as they are with explicit financial market arrangements.'4

Cyclical Variations in Hiring
In practice, many lay-offs do not lead to reemployment and durations of unemployment appear to
increase significantly in recessionary times. Wage levels in markets for unemployed workers without any
rehiring expectations from their most recent employers do not, therefore, appear to adjust quickly enough

to clear those markets.
Capital market imperfections can however account for this variability in employment, when the jobs

in question are primary sector jobs which involve substantial training costs and potential long term relationships between employers and workers. Assume as before that firms maximize a function, u, of their
end of period equity position. Assume, in addition, that an existing stock of trained workers represents the

only element of each firm's capital stock. Then the value of a firm's equity at the end of period i is

a — v + V*
where a1 represents the beginning of period net liquid assets of the firm, g is the present value of current

and committed future expenditures on the existing labor force and i is a certainty equivalent at the end
of period i of the uncertain future net value from that time forward of the labor supplied by a firm's existing labor force. This last quantity is uncertain looking forward from the beginning of period t. Some price

and productivity uncertainties will be resolved during the course of period I and their resolution is

-

reflected

in the distribution of i . The remaining uncertainties looking forward from the end of period

are subsumed in the process of taking the certainty equivalent. Here y and i are, of course, functions of
employment.

The first-order condition governing the hiring of an additional worker at the beginning of period t is

that

E[t [*Jo
which, using the appropriate normalization E[ii'J = 1, becomes
dyg

= E dig + Coy tI', di
-j-j--—

.

(5)

For simplicity we will assume that both the training costs borne by firms and the wages that they

implicitly undertake to pay take the form of fixed payments promises at the time a worker is employed
and that these have the same status as debt to the decision makers of the firm.15

If y comprises total wages, then

0

dy,

=Z

+h

1=0

where

Wg

is the wage payment promised in period t+i, 8 is an adjusted discount factor encompassing

the effects of both the real rate of interest and the probability that a worker quits before period i (i.e.

=

s where 6 is a discount factor of the normal sort and s, is the probability that a worker remains

with the firm through period t+i) and Is is the out-of-pocket cost of hiring and training a worker.

Ignoring endogenous variations in the probability of continued employment, the term di/dtg is the
end of period i certainly equivalent of

Li

(=0

where

—

Pt-s-i

I -5+i)\ t+i

. 8 1(7

is the future level of prices, f'(+) is the future marginal product of labor and, assuming firms

and workers have the same discount rates, ös- is the adjusted discount factor defined above. Assuming
that u is characterized by decreasing absolute risk aversion, decreases in the initial liquid equity of firms
(i.e. a,_1) and increases in uncertainty concerning future prices and marginal productivities will reduce the

value of the certainty equivalents that make up di/de,, reducing E(di,/de). In addition as at falls in

-7response to negative demand or monetary shocks in period i—i, the magnitude of the Cov[tdi/de],
which is negative, will increase. For both reasons, therefore, the right-hand side of
equation (5) will

decline in a recession. The right-hand side of equation (5) evaluated at a firm's existing level of employment represents the marginal 'value" to the firm from hiring an additional worker.
As firms accumulate equity over time, the right-hand side of equation (5) will rise and accordingly

dy÷i = °'
w÷1÷5, + h
U gj

•=

> dy

w÷151

+ h.

If this gap is sufficiently large (because in the depths of a recession firms are sufficiently risk averse) so
that, ignoring end effects (i.e. assuming workers are long lived relative to the length of a typical recession)

dy1

dyE

> (1+r,) —;-;-—

where rt is an appropriate real interest rate for workers, then it is rational for workers to delay taking a

long-term job until economic conditions improve. There are, in effect, no offers that firms would be willing

to make in the depths of a recession that workers would be willing to accept.

The resulting "unemployment" is involuntary in the sense that, absent informational imperfections,
there is a Pareto improving bargain that could be struck between workers and firms. It consists, as in the
lay-off case discussed above, of workers agreeing to accept contingent equity-like wage offers and absorb a

greater share of the risks associated with higher output. But since the firms likely to offer these contracts

(e.g. Eastern Airlines) are just the firms from whom workers do not want to accept them, such arrangements are difficult to make.16

Efficiency Wage Models
The models we have discussed explain fluctuations in the demand curve for labor. They also explain
why even with perfectly flexible wages, there may be lay-offs: at the wages which firms would be willing to
keep their employees, the employees are not willing to work; and though firms would be willing to promise

to pay workers in the future for current work, such promises are not credible, given the informational
imperfections.

During the past ten years, a different strand of literature has focused on a different set of limitations

on information and on contracting in the labor market as an explanation of wage rigidity and unemploy-

ment. This literature argues that for a variety of reasons (selection, incentive, morale, turnover) net

-8productivity increases with wages, sufficiently so that it may not pay firms to lower their wage, even in the
face of an excess supply of labor.17 These efficiency wage theories have been used to explain the existence of

competitive market equilibria with unemployment. Some versions of the theory explain why wages may
not change at all, in the face of a change in the demand for labor;'8 while in other versions'9 the real wage

falls somewhat, but not enough to absorb the full impact of the variability in the demand for labor. Thus,
in these models, the variability in the demand for labor arising from the capital market imperfections discussed in previous sections of this paper gives rise to variability in employment: the two theories are thus
complementary.2°

Capital market imperfections interact with efficiency wage theory in two other ways. First, many of
the efficiency wage arguments would be mitigated if workers had sufficient capital to post oonds, ensuring

their performance; but capital market imperfections mean that unless they have inherited or saved
sufficient capital, they cannot post an adequate bond. Indeed, in many instances the employment relationship itself arises from differential ownership of or access to capital.2'

Secondly, firms' responses to changes in environment are affected by their attitudes towards risk; and

the kinds of capital market imperfections on which we focused in previous sections induce risk averse
behavior on the part of many firms. Thus, consider a disturbance to the economy; and assume that firms
believe that, as a result of efficiency wage considerations, productivity depends on relative wages. There is

still some uncertainty about the effect of the disturbance on their workers' productivity, even were they to

keep their relative wage fixed; but this uncertainty increases if they change the relative wage. They may
believe that an increase (or decrease) in relative wages will increase profitability, but the increased uncertainty associated with such an action, combined with their risk aversion, induces them to keep wages fixed,

thus precluding the kinds of responses which would facilitate the adjustment of the economy to the disturbance.

Efficiency wage theory has been particularly successful in explaining the pattern and form of unem-

ployment, in explaining why there should be differential unemployment rates among different groups, in
explaining why changes in the demand for labor should have differential effects on different groups, and in

explaining why a reduction in the demand for labor should take the form of lay-offs rather than worksharing. It has not been able to explain why there should be fluctuations in the demand for labor (given

that technology and capital stock seem to vary little in the short run). Our theory of capital market
imperfections provides the missing link. For their part, efficiency wage theories are capable of explaining

-9unemployment in secondary sectors of the economy and the existence of long-lived non-cyclical queues for

primary sector jobs. Thus, they complete the full range of explanations of the various types of unemploy-

ment outlined in the introduction to this paper.

Footnotes
'This list of criticisms of the Keynesian model is not meant to be exhaustive. An early criticism was that
Keynes' theory predicted that real wages should rise in recessions, contrary to what in fact occurred.
Solow-Stiglitz [1968], Barro-Grossman [1976] and the subsequent fixed price literature resolved this
difficulty by simply assuming that firms were off their supply curve. But the other criticisms leveled
against the Keynesian model can also be leveled against most of the fixed price literature. Moreover,
all of these models suffer from one central criticism: they simply leave unexplained why firms do not
cut prices in order to sell more. Imperfect competition versions of these models do not provide a persuasive answer, for they must explain why the mark-up (the effective elasticity of demand) moves cyclically. (See Stiglitz [1984]).

2Several of the other explanations to be discussed in this session (such as the Insider-Outsider model) can
also be viewed as complementary with the theory to be presented here.

3An important distinction here must be maintained between (1) theories of chronic unemployment of the
kind that affects certain sectors and groups and seems to be increasingly characteristic of European
labor markets and (2) theories of cyclical variations in unemployment that have been the traditional
focus of macroeconomic concern with the "unemployment" problem. The incidence of these changes in
unemployment rates differs markedly, e.g. across race, sector, and industry.
4Similarly, models which assume market clearing (flexible real wages) must explain either why preferences
move cyclically, or why the marginal productivity schedule shifts. The recent work on real business

cycles, attempting to attribute cyclical variations in employment to technology shocks, has been
rightly criticized for being unable to identify events of sufficient importance that they could come anywhere near to explaining the observed variability in unemployment.
5See, for example, Arrow [1970], Wilson [1977], Rothschild-Stiglitz [1976] on insurance markets; Greenwald
[1979], Stiglitz [1976] on labor markets; Jaffee and Russell [1976], Stiglitz-Weiss [1981] and Ross [1977]
on financial markets and Akerlof [1970] for a general discussion of the adverse selection issue.

6For formal models of this phenomenon see Greenwald, Stiglitz and Weiss [1984], Majluf and Myers[1984]

and, in a slightly different spirit, Leland and Pyle [1977]. In fact, equity issue announcements are
accompanied by significant declines in stock prices of the issuing company (see Asquith and Mullins
[1983]) and this is presumably related to the observation that internally generated funds are by far
the predominant source of equity for most firms (see Taggart [1983]).

7The non-existence of many futures markets may also arise from imperfect information concerning the
quality and reliability of delivery on all but the simplest contracts.
8For a formal general equilibrium macroeconomic model of these phenomena see Greenwald-Stiglitz [1986].
9See Stiglitz-Weiss [1981].

'°A model having firms' managers being averse to the risk of bankruptcy but otherwise risk neutralpro-

duces results which are essentially similar to the generalized risk aversion assumed here. See
Greenwald-Stiglitz [1986] which includes a justification (to the extent it is necessary) for having utility
depend upon end of period equity.

11Dividends can be viewed as negative equity issues. Standard signalling arguments explain why firmsmay

be reluctant to adjust dividends in the face of changes in economic circumstances, and why

- 10 -

accordingly the dividend rates may, in the short run, be taken as fixed. Our model can be extended to

include the endogenous determination of the dividend level; this would complicate the analysis
without changing the basic conclusions.

12Since lifetime income depends on long term wages w0 should not vary with short term conditions. The
argument here is essentially that presented by Baily [1977], reinforced at critical points by the impact
of informational imperfections.

'3Note that in this analysis, we have assumed complete flexibility in the (shadow) wage paid workers in the
long term contract.

'4There remains the problem of why workers do not seek interim employment with other firms. There are
several reasons for this. First, since such employment is likely to be relatively short-lived it does not

pay to expend much effort searching for such jobs. Second, alternative employment in a laid-off
worker's speciality may not be available if similar firms are subject to the same "shocks". Third,
accepting and then quitting an interim job may involve substantial informational costs for a worker.
Acceptance of a "low-paying" alternative job may be taken as evidence that the worker has doubts
about his own abilities and/or his chances of rehiring by his original employer. If workers are better
informed about their own abilities than the market at large this "negative" signal may reduce their
future earnings. Also, if a temporary employer observes a worker's ability and does not attempt to
prevent his return to his original employer, this too may constitute a "negative" signal with adverse
consequences for future earnings (see Greenwald [1986]).. Notice that the latter arguments again
reflect imperfect information.

15

In practice, such fixed commitments make up only part of future wages with the remaining part depen-

dent on the future productivity of workers. This could be easily accommodated within the framework
outlined above by having g represent only the fixed commitment portion of wages and i be net of
the contingent portion of wages. The important constraint in what follows is that the mix of fixed to
contingent labor costs not be freely variable. The informational argument in support of this kind of
constraint is similar to that supporting the no equity constraint. Firms that deviate from common
practice by requiring that workers pay for hiring and training costs and by offering wages that are
heavily weighted toward contingent payments (essentially equity in the firm) are disproportionately
likely to be weak firms or firms who are prone not to fulfill contingent promises. In either case workers are presumably likely to avoid such firms.

'6Two final remarks ought to be made about this kind of unemployment. First, in contrast to many
models of cyclical unemployment, it arises precisely because workers recognize that they are in a recession, not because they are unable to distinguish between local and economy wide conditions. Second,
the reason workers do not accept jobs and quit for new ones when conditions improve must depend on
the informational cost (stigma) attached to such behavior discussed above. If this were not the case,
then such behavior would itself deter hiring by firms since would now be small, reducing di/d

and wages but not h.
17See Yellen [1984] or Stiglitz [1987] for a survey of these models.
'8See Stiglitz [1985].

'9See Shapiro-Stiglitz [1984].

20Other versions of the efficiency wage theory give less clear cyclical predictions. Thus, in the selection
version, if the reservation (self-employment) wage falls in a recession, the primary sector wage may
fall more or less proportionately.
Also, there has been some concern about the consistency of observed patterns of cyclical movements in productivity and wages with the effort-efficiency wage model. The threat of unemployment
should presumably induce retained workers to work even harder in recessionary periods, yet productivity typically declines. As we have argued, however, in the primary sector workers have long term
relationships, and the incentive to work is provided by the long term relationships, and the value of
this is enhanced by some wage/employment smoothing.
21That is, self-employment obviates many of the sources of the efficiency wage problem.

- 11 -

Bibliography
Akerlof, C. [1970], "The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism", Qua,-terly Journal of Economics, Vol. 84, PP. 288-300.

Arrow, K. 3. [1970], Essays in the Theory of Risk Bearing, North-Holland, London.

Asquith, P. and Mullins, D. W. [1983], "Equity Issues and Stock Price Dilution", unpublished paper, Harvard Business School.
Baily, M. N. [1977], "On the Theory of Lay-Offs and Unemployment", Econometrica, Vol. 45, pp. 1043-61.

Barrow, R. and Grossman, H. [1976], Money, Employment and Inflation, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
Greenwald, B. [1979], Adverse Selection in the Labor Market, Garland Press, New York.

Greenwald, B. and Stiglitz, 3. E. [1986], "Information, Finance Constraints and Business Fluctuations',
unpublished paper, Bell Communications Research.
Greenwald, B., Stiglitz, 3. E. and Weiss, A. [1984], "Informational Imperfections and Macroeconomic Fluctuations", American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 74, pp. 194-199.

Grossman, S. J., Hart, 0. D. and Maskin, E. S. [1983], "Unemployment with Observable Aggregate
Shocks", Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, Pp. 907-928.

Jaffee, D. and Russell, T. [1976], "Imperfect Information and Credit Rationing", Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 90, pp. 651-66.

Leland, H. E. and Pyle, D. H. [1977], "Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and Financial
Intermediation", Journal of Finance, Vol. 32, Pp. 371-87.

Myers, S. C. and Majluf, N. S. [1984], "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When Firms Have
Information that Investors Do Not", Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 11, pp. 187-221.
Malinvaud, E. [1977], The Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered, Blackwell, Oxford.

Ross, S. A. [1977], "The Determination of Finance Structure: The Incentive Signalling Approach", Bell
Journal of Economics, Vol. 8, pp. 23-40.
Rothschild, M. and Stiglitz, 3. E. [1976], "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on the
Economics of Imperfect Information", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 90, pp. 629-50.
Salop, S. [1979], "A Model of the Natural Rate of Unemployment", American Economic Review, Vol. 69,
pp. 117-125,
Shapiro, C. and Stiglits, 3. E. [1984], "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device", American Economic Review, Vol. 74, pp. 433-444.

Solow, R. and Stiglitz, 3. E. [1968], "Output, Employment and Wages in the Short Run", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 82, pp. 537-60.
Stiglitz, 3. E. [1974], "Wage Determination and Unemployment in LDC's: The Labor Turnover Model",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 88, pp. 194-227.
Stiglitz, 3. E. [1976], "The Efficiency Wage Hypothesis, Surplus Labour, and the Distribution of Income in
LDC's", Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 28, pp. 185-207.
Stiglitz, J. E. [1985], "Equilibrium Wage Distributions", Economic Journal, Vol. 95, pp. 595-618.

- 12 -

Journal of
Stiglitz, J. E. [1987], "The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence of Quality on Price",
Economic Literature, Forthcoming.

Stiglitz, J. E. and Weiss, A. M. [19811, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information", American Economic Review, Vol. 71, pp. 393-410.

Taggart, R. A. [1983], "Secular Patterns in Financing U.S. Corporations", unpublished paper, Harvard
University.

Wilson, C. A. [1977], "A Model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete Information", Journal of Economic
Theory, Vol. 14, pp. 167-207.
Yellen, J. [1984], "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment", American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings, Vol. 74, pp. 200-205.

