                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF CREDIT BUBBLES:
                             THEORY AND POLICY

                                           Jaume Ventura
                                           Alberto Martin

                                        Working Paper 20933
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20933


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2015




We would like to thank Francisco Queiros for superb research assistance. We acknowledge support
from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (grants ECO2008-01666 and CSD2006-00016),
the Generalitat de Catalunya-DIUE (grant 2009SGR1157), and the Barcelona GSE Research Network.
In addition, Ventura acknowledges support from the ERC (Advanced Grant FP7-249588), and Martin
from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (grant Ramon y Cajal RYC-2009-04624), the
ERC (Consolidator Grant FP7-615651), and the IMF Research Fellowship. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jaume Ventura and Alberto Martin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The International Transmission of Credit Bubbles: Theory and Policy
Jaume Ventura and Alberto Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 20933
February 2015
JEL No. E32,E44,O40

                                              ABSTRACT

We live in a new world economy characterized by financial globalization and historically low interest
rates. This environment is conducive to countries experiencing credit bubbles that have large macroeconomic
effects at home and are quickly propagated abroad. In previous work, we built on the theory of rational
bubbles to develop a framework to think about the origins and domestic effects of these credit bubbles.
This paper extends that framework to two-country setting and studies the channels through which
credit bubbles are transmitted across countries. We find that there are two main channels that work
through the interest rate and the terms of trade. The former constitutes a negative spillover, while the
latter constitutes a negative spillover in the short run but a positive one in the long run. We study both
cooperative and noncooperative policies in this world. The interest-rate and terms-of-trade spillovers
produce policy externalities that make the noncooperative outcome suboptimal.


Jaume Ventura
CREI
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005-Barcelona
SPAIN
and Barcelona GSE
and also NBER
jventura@crei.cat

Alberto Martin
CREI
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
and Barcelona GSE
amartin@crei.cat
      The last twenty …ve years can be broadly described as a period of falling interest rates, rising
…nancial integration and frequent credit booms and busts. Figure 1 plots the evolution of the real
interest rate and of the share of countries experiencing a credit boom between 1990 and 2012. As
the …gure shows, the real interest rate has fallen progressively and has become negative towards
the end of the sample; the share of countries experiencing a credit boom, in the meantime, has
increased over time. In the run-up to the …nancial crisis of 2008, almost 30% of the world’s countries
were experiencing a credit boom. Figure 2 plots the international …nancial integration (IFI) index,
de…ned as the sum of a country’s foreign assets and liabilities as a share of GDP: both the top panel,
which depicts the evolution of the IFI for advanced economies, and the bottom panel, which depicts
the IFI for emerging economies, re‡ect a substantial increase in …nancial integration between 1990
and 2012.
      It is tempting to view these three stylized facts as part of a general narrative, in which greater
…nancial integration, low and declining interest rates and frequent credit booms (and busts) are
di¤erent aspects of the same phenomenon. This is exactly the view that many espoused in the
aftermath of the 2008 …nancial crisis, when it was widely argued that low interest rates in advanced
economies, which resulted from excessive capital in‡ows, relaxed lending standards and fueled the
credit boom that would eventually give rise to the crisis.1 Although appealing, this narrative raises
a number of questions. What generates these low interest rates? Why should they give rise to credit
booms and busts, as opposed to a permanent rise in credit? What are the welfare implications of
such low interest rates? Is there a role for policy intervention and, if so, for policy coordination
across countries? This paper provides an analytical framework to address these questions.
      We build on the closed-economy model of credit bubbles in Martin and Ventura (2014). Our goal
now is to study the international transmission of these credit bubbles and the trole of international
policy coordination. To do this, we develop a two-country model of the world economy, each of which
produces a di¤erentiated input that is used to produce both consumption and investment goods.
Each country is populated by entrepreneurs, who can invest productively in capital accumulation,
and savers, who cannot. In principle, entrepreneurs could borrow resources from savers in the
credit market. We assume that there are weak enforcement institutions, however, which prevent
entrepreneurs from pledging their output to savers. This limits the amount of credit in equilibrium,
reducing the international interest rate and world savings. As in much of the recent literature,
therefore, it is …nancial frictions that lead to low interest rates in our model: they essentially

  1
      See, for example, Bernanke (2009a), The Economist (2009), Krugman (2009) and Portes (2009).


                                                        1
constrain the supply of assets by limiting entrepreneurial borrowing (e.g. Caballero et al. 2008).
Using this framework as a benchmark, we make two key innovations.
   First, we provide a simple characterization of the interaction between low interest rates, …nancial
integration, and credit booms and busts. When a bubble appears in a given country, it enables
its entrepreneurs to expand their borrowing beyond the output that can be pledged. In this sense,
bubbles have a crowding-in e¤ect, raising entrepreneurial demand for credit and thus the world
interest rate, net capital in‡ows, investment and growth. As usual in this class of models, though,
bubbles have a crowding-out e¤ect as well, because at any point in time they make it necessary
to divert resources away from investment and use them to pay for the higher credit that has been
granted in the past. From a global perspective, the bubble that maximizes long-term welfare is the
one that optimally trades-o¤ these two e¤ects.
   Second, we show that credit bubbles transmit themselves through two channels. The …rst one
works through the interest rate and constitutes a negative spillover. A credit boom in one country
attracts capital from the rest of the world by raising the world interest rate. The rest of the world
experiences a capital out‡ow that lowers investment and growth. The second one works through
the terms of trade, and it constitutes a negative spillover in the short run and a positive spillover
in the long run. A credit boom in one country raises both the demand and the supply of goods
produced by that country. In the short run, before supply has had time to adjust, the demand
e¤ect dominates and the credit boom therefore leads to an improvement in the terms of trade and
a real appreciation. In this sense, our model re‡ects a concern that has been repeatedly voiced by
policy makers across emerging markets during the last few years, as their countries simultaneously
experienced increases in asset prices, capital in‡ows and large real appreciations. In the long run,
though, it is the supply e¤ect that dominates and the credit boom thus leads to a decline in the
terms of trade and a real depreciation.
   Even though some bubbles are more desirable than others for the world economy, nothing
guarantees that they will materialize in equilibrium. In fact, an essential feature of bubbles is
that they are driven by investor sentiment or market expectations. Their value today depends
on market expectations about their value tomorrow, which in turn depends on tomorrow’s market
expectations about their value on the day after, and so on. Because of this, the bubble provided
by the market may be either too small or too large, or it may be suboptimally distributed across
countries. It may, moreover, ‡uctuate over time as expectations change. Thus, a bubble may
appear in a country and lead to capital in‡ows, and a credit and investment boom. When the


                                                  2
bubble bursts, however, the logic is reversed: capital leaves the country, there is a credit bust and
investment and output contract.
   This leads us to analyze the role of policy in this world. We allow countries to tax and subsidize
credit contracted by their own citizens. First, we study the cooperative equilibrium in which
countries choose policies in a coordinated fashion so as to maximize the sum of utilities of all
individuals. We show that a this equilibrium replicates the optimal bubble allocation by adopting
a policy of “leaning against investor sentiment”, taxing credit where the bubble is ine¢ ciently large
and subsidizing it elsewhere. This policy is what we call expectationally robust, in the sense that
it stabilizes investment, output and consumption and insulates them from ‡uctuations in investor
sentiment.
   Although the cooperative solution provides a useful benchmark, it is not a very realistic descrip-
tion of the real world. Thus, we also analyze a noncooperative equilibrium in which policy solves
a Nash problem between the two governments. Since the latter do not take into account policy
externalities, the noncooperative equilibrium is in general suboptimal. If the interest-rate spillover
is strong and the terms-of-trade spillover is weak, we …nd that countries tend to subsidize credit
too much and the world economy generates excessive credit. If instead the interest-rate spillover
is weak and the temrs-of-trade spillover is strong, countries tend to tax credit too much and the
world economy generates insu¢ cient credit.
   Our paper is closely related to three strands of literature. To begin with, it builds on the notion
that …nancial frictions are important determinants of the size and direction of capital ‡ows. This
is related to Gertler and Rogo¤ (1990), Boyd and Smith (1997), Matsuyama (2004) and Aoki et al.
(2010), all of which argued that contracting frictions can generate capital out‡ows even in capital
scarce or high-productivity economies. Recently, similar models have been developed to account
for global imbalances and low international interest rates. In Caballero et al. (2008), for example,
high-growing developing economies may experience capital out‡ows due to pledgeability constraints
that restrict their supply of …nancial assets. In Mendoza et al. (2007), it is instead the lack of
insurance markets in developing economies that fosters precautionary savings and the consequent
capital out‡ows.
   The major distinction between our work and this literature is that we show how the low interest
rates brought about by …nancial frictions may give rise to asset bubbles. As such, we are also close
to the recent research on bubbles and …nancial frictions, including Farhi and Tirole (2011), Miao
and Wang (2011), and our own previous work (Martin and Ventura (2012, 2014)). Of this literature,


                                                  3
we are closest in interest and focus to the branch that has extended the analysis to open economies,
including Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2006), Ventura (2011), and Basco (2014). Our work is
di¤erent from these papers in that it deals with large economies, in its focus on the link between
asset bubbles and credit booms and busts, and on the study of cooperative and non-cooperative
policy responses.
    Finally, our paper is also related to the large body of research that studies ‡uctuations in credit.
On the empirical front, this research has sought to. Some examples of this work are Ruckes (2004),
Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006), Matsuyama (2007), Gorton and He (2008) and Martin (2008).
Like us, these papers model ‡uctuations in credit. Unlike us, though, these papers emphasize the
role of regulation or the incentives in generating and magnifying ‡uctuations in credit. We take
instead a macroeconomic perspective and argue that low interest create the conditions for asset
bubbles to arise, which may themselves give rise to credit booms and busts.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Sections 1 develops a symmetric two-country
model with bubbles. Sections 2 explores bubbly equilibria in low interest rate environments and
studies the implications of bubbles for capital ‡ows, investment, output and the terms of trade.
Section 3 characterizes the optimal bubble and shows how to implement it with policy. Section 4
analyzes non-cooperative policymaking and shows how it may lead to excessive credit. Section 5
concludes.


1     A two-country model of credit bubbles

This section presents a two-country model of credit bubbles that builds on the closed-economy
model developed by Martin and Ventura (2014). The centerpiece of this model is a credit friction
that limits the amount of collateral in the economy. As a result, the demand for credit is low and
both the interest rate and investment are depressed. This creates the conditions for the economy
to experience bubble-driven credit booms and busts. Extending this framework to a two-country
world allows us to study how these booms and busts propagate across countries.


1.1    The Model

We consider a world economy with two countries, Home and Foreign. Time is discrete and in…nite,
t = 0; :::; 1. The world is populated by two-period overlapping generations that are equally sized
and evenly distributed across countries. Each country produces one di¤erentiated input using two


                                                   4
factors of production, labor and capital. Inputs are traded, but factor services are not. Inputs are
combined to produce …nal goods. Since these goods have a common price in both countries, we use
them as the numeraire. The world also contains trees that have no role in production but are used
as a store of value. These trees are pure bubbles and we often refer to them as such.
   Each generation contains a fraction " of entrepreneurs and a fraction 1       " of savers. Both of
them maximize the expected consumption of …nal goods in their old age. This choice of preferences
simpli…es the analysis substantially. First, it makes the savings decision trivial as individuals save
any income they have when young. Second, it simpli…es the portfolio decision since individuals are
risk-neutral and choose the portfolio that o¤ers the highest expected return in terms of …nal goods.
   Savers supply one unit of labor when young and earn a wage wt and wt in Home and Foreign,
respectively. As usual, we use asterisks to denote the corresponding Foreign variable. Savers have
two options for their savings: to store consumption goods or to purchase credit contracts. Storage of
consumption goods yields a gross safe return of    < 1. Credit contracts o¤er a, possibly contingent,
interest rate. We refer to the expected return to credit contracts, Rt+1 , as the interest rate.
Maximization generates a simple portfolio rule. If Rt+1 > , savers only purchase credit contracts.
If Rt+1 < , savers only store goods. If Rt+1 = , savers are indi¤erent between purchasing credit
contracts or storing goods.
   Entrepreneurs also supply one unit of labor when young and earn a wage. Unlike savers, they
have the option of owning capital and trees. Let qt and qt be the cost of capital in Home and
Foreign. Capital earns a rental rt and rt for one period and then depreciates. Thus, the gross
                        rt+1       r
return to investment is       and t+1 . Let bt and bt denote the value all trees in Home and
                          qt        qt
Foreign. Some trees are old since they were planted by previous generations. Some trees are new
since they are planted by the current generation. Thus,


                       bt+1 = Gt+1 bt + nt+1      and bt+1 = Gt+1 bt + nt+1                       (1)


where Gt+1 and Gt+1 denote the growth in the value of old trees, and nt+1 and nt+1 is the value
of new trees. Free disposal implies that nt    0 and nt     0. We refer to nt+1 and nt+1 as bubble-
creation shocks.
   Entrepreneurs sell credit contracts to …nance additional holdings of capital and trees. These
contracts must be collateralized, that is, they must be backed by credible promises of future pay-
ments. This brings us to the only friction that we consider in this paper: weak institutions limit the



                                                   5
amount of available collateral. In particular, we assume that entrepreneurs can hide their rental
income from enforcement institutions and, as a result, they cannot pledge it to their creditors.2
This implies the following credit or collateral constraint:


                                 ^ t+1 ft
                                 R             bt+1       ^ t+1 ft
                                                      and R              bt+1                              (2)


      ^ t+1 and R
where R         ^
                  t+1 are the contingent interest rates o¤ered by Home and Foreign entrepreneurs;

and ft and ft are the amounts of credit obtained. Equation (2) simply states that promised
payments cannot exceed the value of the trees owned by old entrepreneurs.
      Throughout, we focus on the case in which the expected return to investment exceeds the
interest rate in both countries. Thus, credit is maximized and the collateral constraint is binding
                                                                                         Et bt+1
in all possible continuations of the economy. Entrepreneurs achieve this by setting ft =         and
                                                                                           Rt+1
R^ t+1 = bt+1 in Home, and ft = Et bt+1 and R  ^       bt+1
                                                 t+1 =      in Foreign. This implies that:
          ft                        Rt+1                ft

                                            Et bt+1                                    Et bt+1
                  qt kt+1 + bt = " wt +               and qt kt+1 + bt = " wt +                            (3)
                                            Rt+1                                       Rt+1

since ft = qt kt+1 + bt     " wt and ft = qt kt+1 + bt          " wt .
      Individuals interact both in markets and within …rms and these interactions determine all
relevant prices. Consider …rst the market for trees. Maximization imposes the following restrictions
on tree prices:
                            Gt+1 = Rt+1 + ut+1        and Gt+1 = Rt+1 + ut+1                               (4)

where Et ut+1 = Et ut+1 = 0. We refer to ut+1 and ut+1 as bubble-return shocks. To understand
Equation (4), recall that entrepreneurs …nance the purchase of trees by selling credit contracts.
Note also that the return to holding trees equals the growth in their price. If the expected return
to holding trees falls short of the interest rate, young entrepreneurs make a loss when they sell credit
contracts to purchase trees and the demand for trees is zero. If the expected return to holding trees
exceeds the interest rate, young entrepreneurs make a pro…t when they borrow to purchase trees
and the demand for trees is unbounded. Thus, equilibrium requires that the expected return to
holding trees equals the interest rate.
      Consider next the credit market. Combining the supply of credit by savers with the demand

  2
    This is obviously an extreme assumption. In Martin and Ventura (2014) we assumed instead that entrepreneurs
can pledge a fraction of their rental income. We focus here on the case = 0 to simplify the algebra.


                                                       6
for credit from entrepreneurs we obtain the equilibrium interest rate:
                                                 (                                )
                                                            Et bt+1 + bt+1
                                Rt+1 = max               ;                                       (5)
                                                           (1 ") (wt + wt )

Equation (5) is quite intuitive and it plays a crucial role in what follows. The economy’s collateral
is Et bt+1 + bt+1 . If collateral is low, the demand for credit is low. Only a fraction of the labor
income is used to purchase credit contracts and the interest rate equals . When this is the case,
we say that there is partial intermediation since there are some savings that are not transferred
to entrepreneurs. If collateral is high, the demand for credit is high. All labor income is used to
purchase credit contracts and the interest rate exceeds . When this is the case, we say that there
is full intermediation since all savings are transferred to entrepreneurs.
   Consider next …rms, which are assumed to be competitive. To produce inputs, …rms combine
labor and capital using standard Cobb-Douglas technologies:


                                yt = lt1        kt       and yt = lt 1           kt              (6)


with     2 [0; 1]; where lt and lt are the labor force in Home and Foreign. Since we have assumed
already that the young have one unit of labor in each country, lt = lt = 1. Then, maximization
implies that factors are paid the value of their marginal products:


                         wt = pt (1        ) kt          and wt = pt (1               ) kt       (7)

                                                     1                                1
                             rt = pt       kt            and rt = pt             kt              (8)

where pt and pt are the prices of the Home and Foreign input.
   To produce …nal goods, …rms combine Home and Foreign inputs. Competition ensures that
price equals cost:
                                                                             1

                                  1 = 0:5 p1t             + 0:5 pt 1
                                                                         1
                                                                                                 (9)

with     2 (0; 1). Equation (9) says that the price of …nal goods (which is one since we use these
goods as the numeraire) equals the cost of producing them. The cost function is CES, it is symmetric
on both inputs, and it has an elasticity of substitution equal to . Shepard’s lemma implies that
the demand for Home and Foreign inputs by …nal goods producers are given by 0:5 pt            xt and
0:5 pt      xt , where xt is the total production of …nal goods.


                                                           7
   To produce capital, …rms combine …nal goods and the domestic input. The assumption that
investment requires the input produced domestically introduces a home bias in spending that will
play a role later. Once again, competition implies that price equals cost:


                                              qt = pt    and qt = pt                                                        (10)


with    2 [0; 1]. Equation (10) says that the price of capital equals the cost of producing it. The
cost function is Cobb-Douglas with a share of domestic inputs equal to . Shepard’s lemma implies
                                                                                                                        1
that the demands for Home and Foreign inputs by producers of capital are given by                                  pt       kt+1
             1
and     pt       kt+1 .
   Consider …nally the market for inputs. As usual, we obtain prices by imposing that supplies
                                                                                                                        1
equal demands. In the market for Home inputs this requires that yt = 0:5 pt                                 xt +   pt       kt+1 .
                                                                                                        1
In the market for Foreign inputs this requires that yt = 0:5 pt                   xt +        pt             kt+1 . Combining
these two conditions, we obtain:

                                                         1
                                         kt        pt        kt+1         pt
                                                         1
                                                                      =                                                     (11)
                                     kt            pt         kt+1        pt

   This completes the description of the model.


1.2    Equilibrium dynamics

To construct equilibria for this economy, we propose …rst a joint stochastic process for bubble
return and creation shocks: fnt ; nt ; ut ; ut g for all t. Naturally, this bubble process must be such
that Et ut+1 = Et ut+1 = 0, nt       0 and nt           0 for all t. With this stochastic process at hand, we
determine all possible sequences for the state variables fkt ; kt ; bt ; bt g from a given initial condition
using the following set of equations:
                                                 2 = p1t         + pt 1                                                     (12)
                                                         1
                                         kt        pt        kt+1         pt
                                                         1
                                                                      =                                                     (13)
                                     kt            pt         kt+1        pt
                                 (                                                                      )
                                                             Et nt+1 + nt+1
                    Rt+1 = max       ;                                                                                      (14)
                                         (1    ") (1          ) (pt kt + pt kt )         bt        bt

                                                                               Et nt+1
                              kt+1 = p1t          " (1           ) kt + pt                                                  (15)
                                                                                Rt+1



                                                             8
                                                                         Et nt+1
                             kt+1 = pt 1     " (1      ) kt + pt                                         (16)
                                                                          Rt+1

                                     bt+1 = (Rt+1 + ut+1 ) bt + nt+1                                     (17)

                                     bt+1 = Rt+1 + ut+1       bt + nt+1                                  (18)

If all the sequences generated in this way are such that kt         0, kt    0, bt   0 and bt     0 for all t,
we say that the proposed bubble process is an equilibrium. Otherwise, we say that the proposed
bubble process is not an equilibrium.
      Bubbly equilibria are possible if the interest rate is below the growth rate. Since this economy
exhibits no growth, this requires that the interest rate be less than one.3 Traditional models of
rational bubbles generate low interest rates by assuming that investment is dynamically ine¢ cient.
That is, these models assume that the interest rate equals the return to investment, and then focus
on environments in which the return to investment is below the growth rate. Here we do not follow
this path. Instead, we generate low interest rates by assuming …nancial frictions. That is, we
assume that insu¢ cient collateral depresses the interest rate below the growth rate, and then focus
on environments in which the return to investment is above the growth rate.
      To evaluate welfare in these equilibria is not straightforward since there are in…nitely many
generations and each of them contains four di¤erent types. The welfare of the savers of generation
t is given by:
                                 US;t = Rt+1 wt and US;t = Rt+1 wt                                       (19)

in Home and Foreign; while the welfare of the entrepreneurs of generation t is given by

                                     1                               1
                          UE;t = "       rt+1 kt+1 and UE;t = "          rt+1 kt+1                       (20)


Some equilibria Pareto dominate others and this allows us to rank them. But some equilibria are
better for some individuals and worse for others. In this case, we cannot rank them.
      Once the bubble process has been speci…ed, the world economy is a complete dynamical
system and Equations (12)-(18) constitute its law of motion. From a given state initial state
fk0 ; k0 ; b0 ; b0 g, Equations (12)-(18) allow us to obtain the following state fk1 ; k1 ; b1 ; b1 g. Before
drawing fn1 ; n1 ; u1 ; u1 g, Equations (12)-(16) determine the price of the two inputs, the interest

  3
    Once again, this is an extreme assumption that helps simplify the algebra. In Martin and Ventura (2014) we
consider the case in which the economy exibits sustained growth.



                                                      9
rate and the capital stocks next period. After drawing fn1 ; n1 ; u1 ; u1 g, Equations (17)-(18) deter-
mine the bubbles next period. We can then start the process again using fk1 ; k1 ; b1 ; b1 g as the
initial state to obtain fk2 ; k2 ; b2 ; b2 g. By repeating this procedure again and again, we …nd the
dynamics of the world economy and determine its properties.


2     Dynamics of credit booms and busts

The world economy developed in the previous section can experience bubble-driven credit booms
and busts. In this section, we construct simple equilibria that clarify how these booms and busts
work and how their e¤ects are transmitted across borders. These equilibria have been designed
to illustrate speci…c points and they do not to replicate the complex and unpredictable behavior
of credit and asset prices observed in real economies. This makes them look somewhat arti…cial.
To remove any temptation to think that all equilibria are so simple, we end the section construct-
ing some equilibria in which credit and tree prices exhibit a high degree of unpredictability and
complexity.


2.1   The bubbleless economy

A natural benchmark to keep in mind when going through this section is the bubbleless equilibrium,
in which fnt ; nt ; ut ; ut g = f0; 0; 0; 0g for all t and b0 = b0 = 0. In this equilibrium, trees have no
value so that there is no collateral to sustain credit. Entrepreneurs can only invest their own wages
while savers fully store theirs. The world economy converges to a steady state in which:

                                                                   1
                                       k = k = [" (1        )] 1                                     (21)


                                                 R=                                                  (22)

                                               p=p =1                                                (23)

Equations (21)-(23) fully characterize the bubbleless steady state. Because there is no credit, the
capital stock and output depend only on the wages of entrepreneurs, and the interest rate equals
the return to storage . Moreover, because the steady-state is symmetric and output is equalized
across countries, the prices of the Home and Foreign inputs are both equal to one.
    As mentioned before, we focus on environments in which the the interest rate is below the



                                                   10
growth rate, while the return to investment is above it:

                                                           r   r
                                           =R<1<             =   =                            .             (24)
                                                           q   q   " (1                   )

Since the economy is stationary, this requires that < 1 (which we have assumed already) and that
       "
  >         (which we assume from now on). The …rst inequality creates the conditions for bubbly
     1+"
equilibria to exist. The second inequality ensures that investment is dynamically e¢ cient. To see
the latter, note that in each period investment equals the wages of entrepreneurs, which represent a
fraction " (1             ) of output. The return to this investment is the economy’s capital income, which
represents a fraction            of output. Thus, the ratio in Equation (24) represents the rate of return to
investment in steady state, which we assume is larger than one.


2.2         Global credit bubbles

We characterize now equilibria with global credit bubbles, which are equally distributed between
Home and Foreign. The simplest way to do so is to assume that there are no bubble shocks, so
that ut = ut = 0, while bubble creation is a …xed fraction                   of income in both countries:


                                      nt+1 =       pt kt    and nt+1 =                   pt kt              (25)


In this equilibria, collateral and credit represent a fraction           of world income. We can think
                                                                   Rt+1
of        as the size of the bubble. From any valid initial condition, the world economy converges to a
steady state in which:
                                                   h                         i       1
                                                                                 1
                                            k = k = " (1            )+                                      (26)
                                                                         R
                                                           r
                                     R = max       ; 0:5     0:25                                           (27)
                                                                    (1       ") (1                )

                                                           p=p =1                                           (28)

Equations (26)-(28) characterize the steady state of the world economy. Figure 3 depicts the
steady-state values of the model’s main endogenous variables as a function of . The latter and the
associated bubble it generates are shown in Panels A and D.
         Panels B and C show the capital stock and storage. At low values of ,4 the steady state
is in the partial intermediation region. Collateral is scarce and storage is used. In this range,

     4
         In particular,   < (1   )    (1   ") (1      ).


                                                               11
increases in        expand the global stock of collateral and raise investment, output and consumption.
At high values of , the world economy enters the full intermediation region. Collateral is now
abundant and storage is no longer used. In this range, increases in                   raise the interest rate more
than proportionally and reduce the global stock of collateral, thereby contracting investment and
output.
       Panels E and F show that the rate of return on investment is always higher than the interest
rate, which is a direct consequence of the binding credit constraint. Note, however, that this gap
is reduced whenever bubble creation raises the global economy’s stock of collateral. Also note
that, because the equilibrium is symmetric, input prices equal one in Panel G. This is why output
in Panel H output follows almost one-to-one the capital stock. Symmetry also explains why the
current account is zero in Panel I.5
       Finally, panels J and K depict the welfare of savers and entrepreneurs. Whereas the welfare of
entrepreneurs rises and falls with the capital stock, the welfare of savers is monotonically increasing
in . The reason is that, in the full intermediation region, bubble creation has two distinct e¤ects on
the welfare of savers: it lowers the steady-state stock of capital (and thus wages and savings) but it
raises the steady-state interest rate (and thus the return on these savings). In our parametrization,
this last e¤ect dominates and the welfare of savers is increasing in .
       This example with a constant and global bubble illustrates the e¤ects of bubble creation in our
model, but it does not generate credit booms and busts. To create this type of episodes we next
introduce global shocks to expectations or investor sentiment, which a¤ect either bubble creation
or bubble returns. For theoretical clarity, we analyze each of these two alternatives separately.
       We consider …rst bubble creation shocks. In particular, assume that:


                               nt+1 =    t+1     pt kt    and nt+1 =      t+1   pt kt                              (29)


where      t   2f   L; H g   and Pr(   t+1   =   t)   =   > 0:5 for all t. Figure 4 shows a simulation of this
equilibrium.6 In this simulation, the economy starts and ends with low tree prices. In between,
the economy experiences two episodes of high tree prices. In each of them, the bubble grows very

   5
     Strictly speaking, the distribution of storage and lending across the world’s savers is indeterminate in our model.
We focus throughout on the allocation that minimizes capital ‡ows, i.e., we assume that entrepreneurs borrow …rst
from savers in their own country and only turn to the international market once all domestic savings have been
intermediated. Fomally, this is equivalent to adding the additional assumption that there are arbitrarily small but
not negligible costs of international transactions.
   6
     For all the stochastic examples in the paper, we run the model for 10,000 periods to produce each simulation.
We use the data obtained from the simulations to produce the corresponding …gures.


                                                            12
quickly and bursts afterwards. So does the capital stock and output. In our parametrization, credit
booms are associated with relatively high interest rates (but still below the growth rate) and low
returns to investment (but still above the growth rate). Credit busts are instead associated with
low interest rates and high returns to investment. Finally, note that both savers and entrepreneurs
are better o¤ during a credit boom.
       This example with global shocks to bubble creation provides an interesting model of how bubbles
in asset prices generate episodes of credit booms and busts. The evolution of the capital stock, the
interest rate and the return to investment seem to be broadly consistent with real-world experience.
The lack of action in current accounts and the terms of trade (that is, relative input prices) is only
due to the symmetric nature of the shocks, as we will see shortly.
       We consider next bubble return shocks. We do so by assuming that the rate of bubble creation
is constant and equal to , but there is a positive probability that the bubble bursts in any given
period:                                     8
                                            <            R with probability 1
                           ut+1 = ut+1 =        1
                                            :
                                                    R         with probability

for all t.7 Figure 5 shows a simulation of this example. Initially, savers’wages are fully intermediated
by the global bubble and storage is not used. At some point, the global bubble bursts: the
immediate e¤ect of this collapse is to reduce the interest rate because entrepreneurs no longer
demand funds to purchase old trees. Since the rate of bubble creation is constant, though, this
fall in the interest rate boosts entrepreneurial collateral thereby raising investment and the capital
stock, reducing the rate of return to investment and increasing entrepreneurial welfare. Once again,
due to the symmetry of the exercise, input prices are one and current accounts are zero throughout.
       This example of global shocks to bubble returns is interesting from a theoretical perspective
because it highlights a key aspect of our model. Namely, it is bubble creation (i.e. the value of neew
treees) that provides collateral and fosters investment; while the pre-existing bubble (i.e., the value
of old trees) actually reduces investment because it competes with it for the resources of savers.
This is why a collapse of the bubble that does not a¤ect bubble creation stimulates growth.

   7
   This case might seem unrealistic, as it implies that the value of old trees collapses while the value of new trees
remains constant. But it is nonetheless useful to understand the mechanics of the model.




                                                         13
2.3         Country credit bubbles

We characterize now bubbles that are no longer equally distributed across countries. Indeed, we
go to the other extreme and now consider equilibria in which bubbles occur only in Home. In
particular, we assume that:


                                 nt+1 =    t+1      pt kt      and nt+1 =   t+1   pt kt


where        t   2 f   L; H g   and Pr(   t+1   =     t)   =    > 0:5 for all t; while    t+1   =   for all t. We
parametrize the model so that countries are still symmetric in the long run, in the sense that the
long-run average rate of bubble creation is the same in Home and Foreign. In the reminder of this
section, we choose a given sequence of shocks and illustrate how the economy behaves under di¤erent
parameter assumptions. Comparing the behavior of endogenous variables in these equilibria allows
us to illustrate the key determinants of how credit booms and busts are propagated across countries.
         It is useful to start with the case in which inputs of both countries are perfect substitutes, that
is       = 1. In this case, their prices are constant and equal to one. This eliminates terms-of-trade
e¤ects and allows us to focus on transmission through the interest rate. This special or limiting
case is depicted in Figure 6.
         Initially, Home is in a credit slump with low bubble creation, high storage, and low capital
accumulation. The value of trees in foreign, in turn, is just enough to intermediate the wages of
its savers: as a consequence, the current account is initially balanced. At some point, Home enters
a credit boom as bubble creation rises and expands entrepreneurial collateral. As growth picks up
in Home, storage is reduced as savings are reallocated towards entrepreneurial investment: once
storage is eliminated, though, Home entrepreneurs begin borrowing from Foreign savers, raising the
world interest rate, crowding out capital accumulation in Foreign and leading to a current account
de…cit in Home. This bene…ts savers in Foreign despite the fall in the country’s capital and wages,
but it hurts Foreign entrepreneurs. Naturally, when the credit booms ends, the process is reversed.
Home growth collapses, the world interest rate falls, and Home once again runs a current account
surplus as there is capital ‡ight to Foreign.8
         This example illustrates the …rst transmission channel of credit bubbles which works through

     8
    Note, for instance, that Foreign savers fare worst right at the end of a credit boom in Home. At this point, they
face both low wages (because, in the past, the credit boom in Home has crowded-out investment in Foreign) and a
low interest rate (because, looking forward, the credit bust in Home has reduced the global demand for investment).




                                                               14
the interest rate and the current account. This interest-rate e¤ect constitutes a negative spillover
for Foreign. A credit boom in Home attracts Foreign savings by raising the world interest rate.
Foreign experiences a capital out‡ow that lowers investment and growth. A credit bust at Home
releases Home savings lowering the world interest rate. Foreign experiences a capital in‡ow that
raises investment and growth.
   Once we make the Home and Foreign inputs imperfect substitutes, we have a second transmis-
sion channel which works through the terms of trade or the real exchange rate. Note that these
two concepts are linked in this model. Home’s terms of trade is the ratio of the export and import
             pt
prices, i.e.    . Home’s real exchange rate is the ratio of the prices of nontraded and traded goods.
             pt
Since consumption goods have the same prices in both countries, Home’s real exchange rate is
                                                                       pt
positively linked to the relative price of investment goods, i.e.           . Thus, the real exchange
                                                                       pt
rate ‡uctuates with the terms of trade, except in the limit when the home bias in spending, i.e.
  ! 0.
   Figure 7A depicts the case in which       = 2 and      = 0. That is, we assume that there is no
home bias in spending. The main di¤erence with Figure 6 is that credit booms in Home, which
expand the supply of the Home input, are now accompanied by a deterioration in the country’s
terms of trade. The reason, of course, is that the expansion in the capital stock in Home raises the
relative supply of Home inputs. This terms-of-trade e¤ect constitutes a a positive spillover e¤ect for
Foreign. In the simulation, this spillover partly compensates for the negative interest-rate spillover.
Thus, relative to the case in which    = 1, the increase in the relative output of Home is smaller
than before and the bene…ts of Home’s credit boom are more equally distributed throughout the
world.
   In the presence of a home bias in spending, the terms-of-trade e¤ect becomes more complex
and interesting. This is shown in Figure 7B which depicts the case in which         = 2 and     = 0:8.
Now, we see that the credit boom initially improves Home’s terms-of-trade and only to worsen
them gradually. The reason is that now the expansion in the capital stock in Home also raises the
demand for Home inputs. This e¤ect happens immediately and leads to a an initial terms-of-trade
improvement. Over time, as the capital stock expands, the supply of Home inputs grows and the
terms-of-trade deteriorate as in the previous example. We see then an interesting pattern emerging:
credit booms lead to a real exchange rate appreciation in the short run that is slowly reversed into
a real exchange rate depreciation in the long run.
   This example illustrates the second transmission channel of credit bubbles which works through


                                                  15
the terms of trade. This terms-of-trade e¤ect constitutes a negative spillover to Foreign in the short
run, but a positive spillover in the long run. A credit boom in Home raises both the demand and
the supply for Home inputs. The demand e¤ect dominates in the short run and worsens Foreign’s
terms of trade. The supply e¤ect dominates in the long run and improves Foreign’s terms of trade.
Naturally, these e¤ects are reversed if Home experiences a credit bust.
   The importance of the terms-of-trade e¤ect depends on the elasticity of substitution between
Home and Foreign inputs. So far, we have assumed that this elasticity is high. Figures 8A and
8B assume that        = 1, while Figures 9A and 9B assume that      = 0:6. Note that, the lower are
both       and , the larger is the positive spillover to Foreign. A low       reduces the demand e¤ect,
while a low      translates a given supply e¤ect into a larger change in the terms-of-trade e¤ect. An
interesting case is that in which    = 1 and    = 0. This is the famous Cole-Obstfeld case in which
countries share expansions and contractions equally and their outputs are perfectly correlated.
   This concludes our exploration of simple examples, which exhibit either global shocks to investor
sentiment or shocks in only one country. These examples are meant to illustrate how the theory
works and, in particular, the channels through which credit booms and busts are propagated around
the world. To show the type of complex dynamics that the model can generate, we turn next to an
example in which credit and asset prices exhibit a rich and unpredictable behavior.


2.4        Complex equilibria

We now simulate an economy that starts in a normal state in which         t   =   t   = . With probability
  < 0:5, the world economy transitions from the normal state to a credit episode in which            t   =~
and    t   = ~ where ~ and ~ are drawn from a uniform distribution centered in . With probability
 , the episode ends and both countries return to the normal state. We also assume that, during
each credit episode, there are bubble return shocks that are i.i.d. both across countries and time
periods.
   Figure 10 illustrates a sample of this simulation. The sample contains three credit episodes We
can refer to the …rst episode as a global depression. Indeed, there is a credit bust in both countries
even though it is more pronounced at Home. As investment collapses in both countries, the use
of storage surges all over the world. Welfare falls for Foreign and Home savers and entrepreneurs,
even though residents of Foreign are relatively better o¤ since they su¤er a smaller contraction in
output. Once the depression is over, the world economy returns to a normal state for a few periods
before entering a second credit episode.


                                                  16
    The second episode combines a credit boom in Home with a credit slump in Foreign. As asset
prices and investment surge in Home, its entrepreneurs start borrowing also from Foreign savers.
As a consequence, Home runs a current account de…cit as the world interest rate begins to rise.
Although the relative fall of Foreign’s output is somewhat mitigated by the improvement in its
terms of trade, welfare falls for all residents of Foreign while it rises for residents of Home.
    Finally, the third episode in the sample is a global credit boom, driven by a simultaneous rise in
the value of trees in Home and in Foreign. The boom is particularly strong in Foreign, though, so
that its entrepreneurs borrow also from Home’s savers and Foreign runs a current account de…cit.
The most interesting aspect of this episode is that this simultaneous boom turns out to be excessive
from a global perspective. The global bubble, and thus the demand for credit, is so large that it
generates a sharp increase in the world interest rate and a collapse in global investment and output!
Simply put, the large bubble crowds out investment. As a consequence, the world’s entrepreneurs
lose from the boom despite the higher value of their trees. The world’s savers, in the meantime,
bene…t fromt the high interest rates.
    This example shows that a world economy characterized by low interest rates can experience
rich and volatile patterns of credit, capital ‡ows, and economic activity. Moreover, even though all
di¤erent types and combinations of credit booms and busts have di¤erent implications for welfare,
it is not possible to determine whether the market will select any speci…c one over the rest. Thus,
sometimes the global credit boom is too small, leading to weak investment and growth. At other
times, the global credit boom may be too large, sustaining high interest rates that also undermine
growth. Finally, the global credit boom may be ine¢ ciently distributed across countries, sustaining
too much credit in some economies and too little in others. These observations raise a natural and
important question: can policies be used to improve upon the market equilibrium? If so, is their a
role for policy coordination across countries? We turn to these questions next.


3    Managing credit booms and busts

This section considers the problem of Home and Foreign governments that can in‡uence credit
markets by taxing and/or subsidizing entrepreneurs. We …rst describe the set of policies that
we consider and show how they a¤ect the evolution of credit, investment and output. We then
characterize a type of cooperative policies, in which both governments jointly maximize a measure
of global welfare, and non-cooperative policies, in which governments design policy independently



                                                  17
of one another.
   Before turning to the analysis, though, it is important to ponder brie‡y on what it means to
design policy in our environment. In our world, the competitive equilibrium is essentially driven
by investor sentiment or expectations, which determine the processes fnt ; nt ; ut ; ut g and thus in-
vestment and prices. This poses a problem for the evaluation of policy, since the implementation of
a policy may in‡uence expectations themselves and change the underlying process fnt ; nt ; ut ; ut g.
We avoid this problem by focusing on policies that are expectationally robust, in the sense that they
implement the same allocations regardless of agent expectations or investor sentiment.


3.1   What can governments do?

We introduce governments in Home and Foreign and assume that they can in‡uence the equilibrium
allocation by subsidizing and/or taxing entrepreneurs. In particular, the Home and Foreign govern-
ments respectively promise to give entrepreneurs of generation t a transfer equal to st+1 and st+1
units of the consumption good during old age. These transfers can be negative and/or contingent
on the state of the economy. Whenever a transfer is positive in a given country, its government
…nances it by imposing a tax of zt to entrepreneurs of generation t in that same country. If a
transfer is negative, its bene…t is distributed to young savers in the same country.
   The key aspect of this policy is that it a¤ects entrepreneurial wealth through taxes and subsidies,
and thus their ability to borrow. To see this, de…ne nst+1 and nst+1 as the net resources that the
policies provide to entrepreneurs of generation t in Home and Foreign:


                       nst+1   st+1   Rt+1 zt and nst+1      st+1   Rt+1 zt .                    (30)


That is, nst+1 and nst+1 re‡ect the di¤erence between subsidies that will be obtained in old age
and the taxes paid in young age by Home and Foreign entrepreneurs, respectively. This transfer of
wealth naturally a¤ects entrepreneurs’ability to borrow and thus –as we show below –the demand
for credit, expanding it when it is positive and contracting it otherwise.
   To close the model, we just need to specify how governments balance their budget constraints.
To this e¤ect, as we already mentioned, we require each government to run a balanced budget.
That is, we assume throughout that,


                                       st = zt and st = zt .                                     (31)


                                                 18
This enables us to express the dynamics of the policies as follows:


                          st+1 = Rt+1 st + nst+1 and st+1 = Rt+1 st + nst+1                               (32)


The formal similarity between Equation (32) and Equations (17) and (18) describing the dynamics
of the Home and Foreign bubbles hints at some of the results that follow.
    We are now ready to analyze the e¤ects of policies fnst ; nst g. These e¤ects are circumscribed
to the credit market, and the analysis of the input and …nal good markets in section 1 remains
unchanged. Remember that we focus throughout on the case in which the expected return to
investment exceeds the interest rate in both countries. Thus, credit is maximized and the collateral
constraint of Equation (2) is binding in all possible continuations of the economy. Entrepreneurs
                                    Et bt+1 + Et st+1        ^ t+1 = bt+1 + st+1 in Home, and ft =
now achieve this by setting ft =                      and R
                                           Rt+1                           ft
Et bt+1 + Et st+1     ^       bt+1 +  s t+1
                  and R t+1 =               in Foreign, i.e., by borrowing both against the value of
      Rt+1                         ft
trees and against government subsidies. Given policies fnst ; nst g, this implies that:

                             Et bt+1 + Et st+1                                        Et bt+1 + Et st+1
 qt kt+1 +bt +st = " wt +                         and qt kt+1 +bt +st = " wt +                          , (33)
                                   Rt+1                                                     Rt+1

since ft = qt kt+1 + bt + st       " wt and ft = qt        kt+1 + bt + st     " wt and we have replaced
governments’budget constraints from Equation (31).
    Equation (33) captures the fact that entrepreneurial borrowing must be used to invest, to pur-
chase existing trees and to pay the taxes prescribed by the policy. It also con…rms that the collateral
constraints of Home and Foreign entrepreneurs are relaxed by the policies of their respective coun-
tries if and only if Et nst+1 > 0 and Et nst+1 > 0, i.e., if and only if the policies raise the expected
wealth of entrepreneurs. Taking into account that the supply of credit, which depends on the wages
of savers, is una¤ected by the policies, the equilibrium interest rate is given by:
                                         (                                       )
                                               Et bt+1 + bt+1 + st+1 + st+1
                           Rt+1 = max        ;                                                            (34)
                                                    (1 ") (wt + wt )

    To construct equilibria for this economy, we propose …rst a joint stochastic process for bubble
return and creation shocks, fnt ; nt ; ut ; ut g for all t; and a policy process fnst ; nst g. With these sto-
chastic processes at hand, we determine all possible sequences for the variables fkt ; kt ; bt ; bt ; st ; st g




                                                      19
from a given initial condition using Equations (12)-(13) and (17)-(18) together with:
                             (                                                                )
                                                Et nt+1 + nt+1 + nst+1 + nst+1
               Rt+1 = max        ;                                                                  (35)
                                     (1   ") (1    ) (pt kt + pt kt ) bt bt         st   st


                                                                 Et nt+1 + nst+1
                       kt+1 = p1t          " (1    ) kt + pt                                        (36)
                                                                      Rt+1

                                                                  Et nt+1 + nst+1
                     kt+1 = pt 1           " (1    ) kt + pt                                        (37)
                                                                       Rt+1

   Relative to the model without policy interventions, Equations (36) and (37) highlight that, for
a given interest rate, investment is now determined by Et nt+1 + Et nst+1 in Home and by Et nt+1 +
Et nst+1 in Foreign. When the policies prescribe Et nst+1 > 0 and/or Et nst+1 > 0, they raise the
expected wealth of Home and/or Foreign entrepreneurs, respectively, and allow them to expand
their investment. Naturally, the opposite is true when Et nst+1 < 0 and/or Et nst+1 < 0. Equation
(35) in turn highlights that, like bubbles, these policies a¤ect the world interest rate by raising or
reducing the maximum amount of resources that entrepreneurs can pledge to their creditors, which
now becomes Et bt+1 + bt+1 + st+1 + st+1 .
   Equations (35)-(37) are key to understand the role of policy in our model. A comparison with
the corresponding Equations (14)-(16) of the baseline model reveals that the only e¤ect of policy
is to replace bt with bt + st and bt with bt + st (and hence, nt and nt are replaced with nt + nSt and
nt + nst , respectively). This immediately implies that any competitive equilibrium of the global
economy can be implemented through the appropriate design of policies in Home and Foreign.
Suppose, for instance, that both governments want to implement the allocation corresponding to
an equilibrium in which the value of Home and Foreign trees equals bt and bt , respectively. Then,
they can do so simply by following a policy that is contingent on the realized value of trees in both
countries, setting st = bt       bt and st = bt     bt for all t. This leads immediately to the following
proposition.

Proposition 1 Suppose that the governments of Home and Foreign can subsidize their respective
entrepreneurs by giving them transfers st and st during old age. Suppose moreover that each
government …nances these transfers by taxing its young entrepreneurs. Then, the allocations of any




                                                      20
                                    n       o
equilibrium with bubble processes    bt ; bt can be replicated by policies that set,


                                            st = bt      bt ;

                                            st   = bt     bt ,


in all periods.

Proof. Follows from previous discussion.
   Proposition 1 tells us that governments seeking to replicate the equilibrium allocations associ-
                            n     o
ated with bubble processes bt ; bt should follow a policy of “leaning against investor sentiment”,
promising to set st and st in a state-contingent fashion so that st + bt = bt and st + bt = bt in
all periods. A salient feature of such policies is that they are expectationally robust, in the sense
that they implement the desired allocations regardless of investor sentiment, i.e., no matter what
expectations are regarding the price of trees in Home and Foreign. In the countries and times
where investor sentiment and the price of trees is low relative to the desired benchmark, the policy
requires the corresponding government to subsidize entrepreneurs. Instead, in the countries and
times where investor sentiment and the price of trees are too high relative to the desired benchmark,
the policy requires the corresponding government to tax entrepreneurial income from the sale of
trees in order to reduce borrowing.


3.2    What should governments do?

Proposition 1 tells us that, given the class of policies that we consider, governments can in principle
replicate any equilibrium allocation that they desire. Determining which allocation they would
actually want to implement, though, is a di¤erent matter. First and foremost, it depends naturally
on the objective function that we assign to governments. In what follows, we will assume that they
maximize steady-state welfare. This seems like a sensible goal and it suits our purpose, which is to
illustrate the e¤ects of policy. Moreover, given that the only shocks in our economy are expectation
or investor sentiment shocks, we characterize the deterministic allocation that achieves this goal,
i.e. we characterize the pair fn; n g that maximizes steady-state welfare.
   To gain a better understanding of the problem, note that there are four types of agents in the
world, entrepreneurs and savers both in Home and in Foreign. In a deterministic steady state, the




                                                   21
welfare of Home entrepreneurs and savers is respectively given by:

                                        1
                           cE = "               p k   and cS = R (1     ) p k .


This expression simply states that the consumption of entrepreneurs equals the economy’s capital
income, whereas the consumption of savers equals their labor income times the world interest rate.
The corresponding expression for Foreign is given by,

                                    1
                         cE = "             p    k    and cS = R (1     ) p   k


   The problem that we consider is one in which the governments of Home and Foreign respectively
choose the values of n and/or n that maximize welfare. They can then implement the desired
allocation through the appropriate use of subsidies and taxes as stated in Proposition 1. Given the
previous expressions for consumption, we can de…ne the welfare of Home and Foreign by adding
the utilities of their residents:


                                    W = [R (1         ") (1    )+ ] p k                          (38)


                                W = [R (1             ") (1    )+ ] p   k                        (39)

   This completes the characterization of governments’objective functions and of the policy tools
at their disposal. The solution to this optimization problem, however, depends on the equilibrium
concept that we use. In particular, we characterize a cooperative equilibrium, in which governments
choose the policies that maximize their joint welfare; and a non-cooperative equilibrium, in which
each government chooses the policy that maximizes its own welfare. Characterizing both types
of equilibria clari…es the spillovers and potential externalities that are associated to the design of
policy. We turn to each of them next.


3.3      Cooperative policy

This section solves for the cooperative equilibrium, which is de…ned as follows:

De…nition 1 The cooperative equilibrium of our economy is characterized by the pair fn; n g that
solves
                     max [W + W ] = [R (1              ") (1   ) + ] [p k + p k ] .


                                                         22
The pair fn; n g is obtained by solving

                                          @W   @W
                                             +     = 0,
                                          @n    @n

                                          @W   @W
                                             +    = 0,
                                          @n   @n

subject to Equations (12)-(16).

   Thus, the cooperative equilibrium is de…ned as the competitive equilibrium that corresponds
to the bubble processes for Home and Foreign that maximize global welfare in steady state. The
following proposition, which is formally proved in the appendix, characterizes the solution to this
problem.

Proposition 2 The cooperative equilibrium of our economy is characterized by a constant and
symmetric rate of bubble creation

                                                               1
                   n = n = (1       )     (1   ") (1      )1       (1         (1   ")) 1   .


This level of bubble creation simultaneously guarantees that R =              and that wages are fully inter-
mediated, and it sustains a steady state with a capital stock equal to

                                                                          1
                               k = k = f[1      (1     ")] (1      )g 1       .


Proof. See appendix.
   Proposition 2 tells us two important yet intuitive features of the “optimal bubble”. The …rst
feature is that it is distributed equally across both countries. This arises naturally in our model
given the symmetry of the setup and the existence of decreasing returns, which imply that any
redistribution of bubble creation away from the symmetric allocation reduces the return to global
investment. It is true that, by a¤ecting the relative output of both countries, any such redistribution
of the global bubble also has e¤ects on their terms of trade. But this adds an additional source of
decreasing returns, since the terms of trade shift against the country with the highest output. The
second important feature of the optimal bubble is that it is just large enough to intermediate all
wages. In e¤ect, once all wages have been intermediated, investment cannot be raised any further
and any additional increases in the bubble can only lead to a higher world interest rate and thus
to a lower capital stock, output and, ultimately, overall consumption.

                                                  23
    By combining propositions 1 and 2, we can characterize the optimal policy when both govern-
ments seek to maximize global welfare in steady state:

Corollary 1 To maximize steady-state welfare, the governments of Home and Foreign should set
fst ; st g so that

                                                       1
                       st =       (1   ") (1      )1       [1   (1   ")] 1   bt ,
                                                       1
                       st   =     (1   ") (1      )1       [1   (1   ")] 1   bt ,


in all periods.

Proof. Follows directly from Propositions 1 and 2.
    Corollary 1 is a speci…c application of Proposition 1, and it tells us the exact manner in which
governments must lean against investor sentiment to replicate the optimal bubble.
    To see how the e¤ects of this policy in practice, we can return to the example of Section 2.4.
In that example, the world economy was subject to bubble creation and bubble return shocks
that generated rich dynamics. We now analyze the dynamics in the presence of policy. Figure 11
reproduces in black the evolution of the main variables in the absence of policy, whereas it depicts in
red the evolution of these same variables under the policy speci…ed in the corollary. Figure 12 shows
the speci…c policy interventions that underlie these results, assuming that investor expectations are
una¤ected by the presence of a policy.
    The policy fully stabilizes the economy throughout the sample. In the …rst episode, which was
a global credit bust, it does so by subsidizing entrepreneurs both in Home and in Foreign. Because
entrepreneurs borrow against these promised subsidies, the policy raises global investment and
output while eliminating storage. It stabilizes the global interest rate and sets it equal to , and it
raises the welfare of savers and entrepreneurs all over the world.
    In the second episode, which combines a credit boom in Home with a bust in Foreign, the policy
also stabilizes the world economy but it has important redistributional consequences. Namely, due
to diminishing returns, the market bubble is suboptimally distributed between Home and Foreign in
this episode. By taxing Home entrepreneurs and subsidizing Foreign ones, the policy reestablishes
symmetry. This raises global investment and output, while hurting residents of Home and bene…ting
those of Foreign.




                                                  24
      Finally, the last episode in the example entailed a global credit boom, which raised global
interest rates and led to a fall in global investment and output. Here, the policy prescribes taxing
entrepreneurs both in Home and in Foreign. This reduces the interest rate and boosts investment
and output. Interestingly, this tax raises the welfare of entrepreneurs and reduces that of savers.
      This example shows how the policy outlined in corollary 1 is successful in stabilizing the world
economy and raising global welfare. This casts a positive light on the possibilities of policy inter-
vention, but these appear to rely on two crucial features of the analysis. The …rst is the assumption
that governments can impose unlimited lump-sum taxes on young entrepreneurs. This assumption
may seem central to our results, since it is not entirely clear whether governments with more lim-
ited powers of taxation (i.e., access only to distortionary taxes or subject to a maximum tax rate)
would be able to implement the optimal allocation. Although this presumption is intuitive, we have
shown elsewhere that it is not true, since governments subject to such limitations could …nance the
policy equally well by issuing debt.9 The second crucial feature of our analysis is, of course, that
we have shown the e¤ects of a policy that is optimally designed and implemented by governments
seeking to maximize global welfare. This may raise the question of whether such a policy would
also be implemented if governments behaved in a non-cooperative fashion.


3.4      Non-cooperative policy

This section solves for the cooperative equilibrium, which is de…ned as follows:

Problem 2 In the non-cooperative solution n maximizes W and n maximizes W . In this case,
n and n are obtained by solving,
                                                     @W
                                                        = 0,
                                                     @n
                                                     @W
                                                        = 0,
                                                     @n

subject to Equations (12)-(16).

      Thus, the non-cooperative equilibrium is de…ned as the Nash equilibrium of a game between
governments in which each of them tries to maximize its own welfare. In this Nash equilibrium,
countries take the policies of the other country as given.
      In general, the non-cooperative equilibrium does not replicate the cooperative equilibrium. The
reason, of course, is that countries do not take into account the spillovers that their policies create.

  9
      For a formal demonstration of this, see Martin and Ventura (2014).


                                                         25
We saw in Section 2.3 that these spillovers work through the world interest rate and the terms-of
trade. The interest-rate spillover is negative and this implies that individual countries have an
incentive to generate too much credit. The terms-of-trade spillover is positive in the long run and
this implies that countries have an incentive to generate too little credit. These two forces distort
country incentives and create a global ine¢ ciency. The sign of this ine¢ ciency depends on the
relative importance of the two distortions.
     We illustrate these insights by solving the noncooperative problem under three di¤erent pa-
rameter assumptions. Figure 13 shows the case in which           = 2 and      = 0. In this case, the
terms-of-trade spillover is weak and does not compensate the interest-rate ine¢ ciency. As a result,
the noncooperative equilibvrium leads to too much credit, too high interest and too low investement
and output. In this world economy, credit is too high. Figure 14 shows the Cole-Obstfeld case in
which     = 1 and    = 0. In this case, the two distortions o¤set each other and the noncooperative
equilibrium coincides with the cooperative one. Figure 15 shows the case in which         = 0:01 and
    = 0. In this case, the terms-of-trade is so powerful that governments eliminate all credit and the
noncooperative equilibrium delivers the bubbleless equilibrium.


4      Concluding remarks

We live in a world of low …nancial integration, low interest rates, and frequent credit booms. In
this paper, we have developed a framework to think about these three stylized facts as part of a
general narrative. In our model, low interest rates are the result of weak enforcement institutions,
which limit collateral and thus credit and investment in the global economy. For simplicity, we
have assumed throughout that enforcement institutions are equally weak in all countries: nothing
substantial would change, however, if we assumed that they are particularly weak in developing
countries. In this case, the decline in the world interest rate could be attributed to the latter’s
increasing …nancial integration with the global economy.
     Our model shows that low interest rates create the conditions for asset bubbles to arise, which
in turn give rise to credit booms and busts. When a bubble raises the market value of assets in an
economy, it relaxes borrowing constraints and fuels a credit boom that attracts foreign capital and
expands investment and economic growth. The e¤ects of this expansion propagate across the world
economy through two channels: the interest rate, which increases for the rest of the world due to
the higher demand for credit, and the terms of trade, which initially worsen but then improve for



                                                  26
the rest of the world as the country going through the credit boom …rst experiences an increase in
the relative demand for its products and eventually an increase in their relative supply. Of course,
credit booms sustained by asset bubbles ultimately rest on expectations or investor sentiment,
which are prone to sudden shifts. When this happens, the boom turns into a credit bust and asset
prices, intermediation, investment and output all fall as capital ‡ows abroad.
   This general description of credit booms and busts seems quite conventional. But it turns the
standard perception of the link between asset prices, investment and capital ‡ows on its head.
The conventional way of thinking about these episodes is that, in any given country, investment
responds to increases in productivity: it is this increase in investment that raises credit, capital
in‡ows and asset prices. Our model provides a di¤erent way of interpreting these phenomena. In a
global economy characterized by low interest rates, it may very well be it is changes in expectations
or investor sentiment that drive changes in asset prices, which in turn translate into ‡uctuations
in credit, investment and capital in‡ows. Insofar as investor sentiment can change abruptly and
independently of economic fundamentals, our model provides a rationale for the incidence of credit
booms and busts in a low-interest world.
   By providing an alternative interpretation of the world that we live in, our model also provides
a di¤erent role for policy. In particular, it shows that a global planner should adopt a policy
of “leaning-against-investor-sentiment”, taxing credit in those times and countries where credit
is excessive and subsidizing it elsewhere. An important characteristic of this policy is that it is
expectationally robust, in the sense that it isolates the world economy from ‡uctuations in investor
sentiment. This policy may be hard to implement in a decentralized fashion, though, as individual
countries are unlikely to internalize the e¤ects of their policies on the world interest rate and on
other countries’terms-of-trade.
   Of course, our model provides a …rst approach to many of these questions. One important issue
that we have left aside is the study of policy, both at the global and at the country level, in an
asymmetric world. What would change in our analysis if countries di¤ered in size or productivity?
What if they di¤ered in the credibility of their institutions, for instance, and thus in their ability
to implement policy? Is it reasonable to assume that larger and more credible countries will be
better able to adopt policies like the one studied here, thereby capturing the rents that arise from
hosting bubbles in a low-interest global economy? These are fascinating questions that provide an
exciting avenue for future research.




                                                 27
References

 [1] Aoki, K., Benigno, G. and N. Kiyotaki (2010), “Adjusting to Capital Account Liberalization”,
    mimeo, LSE.

 [2] Basco, Sergi (2014), “Globalization and …nancial development: A model of the Dot-Com and
    the Housing Bubbles”, Journal of International Economics, 92(1), 78-94.

 [3] Bernanke, B. (2009), “Financial reform to address systemic risk,” Speech at the Council on
    Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C, 10 March.

 [4] Boyd, John, and B. Smith (1997), “Capital Market Imperfections, International Credit Mar-
    kets, and Nonconvergence”, Journal of Economic Theory, 335-64.

 [5] Caballero, R., E. Farhi and P.O. Gourinchas (2008), “An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global Im-
    balances’and Low Interest Rates”, American Economic Review, 98 (1), 358–393.

 [6] Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy (2006), “Bubbles and Capital Flow Volatility: Causes
    and Risk Management”, Journal of Monetary Economics 53(1), 33-53.

 [7] Claessens, S., A. Kose and M. Terrones (2011), “Financial Cycles: What? How? When?”,
    NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics, University of Chicago Press, 7(1), 303 -
    344.

 [8] Dell’Ariccia, G., D. Igan, L. Laeven and H. Tong, with B. Bakker and J. Vandenbussche (2012),
    “Policies for Macro…nancial Stability: How to Deal with Credit Booms”, IMF Sta¤ Discussion
    Note, SDN 12/06.

 [9] Dell’Ariccia, G., D. Igan and L. Laeven (2012), “Credit Booms and Lending Standards: Evi-
    dence from the Subprime Mortgage Market”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44(2-3),
    367-384..

[10] Dell’Ariccia, G. and R. Marquez (2006), “Lendong Booms and Lending Standards”, The Jour-
    nal of Finance 51(5), 2511–2546.

[11] Economist, The (2009), “When a ‡ow becomes a ‡ood”, January 22.

[12] Farhi, E. and J. Tirole (2011), “Bubbly Liquidity”, Review of Economic Studies 79, 678-706.



                                               28
[13] Gertler, M., and K. Rogo¤ (1990), “North–south lending and endogenous domestic capital
    market ine¢ ciencies”, Journal of Monetary Economics 26, 245–266.

[14] Gorton, G. and P. He (2008), “Bank Credit Cycles”, Review of Economic Studies 75(4), 1181-
    1214.

[15] Gourinchas, P.O., R. Valdes and O. Landerretche (2001), “Lending Booms: Latin America
    and the World”, Economia 1(2), 47-99.

[16] Krugman, P (2009): “Revenge of the glut,” The New York Times, 1 March.

[17] Martin, A. (2008), “Endogenous Credit Cycles”, mimeo, CREI.

[18] Martin, A. and J. Ventura (2012), “Economic Growth with Bubbles”, American Economic
    Review 102, 3033-3058.

[19] Martin, A. and J. Ventura (2014), “Managing Credit Bubbles”, mimeo, CREI.

[20] Matsuyama, K. (2004), “Financial market globalization, symmetry-breaking and endogenous
    inequality of nations”, Econometrica 72 (3), 853–884.

[21] Matsuyama, K. (2007), “Credit Traps and Credit Cycles”, American Economic Review 97(1),
    503-516.

[22] Mendoza, E., J. Rios-Rull and V. Quadrini (2009), “Financial Integration, Financial Deepness
    and Global Imbalances”, Journal of Political Economy 117 (3), 371-410

[23] Mendoza, E. and M. Terrones (2012), “An Anatomy of Credit Booms and their Demise”, WP
    18379, NBER.

[24] Miao, J. and P. Wang (2011), “Bubbles and Credit Constraints”, mimeo, Boston University.

[25] Portes, R (2009): “Global imbalances”, in M. Dewatripont, X. Freixas, and R. Portes (eds),
    Macroeconomic stability and …nancial regulation: Key issues for the G20, London, CEPR.

[26] Ruckes, M. (2004), “Bank Competition and Credit Standards”, The Review of Financial Stud-
    ies 17(4), 1073-1102.

[27] Samuelson, P. (1958), “An Exact Consumption-loan Model of Interest with or without the
    Social Contrivance of Money”, Journal of Political Economy 66, 467-482.


                                               29
[28] Schularick, M. and A. Taylor (2012), “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage
       Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870-2008”, American Economic Review 102(2), 1029–1061.

[29] Ventura, J. (2011), “Bubbles and Capital Flows”, Journal of Economic Theory 147 (2), 738-
       758.


Appendix: Proof of proposition 2

The cooperative equilibrium of our economy is characterized by the pair fn; n g that solves


                     max [W + W ] = [R (1                      ") (1                  ) + ] [p k + p k ] .                        (40)


Let
                                             nt                                                  nt
                         =                                            =
                              (1    ") (1          ) pt kt                     (1       ") (1           ) pt kt

denote the rate of bubble creation in Home and Foreign as a function of saver wages. Given this
notation, maximization of Equation (40) amounts to maximizing


                                                           A(R) yb( ; R)                                                          (41)


where
                                        A(R) = (1                    ) (1             ") R +

and
                             1          1
                                                       h                                                              i
                                                                                                                          1
                    yb = p    1    +p    1                 " (1           ) + (1             ") (1            )               .
                                                                                                                  R

      Taking the …rst-order condition of (41) with respect to                                 tells us that a larger global bubble is
desirable as long as


                         A;R       R;   +    yb;   +       yb;p p;    +        yb;p    p ;   +       yb;R R;      0,

                dx m
where     x;m   =       denotes an elasticity between variables x and m. From Equation (14) for the
                dm x
interest rate, it can be shown that
                                             8
                                             <             0              if          < (1       )
                                   R;   =              1    R                                             ,
                                             :                                   otherwise
                                                   1       2 R

                                                                     30
in any symmetric allocation. It can also be shown that                                    yb;p p;     =      yb;p      p ;          in any symmetric
allocation.
   It follows from these observations that it is always optimal to raise                                            when the economy is in
the partial intermediation region, i.e., as long as                          R;       = 0. Once              (1            )        , and taking into
                                                        (1    ")
account that          =                =                             R       , the …rst order condition becomes
                yb;             yb;R
                                           1       " + (1          ")
                                                                         R


                           (1     ") (1   ) R                  1       R                        (1     ")
                                                                                                            R                  0,
                      (1        ") (1   ) R+                       R          1            " + (1         ")
                                                                                                                R

which, evaluated at         = (1           R) R, can be rewritten as

                                          (1       )                                                  1
                                                                                                                       .
                            (1         ") (1       ) R+                1               " + (1        ") (1        R)

                                                                    1+"
This condition can never be satis…ed under our assumption that            . To see this, simply       >
                                                                     1+"
note that the left hand side of the expression is decreasing in both and R, and it is therefore
lower than                             < 1. The right hand side of the expression is instead increasing in both
              1 + " (1           )
                                              1+"
  and R, and it is therefore higher than                   > 1.
                                            (1 + "       )
   Taking this into account, it is immediate to compute the bubble n = n that maximizes Equation
                                                       1
(40). It must simulatenously satisfy R = and R =              , which implies = (1    ) and thus
                                                     1 R

                                                                                  1
                 n = n = (1                    )   (1        ") (1           )1         (" + (1       ") (1            )) 1          .




                                                                       31
                                                                                                   Concurrence of Credit Bo oms
                                                                        40                                                                                  5




                                                                                                                                                                  U . S . R eal Fed eral Fu n d s R ate (%)
                                  % Cou ntri es wi th Cred i t Bo oms
                                                                        20                                                                                  0




                                                                         0                                                                                   −5
                                                                             1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012

Figure 1 : Credit booms are identified by comparing the credit-to-GDP ratio in a given year to a rolling, country-specific, cubic trend estimated over a 10-year
period (see Dell0 Ariccia et al. [2012]). In particular, a credit booms occurs if the deviation from trend is greater than 1.5 times its standard deviation and the
annual growth rate of the credit-to-GDP ratio exceeds 10 percent; or if the growth rate of the credit-to-GDP ratio exceeds 20 percent. There is a total of 170
countries in the sample.
                                                                           OECD Countrie s
                                             4

                                            3.5

                                             3




                                     I FI
                                            2.5

                                             2

                                            1.5

                                             1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002    2004    2006    2008    2010


                                                                         Non-OECD Countrie s
                                            1.6

                                            1.4

                                            1.2
                                     I FI




                                             1

                                            0.8


                                             1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002    2004    2006    2008    2010

Figure 2 : IFI is the sum foreign assets and liabilities scaled by GDP (see Lane [2012]). We report the aggregate IFI ratio for OECD and Non-OECD countries.
Data are taken from the Lane and Milesi-Feretti database and low-income countries, oil producers and countries with population less than one million were excluded.
            A: Bubble Cr eat ion                     B: Capit al                               C: St or age
 0.1                                    0.2                                      1
                 ⌘ = ⌘⇤                               k = k⇤                                              st
                                                                                                                =    st ⇤
                                       0.15                                                              sa v       sa v ⇤
                                                                                0.5
0.05                                    0.1
                                                                                 0
                                       0.05

  0                                      0                                     −0.5
       0            0.05         0.1          0           0.05           0.1          0           0.05                       0.1
                D: Bubble                         E: Int er es t Rat e                    F: Ret ur n on Capit al
0.08                                                                             5
                                        0.5
                 b = b⇤                               R                                                         r
                                                                                                                    =   r⇤
0.06                                                                             4                              q       q⇤
                                        0.4
0.04                                                                             3

0.02                                    0.3                                      2

  0                                                                              1
       0            0.05         0.1          0           0.05           0.1          0           0.05                       0.1
              G: Input Pr ices                       H: O ut put                           I: Cur r ent Account
  2                                     0.5                                      1
                 p = p⇤                               y = y⇤                                    CA = CA⇤
 1.5                                    0.4                                     0.5

  1                                     0.3                                      0

 0.5                                    0.2                                    −0.5

  0                                     0.1                                     −1
       0            0.05         0.1          0           0.05           0.1          0           0.05                       0.1
                 J: Saver s                       K: Ent r epr eneur s                             ⌘
0.08                                   0.25
                 U S = U S⇤                           U E = U E⇤
0.06                                    0.2
                                                                                  ↵ =0. 5, ✏ =0. 2, ⇢ =0. 25
0.04                                   0.15

0.02                                    0.1
                                                                                    and are not re l e vant i n
  0                                    0.05                                       thi s sy mme tri c e x ampl e
       0            0.05         0.1          0           0.05           0.1
                     ⌘                                     ⌘

           Figure 3 : This panel plots the steady-state values of key variables as a function of ⌘.
                                       A : Bu b b l e Creati on                    B: Capital                                C: Storage
                                0.15                 ⇤                                       ⇤                                                st ⇤
                                             ⌘ =⌘                                   k =k                                           st
                                                                                                                                         =
                                                                         0.2                                      1               sa v       sa v ⇤

                                 0.1
                                                                         0.1                                     0.5
                                0.05

                                  0                                       0                                       0
                                       5   10   15       20   25   30          5   10   15       20   25   30            5   10      15        20     25   30
                                           D : Bu b b l e                      E: Inte re st Rate                      F: Re turn on Capital
                                0.08                                                                              8
                                             b = b⇤                     0.35        R t +1                                        Et r t + 1 E r⇤
                                                                                                                                            = tq ⇤t + 1
                                0.06                                                                              6                 qt           t


                                0.04                                     0.3                                      4
                                0.02                                                                              2
                                                                        0.25
                                  0                                                                               0
                                       5   10   15       20   25   30          5   10   15       20   25   30            5   10      15        20     25   30
                                        G: Input Pric e s                          H: Output                           I: Curre nt Ac c ount
                                  2                                                                               1
                                             p = p⇤                      0.6        y = y⇤                                    CA = CA⇤
                                 1.5                                                                             0.5
                                                                         0.4
                                  1                                                                               0

                                 0.5                                     0.2                                    −0.5

                                  0                                       0                                      −1
                                       5   10   15       20   25   30          5   10   15       20   25   30            5   10      15        20     25   30
                                            J : Save rs                        K: Entre pre ne urs
                                 0.1
                                             U S = U S⇤                  0.3        U E = U E⇤
                                0.08                                    0.25                                       ↵ =0. 5, ✏ =0. 2, ⇢ =0. 25
                                0.06                                     0.2
                                0.04                                    0.15
                                                                         0.1                                         and are not re l e vant i n
                                0.02
                                                                                                                   thi s sy mme tri c e x ampl e
                                       5   10   15       20   25   30          5   10   15       20   25   30

Figure 4 : This panel shows the simulation of an economy with shocks to bubble returns ⌘t (the two countries are subject to the same shocks, so that ⌘t = ⌘t⇤ ).
                                       A : Bu b b l e Creati on                    B: Capital                                 C: Storage
                                                                        0.18                                     0.05
                                0.15                 ⇤                                       ⇤                                                 st ⇤
                                             ⌘ =⌘                                   k =k                                            st
                                                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                                   sa v       sa v ⇤
                                                                        0.16
                                 0.1
                                                                                                                   0
                                                                        0.14
                                0.05

                                  0                                     0.12                                    −0.05
                                       5   10   15       20   25   30          5   10   15       20   25   30             5   10      15        20     25   30
                                           D : Bu b b l e                      E: Inte re st Rate                       F: Re turn on Capital
                                0.08                                     0.4
                                             b = b⇤                                 R t +1                                         Et r t + 1 E r⇤
                                                                                                                                             = tq ⇤t + 1
                                                                                                                                     qt
                                                                        0.35                                      1.6                             t
                                0.06
                                                                         0.3                                      1.4
                                0.04
                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                  1.2
                                       5   10   15       20   25   30          5   10   15       20   25   30             5   10      15        20     25   30
                                        G: Input Pric e s                          H: Output                            I: Curre nt Ac c ount
                                  2                                                                                1
                                             p = p⇤                     0.45        y = y⇤                                     CA = CA⇤
                                 1.5                                                                              0.5

                                  1                                      0.4                                       0

                                 0.5                                    0.35                                     −0.5

                                  0                                                                               −1
                                       5   10   15       20   25   30          5   10   15       20   25   30             5   10      15        20     25   30
                                            J : Save rs                        K: Entre pre ne urs
                                0.08
                                             U S = U S⇤                 0.22        U E = U E⇤
                                0.07
                                                                         0.2                                        ↵ =0. 5, ✏ =0. 2, ⇢ =0. 25
                                0.06
                                                                        0.18
                                0.05
                                                                        0.16                                          and are not re l e vant i n
                                                                                                                    thi s sy mme tri c e x ampl e
                                       5   10   15       20   25   30          5   10   15       20   25   30

Figure 5 : This panel shows the simulation of an economy with shocks to bubble returns ut (the two countries are subject to the same shocks, so that ut = u⇤t ).
                            A: Bubble Cr eat ion                    B: Capit al                         C: St or age
                      0.2                             0.25                               0.04

                     0.15                              0.2
                                                                                         0.02
                      0.1                             0.15
                                                                                             0
                     0.05                              0.1

                       0                              0.05                              −0.02
                            5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5      10    15    20    25
                                  D: Bubble                      E: Int er es t Rat e            F: Ret ur n on Capit al
                     0.08                             0.45                                   2

                     0.06                              0.4                                1.8

                     0.04                             0.35                                1.6

                     0.02                              0.3                                1.4

                       0                              0.25
                            5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5      10    15    20    25
                                G: Input Pr ices                   H: O ut put                    I: Cur r ent Acount
                       2                              0.45                               0.04

                      1.5                              0.4                               0.02

                       1                              0.35                                   0

                      0.5                              0.3                              −0.02

                       0                              0.25                              −0.04
                            5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5      10    15    20    25
                            J: Saver s ( welfar e)       K : Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)
                    0.08                              0.25
                                                                                                     Home (l ai sse z fai re )
                    0.06                               0.2

                    0.04                              0.15                                           Fore i gn (l ai sse z fai re )

                    0.02                               0.1                                           ↵ =0. 5, ✏ =0. 2, ⇢ =0. 25
                            5    10    15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25

                                                                                                        = 1, not re l e vant
                                                                                                     i n thi s e x ampl e

Figure 6 : This panel shows the simulation of an economy with shocks to bubble creation ⌘t (and constant ⌘t⇤ ). In this example,      = 1.
                                      A: Bubble Cr eat ion                    B: Capit al                       C: St or age
                                0.2                             0.16                               0.04

                               0.15                             0.14
                                                                                                   0.02
                                0.1                             0.12
                                                                                                       0
                               0.05                              0.1

                                  0                             0.08                              −0.02
                                      5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                            D: Bubble                      E: Int er es t Rat e            F: Ret ur n on Capit al
                               0.08                             0.45                                   2

                               0.06                              0.4                                1.8

                               0.04                             0.35                                1.6

                               0.02                              0.3                                1.4

                                  0                             0.25
                                      5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                          G: Input Pr ices                    H: Out put                    I: Cur r ent Acount
                                1.2                              0.4                               0.04
                                                                0.38                               0.02
                                1.1
                                                                0.36
                                                                                                       0
                                                                0.34
                                  1
                                                                0.32                              −0.02

                                0.9                                                               −0.04
                                      5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                      J: Saver s ( welfar e)       K : Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)
                               0.08                              0.2
                                                                                                                Home ( lais s ez fair e)
                               0.06                             0.18

                               0.04                             0.16                                            For eign ( lais s ez fair e)

                               0.02                                                                             ↵ =0.5, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25
                                      5    10    15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25

                                                                                                                    =2,   =0

Figure 7.A : This panel shows the simulation of an economy with shocks to bubble creation ⌘ (and constant ⌘ ⇤ ). In this example,              = 2 and   =0.
                                       A: Bubble Cr eat ion                    B: Capit al                       C: St or age
                                 0.2                             0.25                               0.04

                                0.15                              0.2
                                                                                                    0.02
                                 0.1                             0.15
                                                                                                        0
                                0.05                              0.1

                                  0                              0.05                              −0.02
                                       5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                             D: Bubble                      E: Int er es t Rat e            F: Ret ur n on Capit al
                                0.08                             0.45                                   2

                                0.06                              0.4

                                0.04                             0.35                                1.5

                                0.02                              0.3

                                  0                              0.25                                   1
                                       5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                           G: Input Pr ices                   H: O ut put                    I: Cur r ent Acount
                                 1.4                             0.45                               0.02

                                                                  0.4                               0.01
                                 1.2
                                                                 0.35                                   0
                                  1
                                                                  0.3                              −0.01

                                 0.8                             0.25                              −0.02
                                       5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                       J: Saver s ( welfar e)       K : Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)
                               0.08                               0.2
                                                                                                                 Home ( lais s ez fair e)
                               0.06                              0.18

                               0.04                              0.16                                            For eign ( lais s ez fair e)

                               0.02                                                                              ↵ =0.5, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25
                                       5    10    15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25

                                                                                                                     =2,   =0.8

Figure 7.B : This panel shows the simulation of an economy with shocks to bubble creation ⌘ (and constant ⌘ ⇤ ). In this example,               = 2 and   = 0.8 .
                                  A: Bubble Cr eat ion                     B: Capit al                       C: St or age
                            0.2                              0.16                               0.06

                           0.15                              0.14                               0.04

                            0.1                              0.12                               0.02

                           0.05                               0.1                                   0

                             0                               0.08                              −0.02
                                  5     10   15   20   25           5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                        D: Bubble                       E: Int er es t Rat e            F: Ret ur n on Capit al
                           0.08                              0.45                                   2

                           0.06                               0.4                                1.8

                           0.04                              0.35                                1.6

                           0.02                               0.3                                1.4

                             0                               0.25
                                  5     10   15   20   25           5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                      G: Input Pr ices                     H: Out put                    I: Cur r ent Acount
                            1.2                              0.37                               0.04

                                                             0.36                               0.02
                            1.1
                                                             0.35                                   0
                             1
                                                             0.34                              −0.02

                            0.9                              0.33                              −0.04
                                  5     10   15   20   25           5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                  J: Saver s ( welfar e)        K : Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)
                          0.08                              0.185

                                                             0.18                                            Home ( lais s ez fair e)
                          0.06                              0.175
                                                                                                             For eign ( lais s ez fair e)
                                                             0.17

                          0.04                              0.165                                            ↵ =0.5, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25
                                  5    10    15   20   25           5     10   15   20   25

                                                                                                                 =1,   =0

Figure 8.A : This panel shows the simulation of an economy with shocks to bubble creation ⌘ (and constant ⌘ ⇤ ). In this example,           = 1 and   =0.
                                  A: Bubble Cr eat ion                    B: Capit al                       C: St or age
                            0.2                             0.25                               0.04

                           0.15                              0.2
                                                                                               0.02
                            0.1                             0.15
                                                                                                   0
                           0.05                              0.1

                              0                             0.05                              −0.02
                                  5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                        D: Bubble                      E: Int er es t Rat e            F: Ret ur n on Capit al
                           0.08                             0.45                                   2

                           0.06                              0.4

                           0.04                             0.35                                1.5

                           0.02                              0.3

                              0                             0.25                                   1
                                  5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                      G: Input Pr ices                    H: Out put                    I: Cur r ent Acount
                            1.6                              0.4                               0.02

                            1.4                             0.38                               0.01
                                                            0.36
                            1.2                                                                    0
                                                            0.34
                              1                             0.32                              −0.01

                            0.8                                                               −0.02
                                  5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15   20   25
                                  J: Saver s ( welfar e)       K : Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)
                           0.08                              0.2
                                                                                                            Home ( lais s ez fair e)
                           0.06                             0.18

                           0.04                             0.16                                            For eign ( lais s ez fair e)

                           0.02                                                                             ↵ =0.5, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25
                                  5    10    15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25

                                                                                                                =1,   =0.8

Figure 8.B : This panel shows the simulation of an economy with shocks to bubble creation ⌘ (and constant ⌘ ⇤ ). In this example,          = 1 and   = 0.8 .
                                  A: Bubble Cr eat ion                    B: Capit al                       C: St or age
                            0.2                             0.16                               0.06

                           0.15                             0.14                               0.04

                            0.1                             0.12                               0.02

                           0.05                              0.1                                   0

                              0                             0.08                              −0.02
                                  5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15     20    25
                                        D: Bubble                      E: Int er es t Rat e            F: Ret ur n on Capit al
                           0.08                             0.45                                   2

                           0.06                              0.4

                           0.04                             0.35                                1.5

                           0.02                              0.3

                              0                             0.25                                   1
                                  5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15     20    25
                                      G: Input Pr ices                    H: Out put                    I: Cur r ent Acount
                            1.4                              0.4                               0.04
                                                            0.38                               0.02
                            1.2
                                                            0.36
                                                                                                   0
                                                            0.34
                              1
                                                            0.32                              −0.02

                            0.8                                                               −0.04
                                  5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15     20    25
                                  J: Saver s ( welfar e)       K : Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)
                           0.08                              0.2
                                                                                                            Home ( lais s ez fair e)
                           0.06                             0.18

                           0.04                             0.16                                            For eign ( lais s ez fair e)

                           0.02                                                                             ↵ =0.5, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25
                                  5    10    15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25

                                                                                                                =0.6,        =0

Figure 9.A : This panel shows the simulation of an economy with shocks to bubble creation ⌘ (and constant ⌘ ⇤ ). In this example,          = 0.6 and   =0.
                                        A: Bubble Cr eat ion                    B: Capit al                       C: St or age
                                  0.2                             0.16                               0.04

                                 0.15                             0.14
                                                                                                     0.02
                                  0.1                             0.12
                                                                                                         0
                                 0.05                              0.1

                                   0                              0.08                              −0.02
                                        5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15     20    25
                                              D: Bubble                      E: Int er es t Rat e            F: Ret ur n on Capit al
                                 0.08                             0.45                                2.5

                                 0.06                              0.4                                   2

                                 0.04                             0.35                                1.5

                                 0.02                              0.3                                   1

                                   0                              0.25                                0.5
                                        5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15     20    25
                                            G: Input Pr ices                   H: O ut put                    I: Cur r ent Acount
                                  1.4                             0.45                               0.04

                                  1.2                              0.4                               0.02

                                   1                              0.35                                   0

                                  0.8                              0.3                              −0.02

                                                                  0.25                              −0.04
                                        5     10   15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25             5   10    15     20    25
                                        J: Saver s ( welfar e)       K : Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)
                                0.08                              0.19
                                                                                                                  Home ( lais s ez fair e)
                                0.06                              0.18

                                0.04                              0.17                                            For eign ( lais s ez fair e)

                                0.02                              0.16                                            ↵ =0.5, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25
                                        5    10    15   20   25          5     10   15   20   25

                                                                                                                      =0.6,        =0.8

Figure 9.B : This panel shows the simulation of an economy with shocks to bubble creation ⌘ (and constant ⌘ ⇤ ). In this example,                = 0.6 and   = 0.8 .
                                         A: Bubble Cr eat ion                  B: Capit al                        C: St or age
                                   0.1                            0.25                               0.2

                                  0.08                             0.2                               0.1

                                  0.06                            0.15                                   0

                                  0.04                             0.1                              −0.1
                                          10    20   30    40             10     20   30     40              10     20     30      40
                                               D: Bubble                  E: Int er es t Rat e               F: Ret ur n Capit al
                                  0.06                                                                   2
                                                                  0.32
                                  0.05
                                                                   0.3
                                  0.04
                                                                  0.28
                                                                                                     1.5
                                  0.03                            0.26
                                  0.02                            0.24                                   1
                                          10    20   30    40             10     20   30     40              10     20     30     40
                                          G: Input Pr ices                     H: Out put                    I: Cur r ent Acount
                                                                  0.45                              0.04
                                   1.1
                                                                                                    0.02
                                  1.05
                                                                   0.4
                                    1                                                                    0
                                  0.95                                                             −0.02
                                                                  0.35
                                   0.9
                                                                                                   −0.04
                                          10    20   30    40             10     20   30     40              10     20     30      40
                                         J: Saver s ( welfar e)      K : Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)
                                 0.08                             0.22
                                                                                                                  Home (l ai sse z fai re )
                                                                   0.2
                                 0.06
                                                                  0.18                                            Fore i gn (l ai sse z fai re )

                                 0.04                             0.16                                            ↵ =0.5, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25
                                         10     20   30    40             10     20   30     40

                                                                                                                    =2,      =0.8

Figure 10 : This panel shows the simulation of an economy with shocks to bubble creation ( ⌘t and ⌘t⇤ ) and bubble returns ( ut and u⇤t ). There are two states
of the world: a normal state and a credit episode. In the normal state, ⌘t = ⌘t⇤ = ⌘. In an episode, ⌘t = ⌘˜ and ⌘t⇤ = ⌘˜⇤ , where ⌘˜ and ⌘˜⇤ are independently drawn
from a uniform distribution with support [(1     ) ⌘, (1 + ) ⌘] at the beginning of the episode. There is a constant transition probability across states. In this
simulation, = 0.25, = 0.1 and ⌘ = ⌘ opt = (1 ✏)(1 ↵)⇢(1 ⇢) . The bubble return shocks ut and u⇤t are i.i.d. across time and countries and are drawn from a
uniform distribution with support [ 0.02, 0.02].
                        A: Bubble Cr eat ion                  B: Capit al                        C: St or age
                  0.1                            0.25                               0.2

                 0.08                             0.2                               0.1

                 0.06                            0.15                                   0

                 0.04                             0.1                              −0.1
                         10    20   30    40             10     20   30     40              10     20     30      40
                              D: Bubble                  E: Int er es t Rat e               F: Ret ur n Capit al
                 0.06                                                                   2
                                                 0.32
                 0.05
                                                  0.3
                 0.04
                                                 0.28
                                                                                    1.5
                 0.03                            0.26
                 0.02                            0.24                                   1
                         10    20   30    40             10     20   30     40              10     20     30     40
                         G: Input Pr ices                     H: Out put                    I: Cur r ent Account
                                                 0.45                              0.04
                  1.1
                                                                                   0.02
                 1.05
                                                  0.4
                   1                                                                    0
                 0.95                                                             −0.02
                                                 0.35
                  0.9
                                                                                  −0.04
                         10    20   30    40             10     20   30     40              10     20     30      40
                        J: Saver s ( welfar e)      K : Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)
                 0.08                            0.22                                            Home (l ai sse z fai re )
                 0.07
                                                  0.2
                 0.06                                                                            Fore i gn (l ai sse z fai re )
                                                 0.18
                 0.05

                 0.04                            0.16                                            Opti mal Pol i c y
                         10    20   30    40             10     20   30     40
                                                                                                 ↵ =0.5, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25
                                                                                                   =2, =0.8

Figure 11 : This panel shows the economy simulated in Figure 10 and compares it to a managed economy with the optimal policy.
                                                 Polic y Inte rve ntion: Home
                        b
           0.06         s


           0.04


           0.02


             0


          −0.02
                        5       10          15         20      25      30       35   40      45


                                             Polic y Inte rve ntion: Fore ign
                        b⇤
           0.06         s⇤

           0.04


           0.02


             0


          −0.02
                        5       10          15         20      25      30       35   40      45
                  ↵ =0.5, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25
                    =2, =0.8

Figure 12 : This panel shows the implementation of the optimal policy in the example in Figure 11.
            A: Bubble Cr eat ion                           B: Capit al                             C: St or age
   0.11                                    0.24                                     0.01

                                           0.22                                    0.005
    0.1
                                            0.2                                        0
   0.09
                                           0.18                                   −0.005

   0.08                                    0.16                                    −0.01
             10    20     30     40                   10     20   30     40                   10     20    30     40
                  D: Bubble                           E: Int er es t Rat e                   F: Ret ur n Capit al
   0.08                                    0.45                                      1.2
                                            0.4
   0.07
                                           0.35                                      1.1
   0.06
                                            0.3

   0.05                                    0.25                                        1
             10    20     30     40                   10     20   30     40                  10      20   30      40
             G: Input Pr ices                              H: Out put                       I: Cur r ent Account
     2                                     0.52                                        1

    1.5                                     0.5                                       0.5

     1                                     0.48                                        0

    0.5                                                                             −0.5
                                           0.46
     0                                                                                −1
             10    20     30     40                   10     20   30     40                   10     20    30     40
            J: Saver s ( welfar e)             K: Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)               L : Tot al Welfar e
                                                                                   0.295
    0.1
                                           0.23                                     0.29
   0.09
                                           0.22                                    0.285
   0.08
                                           0.21                                     0.28
   0.07
                                            0.2                                    0.275

             10    20     30     40                   10     20   30     40                   10     20    30     40

                   Coop e rati ve E q ui l i bri um                           Non-Coop e rati ve E q ui l i bri um
          ↵ =0.45, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25,           =2,      =0

Figure 13 : This panel compares the cooperative and the non-cooperative equilibria when                                > 1.
             A: Bubble Cr eat ion                           B: Capit al                             C: St or age
      2                                        2                                     0.01

                                                                                    0.005
      1                                        1
                                                                                        0
      0                                        0
                                                                                   −0.005

     −1                                       −1                                    −0.01
              10    20     30     40                   10     20   30     40                   10     20    30     40
                   D: Bubble                           E: Int er es t Rat e                   F: Ret ur n Capit al
      2                                        2                                        3

      1                                        1                                        2

      0                                        0                                        1

     −1                                       −1                                        0
              10    20     30     40                   10     20   30     40                  10      20   30      40
              G: Input Pr ices                              H: Out put                       I: Cur r ent Account
      2                                     0.52                                        1

     1.5                                   0.515                                       0.5

      1                                     0.51                                        0

     0.5                                   0.505                                     −0.5

      0                                                                                −1
              10    20     30     40                   10     20   30     40                   10     20    30     40
             J: Saver s ( welfar e)             K : Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)              L : Tot al Welfar e
    0.08                                                                            0.295
   0.075                                   0.235
                                                                                     0.29
    0.07                                    0.23
                                                                                    0.285
   0.065                                   0.225
                                                                                     0.28
                                            0.22
              10    20     30     40                   10     20   30     40                   10     20    30     40

                    Coop e rati ve E q ui l i bri um                           Non-Coop e rati ve E q ui l i bri um
           ↵ =0.45, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25,           =1,      =0

Figure 14 : This panel compares the cooperative and the non-cooperative equilibria when                                 = 1.
                    A: Bubble Cr eat ion                                              B: Capit al                                                              C: St or age
                                                                  0.4                                                              0.01
0.08
                                                                  0.3                                                             0.005
0.06
0.04                                                              0.2                                                                 0

0.02                                                              0.1                                                            −0.005
  0
                                                                   0                                                              −0.01
          5   10    15     20    25    30    35     40      45          5   10   15   20   25   30       35   40     45                     5    10       15   20    25    30    35   40   45

                          D: Bubble                                               E: Int er es t Rat e                                                    F: Ret ur n Capit al
                                                                   2                                                                  5
0.06
                                                                                                                                      4
0.04                                                               1
                                                                                                                                      3
0.02
                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                      2
  0
                                                                  −1                                                                  1
          5   10    15     20    25    30    35     40      45          5   10   15   20   25   30       35   40     45                          10            20          30         40
                      G: Input Pr ices                                                H: Out put                                                      I: Cur r ent Account
  2                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                  0.5
 1.5                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                  0.4
  1                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                  0.3
 0.5                                                                                                                               −0.5
                                                                  0.2
  0                                                                                                                                  −1
          5   10    15     20    25    30    35     40      45          5   10   15   20   25   30       35   40     45                     5    10       15   20    25    30    35   40   45
                     J: Saver s ( welfar e)                                  K: Ent r epr eneur s ( welfar e)                                              L : Tot al Welfar e
0.08

                                                                  0.2                                                              0.25
0.06
                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                 0.15
0.04
                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                  0.1
0.02                                                                                                                                0.1
          5   10    15     20    25    30    35     40      45          5   10   15   20   25   30       35   40     45                     5    10       15   20    25    30    35   40   45

                         Coop e rati ve E q ui l i bri um                                                          Non-Coop e rati ve E q ui l i bri um
       ↵ =0.45, ✏ =0.2, ⇢ =0.25,            = 0.01,         =0


                   Figure 15 : This panel compares the cooperative and the non-cooperative equilibria when                                                          < 1.
