NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DECISION-MAKING APPROACHES AND THE PROPENSITY TO DEFAULT:
EVIDENCE AND IMPLICATIONS
Jeffrey R. Brown
Anne M. Farrell
Scott J. Weisbenner
Working Paper 20949
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20949

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) through grants RRC0809840004-00 and RRC08098400-03-00 to the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) as part of
the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those
of the authors and do not represent the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the
NBER. This research would not have been possible without the expert and enthusiastic assistance
of the State Universities Retirement System staff, especially Bill Mabe, Pam Butler, Tracy Childress,
and Byron Campbell. We thank Susan Anderson for cheerful and expert assistance in programming
the survey instrument and Lisa Marinelli for her exceptional assistance guiding this project through
the Institutional Review Board process. We thank John Beshears, Bruce Carlin, James Choi, and workshop
participants at the SSA and the University of Colorado at Boulder for feedback on earlier versions
of this paper. Disclosure: Brown is a Trustee for TIAA and has also received compensation as a speaker,
author, or consultant from a number of financial institutions that are involved in retirement plan design.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20949.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Anne M. Farrell, and Scott J. Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Decision-Making Approaches and the Propensity to Default: Evidence and Implications
Jeffrey R. Brown, Anne M. Farrell, and Scott J. Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 20949
February 2015
JEL No. D03,D14,G11
ABSTRACT
This paper examines heterogeneity in the responsiveness to default options in a large state retirement
plan, focusing on individuals’ decision-making approaches as well as their economic and demographic
characteristics. Using a survey of plan participants, we find that procrastination and the need for cognitive
closure are important determinants of the likelihood of default. We also explore an important implication
of defaulting – individuals who default are significantly more likely to subsequently express a desire
to enroll in a different plan. The desire to change plans is also correlated with numerous economic
and decision-making characteristics, including procrastination.

Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
brownjr@illinois.edu
Anne M. Farrell
Miami University Farmer School of Business
800 East High Street, 3094
Department of Accountancy
Oxford, OH 45056
Anne.Farrell@MiamiOH.edu

Scott J. Weisbenner
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Department of Finance
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbenn@illinois.edu

I. Introduction
One of the most influential contributions of behavioral economics to business practice
and public policy over the past decade has been to demonstrate the substantial power of default
options in influencing human behavior. Nowhere is this influence more apparent than in the area
of retirement plan design and policy. Compelling evidence that changing the default option
dramatically increases participation and savings in 401(k) plans (e.g., Madrian and Shea 2001;
Choi et al. 2002, 2004a) prompted the U.S. government to codify automatic enrollment in
defined contribution retirement plans in the 2006 Pension Protection Act. In recent years, we
have seen dramatic increases in the use of automatic enrollment, automatic escalation of
contributions, and automatic portfolio allocation and rebalancing both in the U.S. and abroad. 1
There have also been calls to extend the logic of defaults to the post-retirement payout phase of
retirement plans by encouraging automatic annuitization (Gale et al. 2008).
Although countless studies have documented profound effects of defaults on behavior,
we are still limited in our understanding of why defaults have such large effects overall, and,
equally importantly, why there is heterogeneity in the responsiveness to defaults. In this paper,
we empirically examine the determinants of a default decision in a large public plan that offers
an irrevocable choice among three retirement plans: a traditional defined benefit plan, a portable
defined benefit plan, and a defined contribution plan. In addition to examining the full range of
economic and demographic factors, we also study the role of several relevant individual
decision-making approaches identified in the judgment and decision-making literature. 2 These
include approaches in the presence of decision conflict, or uncertainty about which course of
1

The Plan Sponsor Council of America’s 55th Annual Survey finds that 46% of surveyed defined contribution plans
have an automatic enrollment feature in 2011, while Munnell and Sundén (2004) report that report that 7% of plans
sponsors offered automatic enrollment in 1999.
2
Our use of the term “decision approaches” encompasses both decision style and decision approach constructs
identified by Appelt et al. (2011) that are relevant to our setting.
1

action to take (Mann et al. 1997); indecision (Frost and Shows 1993); the propensity to regret
(Schwartz et al. 2002), and the need for cognitive closure, or the desire to come to an answer
(Roets and Van Hiel 2011). We capture measures of our economic, demographic, and decision
approach factors using a broad survey conducted among participants in the State Universities
Retirement System (SURS) of Illinois. In all, we collected survey responses from over 6,000
public university employees in the State of Illinois during Fall 2012.
We first study whether individuals made an active retirement plan choice or were
defaulted into the traditional defined benefit plan (individuals are defaulted six months after
joining the system unless they make an active election prior to that date). In our data,
approximately 27% of respondents defaulted whereas the remainder actively chose among the
three plans. We find numerous demographic and economic variables influence the propensity to
default. For example, higher income and higher net worth individuals are significantly less likely
to default, as are women, those with higher self-assessed investment skills, those with greater
knowledge of the retirement system, and a higher education level.
With regard to decision-making approaches, we find that a tendency toward
procrastination is significantly positively correlated with the likelihood of default. Numerous
authors have speculated that procrastination is a plausible reason for default, although this has
not been shown empirically. This finding is quite intuitive: those with a tendency to procrastinate
are less likely to make an active decision before the default deadline. It is also consistent with a
body of economic theory that portrays procrastination as an outcome of present-biased
preferences (Akerloff 1991; O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999). In this view, people with presentbiased preferences tend to systematically overweight the cost of making a decision today without
fully incorporating the fact that they will do the same tomorrow, a tendency that manifests itself

2

as procrastination.
We also find that individuals with a strong need for cognitive closure are less likely to
default. Kruglanski (1990) defines need for closure as a desire for ‘‘an answer on a given topic,
any answer...compared to confusion and ambiguity” (p. 337, emphasis added). 3 A need for
closure is therefore a natural factor to explore that can potentially mitigate default behavior.
Having established that individual decision-making approaches are important
determinants of default propensities, we then turn to understanding how individuals evaluate the
suitability of their retirement plan ex post. We do this by asking respondents, “If you could go
back in time and re-do your original pension choice (assuming the rules when you joined SURS
are still in place), which plan would you choose?”, and by asking them to rate the strength of
their desire to choose a different plan. We find that respondents who defaulted into the traditional
defined benefit plan are 21 percentage points less likely to want to select the same plan if given a
chance to re-do their choice. This is true even relative to those who actively chose the same plan
into which others were defaulted, suggesting that it is the default behavior rather than the plan
itself that is driving this desire to switch to a different plan. We also find that the proportion of
those who would “strongly desire” to switch plans is significantly greater among defaulters than
among active choosers.
We relate the desire to change plans against the same set of economic, demographic, and
decision-making characteristics from above. We again find that procrastination is important:
individuals who procrastinated their way into the default are significantly more likely to desire to
be in a different plan. We also find that buck-passers – those that are content to leave decisions
to others – are significantly less likely to express a desire to switch plans.
3

The full Need for Closure Scale was developed by Webster & Kruglanski (1994). We use the shorter, 15-question
version from Roets and Van Hiel (2011).
3

These results are informative to the broader use of default options in public and private
retirement plans in practice. In particular, the findings that procrastination leads to defaults and
that procrastinators are more likely to subsequently express a desire to be in a different plan are
important for assessing the welfare consequences of defaults. The use of defaults is often
portrayed as a Pareto improvement because a well-designed default can guide individuals into
making potentially welfare-improving decisions while still providing the freedom to choose. But
if individuals end up dissatisfied with the results of the default, especially in settings like ours
where the default is irreversible, this suggests caution in relying heavily on default options as
opposed to other alternatives such as forced choice.
This paper adds to the small but growing body of research suggesting that defaults can
have potential downsides. Other researchers have shown that poorly designed defaults can
reduce welfare if employees fail to later adjust the defaults to suit their needs (Choi et al. 2002,
2004a, 2004b; Beshears et al. 2008, 2010a) and that optimal defaults can vary depending upon
participant characteristics (Carroll et al. 2009; Carlin, Gervais, and Manso 2010; Goda and
Manchester 2010). Our results also suggest reasons to be cautious in relying solely on defaults to
influence behavior. They further raise the question of whether a plan sponsor can take steps to
decrease the tendency of procrastinators to default.
This paper proceeds as follows. In Section II we summarize prior literature on defaults. In
Section III we briefly describe prior literature related to individual judgment and decision
making approaches in complex settings. Section IV provides background on the SURS
retirement system, and in Section V we describe our survey design. Section VI presents results of
analyses of factors associated with the likelihood of default and with the desire to subsequently
make a different choice. We summarize and conclude in Section VII.

4

II. Prior Literature on Defaults
The earliest work on defaults in the retirement space showed that changing the 401(k)
enrollment procedure to one in which a participant must actively opt out of a plan rather than
actively opt in dramatically increases plan participation (Madrian and Shea 2001). Additional
research has shown that changing the default savings rate and default investment allocations
increase participant savings (Choi et al. 2002, 2004a). This early work, as well as industry
experience, propelled policy conversations that led to the U.S. government paving the way for
more widespread use of automatic enrollment in defined contribution retirement plans via the
2006 Pension Protection Act (PPA). 4 The PPA and subsequent regulatory actions have also
encouraged the widespread use of “Qualified Default Investment Alternatives” (QDIAs) as
default portfolio allocations, as well as the use of automatic escalation of contributions. Many
financial services firms also now offer automatic rebalancing of portfolios. There have also been
policy proposals to enact automatic annuitization as a default distribution strategy after
retirement (Gale et al. 2008; Brown 2009).
The idea that governments and organizations can influence behavior through the use of
defaults and other forms of non-binding approaches is often referred to in academic and popular
literature as “soft paternalism” or “libertarian paternalism” (Sunstein and Thaler 2003; Thaler
and Sunstein 2003, 2008). Some proponents of libertarian paternalism suggest that careful design
of policies and defaults can do more to increase welfare than can providing information to
increase individuals’ knowledge about their choices (Sunstein and Thaler 2003; Benartzi and
Thaler 2007). While retirement plan design has been a very visible and important application of
this concept, the effect of defaults on individual choice has been recognized in other domains as
well, including e-mail marketing (Johnson, Bellman, and Lohse 2002), health care (Halpern,
4

Similar legislation was passed in New Zealand in 2006 and the United Kingdom in 2007 (Beshears et al. 2010b).
5

Ubel, and Asch 2007), health club memberships (DellaVigna and Malmendier 2006), insurance
(Johnson et al. 1993), and organ donation (Johnson and Goldstein 2003; Abadie and Gay 2006).
While libertarian paternalism is often portrayed as an ideological “win-win” by guiding
behavior while preserving individual choice, literature has begun to raise potentially negative
consequences. For example, Glaeser (2006) points out that there is a danger of leading
individuals to sub-optimal outcomes because those who design policies and choose default
options likely bring their own incentives and biases to that task. 5 Some studies have shown that
poorly designed defaults, such as those with low default savings rates or excessively
conservative asset allocations, can reduce welfare if employees fail to later adjust the defaults to
suit their needs (Choi et al. 2002, 2004a, 2004b; Beshears et al. 2008). At another extreme,
Beshears et al. (2010a) examine a setting in which the default savings rate for a defined
contribution retirement plan is extremely high, and find that the rate is suboptimal for all
employees.
Other research has explored conditions under which defaults are more or less likely to
improve social welfare. Carroll et al. (2009) contrast forced active choice, automatic enrollment
defaults, and non-automatic enrollment defaults in savings plans and find that forced choice is
optimal when participants may procrastinate or have heterogeneous preferences, while automatic
enrollment is optimal when participants are financially illiterate. Similarly, Carlin, Gervais, and
Manso (2010) model conditions under which providing default options for financial decisions
may be optimal; they find that even well-thought-out defaults can be detrimental to welfare when
5

Glaeser (2006) also discusses a number of other criticisms and negative consequences of over-reliance on
libertarian paternalism as a guide to policy, including: (i) soft paternalism can pave the way towards stricter forms of
paternalism that reduce welfare by reducing individual choice; (ii) soft paternalism may rely on stigmatizing
behaviors, which can then lead to negative consequences for those who choose to engage in those behaviors; (iii)
relative to governments and organizations that design paternalistic policies, individuals face stronger incentives to
make choices that improve their own welfare; and, (iv) paternalism often relies on persuasion and governments and
organizations have an incentive to abuse persuasion-based systems to enhance their own power.
6

participants have heterogeneous attributes (and less is known about them) and when the
economic stakes of the decision are large. Goda and Manchester (2010) examine the welfare
effects of age-based defaults and find that varying the default option by age groups can result in
welfare gains relative to a single default for all age groups.
Although prior literature provides insights into when defaults may or may not be optimal,
the empirical evidence regarding who defaults and why is more limited. Beshears et al. (2008)
propose three reasons that individuals may default, including the complexity of the decision, the
belief that the default is a signal or endorsement of the best choice, or that procrastinators never
get around to making a decision. Understanding why people default is crucial for evaluating the
welfare consequences of relying on defaults as opposed to other interventions.
This paper begins to address the empirical gap by exploring economic, demographic, and
individual decision-making determinants of default behavior in a high-stakes setting. Although
our setting does not allow us to examine the welfare effects of default, we inform this question
by examining individuals’ post-decision subjective satisfaction with the plan in which they are
enrolled. This subjective satisfaction is also important for employers who design defaults. After
all, employers have an incentive to ensure that the significant sums they spend to provide
retirement benefits are valued by employees at least as much as a comparable sum spent on
wages (Gustman, Mitchell, and Steinmeier 1994; Gustman and Steinmeier 2005).

III. Prior Research on Decision-Making Approaches
Standard economic models of rational consumers assume that individuals make decisions
by maximizing expected utility. Indeed, even with the insights of behavioral economics, most
economic models of decision-making are still based upon an assumption of optimization, albeit

7

occasionally with non-standard preferences (e.g., loss aversion or hyperbolic discounting). One
of the reasons that economists have found default behavior interesting is that it is difficult to
reconcile the powerful effect of default options with many such models.
There is growing acceptance in economics that not all individuals approach decisionmaking in the same manner, and thus their decisions themselves can diverge from an economicsbased definition of optimality. For example, Choi et al. (2014) conducted an experiment to test
the quality of decisions as measured by their consistency with Generalized Axioms of Revealed
Preference (GARP) and find evidence of substantial heterogeneity in decision quality. Lusardi
and Mitchell (2014) summarize a large literature that documents substantial heterogeneity in
financial literacy and its implications for retirement well-being (among other outcomes).
A long history of research has shown that, when faced with complex decisions,
individuals frequently adopt simplifying decision strategies (Wood 1986; Campbell 1988; Payne
et al. 1993; Sethi-Iyengar, Huberman, and Jiang 2004; Benartzi and Thaler 2007; Bonner 2008).
For example, an individual may only consider a subset of information, and the information
chosen may not necessarily reflect the relevance of the information to the choice. Individuals
may also speed up information processing in response to time pressure, which can introduce
error into the choice process. Alternately, they may adopt a simpler processing strategy, which at
the extreme can be avoiding choice all together by accepting a default (Payne et al. 1993; SethiIyengar, Huberman, and Jiang 2004; Benartzi and Thaler 2007; Beshears et al. 2008).
In drawing on this rich judgment and decision-making literature, our research focuses on
what has been called “decision-coping.” 6 In particular, we draw on prior literature on decision
conflict, which assumes that “stress engendered by decisional conflict is a major determinant of
failure to achieve high quality decision making” (Mann et al. 1997, p. 2). In brief, when faced
6

The discussion of decision coping draws directly from Mann et al. (1997).
8

with a difficult decision, not all individuals respond in the same way. A subset will respond in a
manner that would be consistent with economic models of optimizing behavior, i.e., by
collecting and analyzing relevant information and choosing the outcome that maximizes utility.
However, other individuals will ignore information and continue the present course of action;
some will adopt whichever course is most strongly recommended; some will procrastinate or
shift responsibility for the choice; and some will “impulsively seize upon hastily contrived
solutions that seem to promise immediate relief” (Mann et al. 1997, p. 2).
As we describe more fully in Section V, we include in our survey questions that capture
decision approaches identified in prior literature that are likely to manifest in our decision
context – a complex, high-stakes, and irrevocable financial choice. We include the Melbourne
decision-making questionnaire, which captures four decision approaches to coping with decision
conflict. We also include scales from the judgment and decision-making literature that measure
regret, indecisiveness, and the need for cognitive closure (defined as “a desire for ‘‘an answer on
a given topic, any answer ... compared to confusion and ambiguity”; Kruglanski 1990, p. 337,
emphasis added). 7

IV. Background on the SURS Retirement System
Our decision context is the State Universities Retirement System (SURS) for the State of
Illinois. 8 Employees in the system have a one-time irrevocable choice among three different
retirement plans which have very different features (described below). Individuals who fail to

7

The full Need for Closure Scale was developed by Webster & Kruglanski (1994). We use the shorter, 15-question
version from Roets and Van Hiel (2011).
8
The discussion of institutional details updates a prior discussion of SURS in Brown and Weisbenner (2009), where
a more detailed description of the SURS retirement plan options can be found. We note that the reduction in the
number of employers covered by SURS in the two papers reflects the combining of several campuses. Most of the
factual information about SURS is drawn from the SURS website (www.surs.org, last accessed 12/11/2012).
9

make a choice within six months of joining the system are defaulted into a defined benefit plan
and have no subsequent opportunities to alter that choice. Given that SURS-covered employment
is not covered by Social Security, the retirement plan provided by SURS is meant to replace both
Social Security and an employer pension. As such, in addition to being very complex, this
decision is enormously consequential.
As background, SURS covers over 200,000 current and former employees of over 65
Illinois universities, community colleges, and state agencies. Participants include university and
college administrators, faculty members, clerical and support staff, campus police, and others.
SURS withholds eight percent of a participant’s salary as a contribution to his/her retirement
plan. Social Security taxes are not withheld and participants do not earn credit toward Social
Security benefits based on their earnings from a SURS-covered employer. The state/employer
contribution for an employee varies by retirement plan type, and because all SURS participants
are employees of the State of Illinois, these employer contributions are a general state obligation.
From its inception in 1941 until 1997, all participants in SURS were covered by a
traditional defined benefit plan. In 1997, the Illinois Legislature passed a law allowing SURScovered employers to offer participants a choice from among three plans, and virtually all did so
by 1999. The choice now offered by SURS employers is extremely complex due to the myriad
ways in which the three plans differ.
The defined benefit plan, called the “Traditional Plan,” remains one of the three plan
options and is the default option for participants who do not make an active choice within six
months of the date that SURS receives certification of their employment. Participants contribute
eight percent of salary for the Traditional Plan, an amount that is meant to cover the employee’s
share of the normal retirement benefit, automatic annual increases in retirement benefits, and

10

survivor benefits. The state’s share of the normal cost of maintaining the plan has varied over
time, but the Illinois legislature has a long history of under-funding the plan and thus the state
contributions are rarely made in full. Benefits are paid as joint and survivor life annuities; single
participants can take one-eighth of their contributions plus interest as a lump-sum at retirement in
lieu of the survivor benefits. There are two formulas for calculating the annuity – a standard
defined benefit formula and a money purchase calculation – and a participant receives the larger
of the two amounts (State Universities Retirement System of Illinois 2009). 9 While the
Traditional Plan is fairly generous for those who retire from the system, it is less so for those
who leave early.
The second plan option, the “Portable Plan,” is similar to the Traditional Plan but has a
few key differences. First, if a participant leaves the SURS system before retirement and takes a
refund (i.e., “cashes” out his/her pension), s/he receives a much higher refund than under the
Traditional Plan. Second, those who refund from the Portable Plan receive a dollar-for-dollar
matching contribution from the employer, whereas those who refund from the Traditional Plan
receive only employee, and not employer, contributions. Third, the effective interest rate for the
Portable Plan is determined annually by the SURS Board of Trustees and is typically higher than
the rate provided by the Traditional Plan. 10 Fourth, if a participant retires from the SURS system,
the Portable benefit is paid as a single life annuity, and married participants must accept an
actuarial reduction to convert it to a joint and survivor annuity. Thus, for participants who leave
SURS service and take refunds, the Portable Plan is more generous than the Traditional Plan, but
for those who retire from the SURS system the benefits from the Portable Plan are not as
generous as those from the Traditional Plan.
9

The money purchase formula was eliminated for new participants in 2005.
The Traditional Plan provides an interest rate on contributions of 4.5 percent, whereas the interest rate applied on
Portable Plan funds has averaged 8.8 percent over the period from September 1989 through June 2010.
10

11

The third plan option, the “Self-Managed Plan,” is a participant-directed defined
contribution plan that invests 14.6 to 15.1 percent of salary (eight percent from the employee and
between 6.6 and 7.1 percent from the employer 11) into a participant’s account. Participants are
able to choose from a variety of mutual funds and annuity contracts from Fidelity and TIAACREF. Upon full vesting after five years of service, a participant who leaves SURS service is
entitled to a full refund of both employer and employee contributions plus investment
gains/losses. Upon retirement, the participant can choose from a wide range of annuities or a
lump-sum distribution.
Participants must make their choice of retirement plan within six months of the date on
which SURS receives certification of employment from the employer (which is essentially the
date of hire). If they do not do so, they are automatically enrolled in the default option, which is
the Traditional Plan. Importantly, plan choice, including enrollment in the Traditional Plan by
default, is permanent and irrevocable.
A complete comparison of the three plans is extremely complex and involves
consideration of multiple information items, some of which are not immediately evident in the
basic enrollment materials. For example, a participant who leaves SURS service may take a
lump-sum refund, but the difference in the refund between the Portable and Self-Managed Plans
is small prior to being vested (which is less than five years for most participants in our sample)
but is much larger after vesting. For participants who retire from SURS, the expected value of
the Traditional or Portable Plans is higher than that of the Self-Managed Plan due to factors such
as differing match rates, differing interest rate assumptions, and more generous annuitization
rates in the Traditional and Portable Plans than are available in the private sector. There are also
11

The 6.6 percent rate was in effect from the plan’s inception until the past few years. More recently, the rate has
risen as SURS has determined that the cost of providing disability benefits to Self-Managed Plan participants was
not as high as previously calculated.
12

countless other complexities that make it very difficult to make an optimal plan choice.
In light of the complexity and importance of this decision, it is a natural setting in which
to understand decision-making heterogeneity and its impact on default behavior.

V. Survey Design and Sample Statistics
V.1 Survey Methods
In cooperation with administrators at SURS, we administered a web-based survey of
SURS participants. The target population was participants with an active e-mail address on file
who joined the system in or after 1999, to ensure that the participants made their SURS plan
choice as new employees. SURS sent these participants an e-mail in August 2012 inviting them
to participate in the survey, with a link to the on-line survey if they wished to do so. Participants
received two subsequent reminder invitations in approximately two-week intervals. In total, out
of 60,625 valid emails, we received 6,065 usable responses, for a ten percent response rate.
SURS sent four separate invitations, one each for active choosers of each of the three
plans and one for those who defaulted into the Traditional Plan. 12 Thus, we know the actual plan
choice of each respondent as listed in SURS administrative records, as well as whether the plan
choice was active or by default. The four surveys differed in only minor ways as noted below.
The survey questions were designed to capture three broad categories of data. First, we
included questions that captured respondents’ basic demographic and economic information such
as gender, marital status, age, employment, education, income, and net worth. We also included
several questions to capture risk preferences, investment skills, and financial literacy.
Second, questions captured respondents’ experiences with and recollections of SURS
plans, the enrollment process, and their desire to switch plans if they could. These questions are
12

All surveys were approved by the Institutional Review Boards at the authors’ institutions.
13

the only ones that varied across the four surveys. Also, after being asked their recollections of
their plan enrollment status, all respondents’ actual enrollment status per SURS records was
revealed to them; this revelation differed across the four surveys.
Third, we included four validated scales from prior judgment and decision-making
literature to capture respondents’ decision-making approaches relevant to our context. These
scales have been extensively used in prior research, including work on consumer behavior, the
effects of decision-making on well-being, cross-cultural differences, and choice in specific
contexts (e.g., health, health care, career, and other lifestyle choices). Given the number of
questions required to construct these scales, we interspersed these throughout other questions on
the survey to minimize participant fatigue.
The first decision-approach scale we use is the Melbourne decision-making questionnaire
(Mann et al. 1997), a 22-item scale to assess an individual’s approach to decision making in the
presence of decision conflict because of uncertainty. Four sub-scales are constructed from the
Melbourne questions.
•

Procrastination (five questions): Delaying decisions, which we hypothesize will positively
predict default.

•

Vigilance (six questions): A thorough analysis of alternatives, which is consistent with an
economist’s definition of optimizing behavior; we hypothesize this will negatively predict
default.

•

Hypervigilance (five questions): An anxious process of hastily settling on an answer, which
we hypothesize will negatively predict default.

•

Buck-passing (six questions): Leaving decisions to others, which we hypothesize will be
positively predict default.

14

The decision making approaches measured by the Melbourne scale are quite relevant to
our context – a complex, multi-alternative, irrevocable, and time-constrained choice before
default. Indeed, as Mann et al. (1997) note, the assumption underlying the Melbourne scale is
one in which three conditions influence the choice of decision approach, each of which is
satisfied by our setting. 13
We also include a 15-item scale to measure compulsive indecisiveness (Frost and Shows
1993). Indecisiveness is the tendency of an individual to avoid making decisions, which in our
setting could lead one to default.
To measure the propensity for regret, we include a five-item scale from Schwartz et al.
(2002). Our decision context is one in which the alternatives are permanently foregone after one
chooses or is defaulted and thus the potential for regret may be especially salient.
Finally, we include Roets and Van Hiel’s (2011) 15-item questionnaire to measure an
individual’s need for cognitive closure, defined as a “desire for an answer on a given topic, any
answer … compared to confusion and ambiguity” (Webster and Kruglanski 1994, p. 1049). We
hypothesize that people with a need for cognitive closure are more likely to make an active
decision rather than default.

V.2 Sample and Summary Statistics
Table 1 shows that of our 6,065 respondents, 27 percent defaulted into the Traditional
Plan, 19 percent actively chose the Traditional Plan, 34 percent chose the Portable Plan and 20

13

The authors note “Janis and Mann’s (1977) conflict model is essentially a social psychological theory of decision
making in which the presence or absence of three antecedent conditions are held to determine reliance on a
particular coping pattern. The three conditions are: (1) awareness of serious risks about preferred alternatives, (2)
hope of finding a better alternative, and (3) belief that there is adequate time to search and deliberate before a
decision is required.” (p. 2).
15

percent chose the Self-Managed Plan. 14 Although we rely on SURS administrative data rather
than self-reported responses of plan enrollment, we note that respondents in our sample are
knowledgeable about their plan selection – 92 percent of respondents correctly identified the
plan in which they are actually enrolled in the survey (with high knowledge rates regardless of
plan enrollment). These rates of correct plan reporting are substantially higher than the 77
percent found in Gustman and Steinmeier (2005, Table 2), suggesting that SURS participants are
more knowledgeable about their retirement plans than the general U.S. population.
Table 1 also indicates that although the sample is not nationally representative, it is
nonetheless diverse in terms of demographics, occupation, and economic background. Not
surprisingly, given that this system covers higher education, respondents are highly educated,
with 62 percent holding a Master’s degree, professional degree, or Ph.D. Among the remaining
respondents, 10 percent have no post-secondary degree, another six percent have an Associate’s
degree, and just over 20 percent have a Bachelor’s degree. Respondents also come from a range
of occupations, with about 13 percent employed as tenured or tenure-track faculty, and 25
percent non-tenure-track faculty. The remaining occupations are spread amongst academic
professionals, executives, support staff, and maintenance and public safety personnel. We also
have substantial variation in income and household net worth.
Table 2 summarizes the distribution of responses for the decision-making approaches that
we examine. Recall that every question is asked (or reverse-coded) on a five point scale, with 1
being “strongly disagree” and 5 being “strongly agree.” Each decision approach measure is
computed as the average of the five-point response for each of the questions associated with that
14

Relative to the full universe of SURS participants who have joined the system since 1999, our sample population
under-represents defaulters and over-represents active choosers. This is primarily because those who default into the
system are substantially less likely to have an e-mail address on file with SURS, and thus were less likely to be
solicited by the survey. Relative to the population of SURS participants who joined the system since 1999 and who
had an email address on file, our sample proportions are much closer.
16

approach, and thus can range from 1.0 to 5.0. Interestingly, the average respondent in our sample
views themselves as being vigilant (that is, a careful optimizer), with an average score of 4.1.
The average person disagrees with the characterization of being a procrastinator, with an average
score of 1.9. Perhaps more important for our purposes, however, is that the standard deviation of
responses is between 0.5 and 0.7, which is useful to keep in mind when evaluating the magnitude
of the coefficients below.

VI. Results
VI.1. Factors Associated with the Likelihood of Default
VI.1.1 Decision-Making Approaches as Determinants of Default
Table 3 provides the result of a linear probability model (OLS) with the dependent
variable set to 1 if respondents defaulted into the Traditional Plan and 0 if they made an active
choice of plan (i.e., picked any of the three plans before the six-month deadline). We rescaled the
coefficients by multiplying them by 100 so that they represent percentage points. We also run all
specifications using a non-linear probit model, and the marginal effects are nearly identical to
those reported. 15
Two decision-making approaches are significant predictors of default. Individuals who
are prone to procrastinate are significantly more likely to default (coefficient = 3.9). While onefifth of respondents answered “strongly disagree” to all five procrastination questions (i.e., a
score of 1.0 out of 5.0), one-ninth of respondents averaged at least a 3.0 on this scale (indicating
at least some agreement with having a tendency to procrastinate). Such a difference in

15

Since respondents occasionally skipped or chose not to respond to a question in the survey, we created dummy
variables for non-responses for the various explanatory variables. This way, an observation is not lost because of a
non-response for a particular variable. These dummy variables are included in the regressions reported in Tables 3-5
(though the coefficients are not reported for sake of brevity).
17

procrastination is associated with a 7.8 percentage point higher likelihood of defaulting into the
Traditional Plan (3.9 * 2). Another way to assess the economic importance of procrastination is
to measure the effect of a one-standard deviation change in this variable on defaults. Recall that
the standard deviation on this variable is 0.7 (on a five-point scale). Thus, a one-standard
deviation increase in this measure of procrastination is associated with a 2.7 percentage point
(3.9 * 0.7) increase in the likelihood of default, or a 10 percent increase relative to the baseline
default rate of 27%.
The simplest interpretation is that those who procrastinate are less likely to choose a plan,
and thus are more likely to find themselves defaulted. Economists tend to view procrastination as
being a manifestation of present-biased preferences. Present-biased individuals put too little
weight on time-distant outcomes (in this case, retirement preparedness) relative to the near-term
cost of making an active decision. 16 It is worth noting that there are other reasons besides present
bias that an individual may procrastinate. For example, procrastination may simply result from
being busy or not having enough time. Thus, as a simple control, we include a separate question
to measure the extent to which one is too busy or in too much of a hurry. The coefficient on this
“busy” measure is not significant, nor does it alter the magnitude of the coefficient on
procrastination.
Consistent with our hypothesis, we also find that individuals with a stronger need for
cognitive closure are less likely to default. Individuals who have a need for closure are believed
to be uncomfortable with ambiguity and strongly desire to arrive at “an answer” (although not
necessarily the “right answer”). The coefficient on the need for closure is -4.5. Thus, a one
standard deviation (0.5 units on the five-point scale as reported in Table 2) leads to a -2.3
16

For more evidence on how procrastination resulting from present-biased preferences affects a range of retirementplanning activities, see Brown and Previtero (2014).
18

percentage point reduction in the likelihood of defaulting, or more than an eight percent
reduction relative to baseline default rates.
Interestingly, the coefficient on vigilance – the one approach that is most closely
associated with the economic view of rational decision making – is not significantly different
from zero. Likewise, the other measures of decision-making that we included in the survey are
not significant predictors of default behavior.

VI.1.2 Economic and Demographic Determinants of Default
Continuing with Table 3, we find that risk preferences and self-assessed investment skills
are significantly correlated with default probabilities. We include two questions to assess risk
preferences. The first is modeled on a question used in the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF)
that asks individuals whether they would prefer to take above (below)-average risk for above
(below)-average returns. We find a pattern of significant coefficients indicating that less riskaverse individuals are less likely to default. This could reflect that respondents who are
comfortable taking financial risks may be more likely to prefer the defined contribution plan
option, which would require an active choice. However, we also ask a second question based
upon the risk aversion questions in the Health and Retirement Survey asking respondents to
choose between their current income or a 50/50 gamble between doubling their salary or seeing
it cut by a third. Here, we find those most willing to take the gamble are more likely to default.
Reconciling this offsetting pattern of coefficients in these two questions is admittedly puzzling;
we do note, though, that the economic and statistical significance is much larger for the response
to the SCF question (i.e., that less-risk averse respondents are less likely to default).
Respondents with more confidence in their own investing skills are less likely to default.

19

This could reflect a general level of comfort making financial decisions. It could also again
reflect the fact that these respondents may be more interested in participating in the defined
contribution plan option.
Respondents who report that it is very or extremely likely they will remain in SURScovered employment for the rest of their career are more likely to default. At first blush, this
seems like a counterintuitive finding because those with longer career horizons with a SURS
employer should view this as an even more consequential decision. However, those with shorter
horizons likely find the Portable or Self-Managed Plans more attractive options than the
Traditional Plan because of the more favorable cash-out terms offered by the two former plans
once SURS-covered employment ends, thus explaining the positive coefficient on expected job
tenure in Table 3.
At the top of the right hand column, we report the coefficient on a question that was
intended to control for perceptions of political risk. The poor funding status of public pensions in
Illinois is widely known; nearly three quarters of respondents stated that they were “not at all
confident” in the Illinois state legislature, and thus one might think that greater concern about
funding would make one less likely to default into the poorly-funded defined benefit plan.
However, active choice does not necessarily protect one from this risk: only the Self-Managed
Plan avoids it because both the Traditional and Portable Plans are supported by the same funds.
Thus, while the coefficient on lacking confidence in Illinois government is negative, it is
insignificantly different from zero.
Respondents with more education are less likely to default. Specifically, those with a
Master’s or Professional degree are 4.6 percent less likely to default, and those with a Ph.D. are
8.3 percent less likely to default. Conditional on education, we do not find that measures of

20

financial literacy 17 or having degrees or work experience in finance or business explain default
behavior. The exception is that respondents who are able to correctly answer two basic questions
about the SURS system (the approximate share of salary employees contribute to the plan, and
whether they pay Social Security tax on SURS income) are less likely to default. 18 However, we
caution against drawing a causal inference because it may be that respondents who chose the
Self-Managed Plan have learned more about these issues during the process of making an active
choice or even after the fact.
We also find that women are less likely to default, whereas those with children are more
likely to do so. Turning to the continuation of Table 3 on the next page, we also see differences
in default rates based on occupation, income, and net worth. Specifically, we find that higher
income and higher net worth individuals are significantly less likely to default.
In sum, the data in Table 3 indicates that the probability of default is inversely related to
financial sophistication and wealth. More highly-educated participants, those with more
confidence in their investment skills, those with more plan-specific knowledge, and those with
higher income and net worth are all significantly less likely to default. Even after conditioning on
these and other factors, however, we find that individual decision-making approaches like
procrastination matter in explaining default behavior.

17

We define a respondent as having basic financial literacy if s/he answered two questions correctly. One
component to our financial literacy measure is being able to identify that a savings account of $200 earning 10% per
year will grow in two years to “more than $240” (as opposed to “less than $240” or “exactly $240”). The second
component is answering that the stock of an individual company is at least as risky as a mutual fund of U.S. stocks,
which is at least as risky as a mutual fund of U.S. government bonds, which is at least as risky as a money market
fund (as revealed by individual risk rankings of the various investments). Just over two-fifths of the sample
answered both questions correctly.
18
Specifically, we code respondents as having “basic SURS knowledge” if they know both that they do not pay
Social Security taxes on income from their SURS employment and that they contribute in the range of six to ten
percent of salary as an employee contribution (the actual number is eight percent). Three-fifths of the sample
answered both basic-SURS-knowledge questions correctly.
21

VI.2. An Implication of Defaults: The Subsequent Desire to Switch Plans
VI.2.1 Average Differences by Plan in Desire to Switch
Whether the reliance on default options enhances or detracts from social welfare depends
largely on how the default affects the utility of individuals who accept the default relative to
whatever action they would have taken otherwise. We are not aware of any research that has
attempted to address this difficult question, nor do we address it directly here because we are
unable to vary the default or measure the utility consequences of the various plan choices.
Nonetheless, our research can inform this issue. In our survey, we ask participants, “If
you could go back in time and re-do your original pension choice (assuming the rules when you
joined SURS are still in place), which plan would you choose?” This allows us to measure
whether the respondent views his or her plan as the best choice as of the time of the survey, or
whether s/he now prefers a different plan. We recognize that this does not measure ex ante
expected utility at the time of the decision, nor is it an ex post measure of derived utility by the
end of life. It does, however, measure the preferences of respondents at the time of the survey,
and as such, it is relevant for assessing overall satisfaction with the plans.
Of course, even if respondents reported that they would choose to enroll in a different
plan, the reasons behind this response are important. For example, if personal circumstances
changed (e.g., changes in tenure, marital, or health status), then a desire to be in a different plan
does not necessarily mean that the original choice was ex ante sub-optimal given the uncertainty
at the time. In contrast, if respondents learned something about their plans that they should have
known at the time of their decisions, or did not select pension plans “best” for them because they
did not get around to making a decision before the deadline, then there is concern that the default
guided at least some participants into sub-optimal decisions. We analyze these and other factors

22

in more detail later, but we begin with simple tabulations.
In Figure 1, we report the fraction of respondents who would choose the same versus
different retirement plans than the ones in which they are enrolled if they were allowed to switch.
Across the horizontal axis, we divide the sample into defaulters and active choosers, followed by
the active choosers divided by each of the three plans (Traditional DB, Portable DB, and SelfManaged DC). For each group, we show the fraction who would and who would not choose the
same plan (either through selecting a different plan or choosing “don’t know”).
Strikingly, three out of five defaulters would not choose the same plan today, which is 21
percentage points higher than that for all active choosers. Of course, such a comparison does not
allow us to determine whether it is the act of defaulting or the plan itself that leads to differences
in the desire to switch plans, and absent the ability to default different people into different plans,
this is difficult to disentangle. Nevertheless, we can address this concern by holding enrollment
in the Traditional Plan constant, and compare those who defaulted into the Traditional Plan to
those who actively chose the same plan. Even with the same plan, the difference in the desire to
switch plans is still 16 percentage points.
Figure 1 is based on a broad definition of wanting to change plans; it includes those who
responded “don’t know” when asked which plan they would choose today, and it does not
capture the intensity with which a respondent wishes to switch plans. Figure 2 refines the
measure by including only respondents who stated a different plan choice, and that their desire to
switch is strong or extremely strong. With this measure, 17 percent of defaulters have a strong
desire to change plans, compared to only 7 percent of active choosers. When we again hold the
Traditional Plan constant by comparing those who defaulted into the Traditional Plan and those
who actively chose it, we find a similar pattern: 17 percent of defaulters versus 8 percent of

23

active choosers strongly desire to change plans.

VI.2.2 Correlates of Desire of Defaulters to Switch Plans
Having established that defaulters are more likely to wish to switch plans than active
choosers, we now turn to an analysis of decision approach, economic, and demographic
characteristics that are associated with the desire of defaulters to switch plans. The linear
probability models in Tables 4 and 5 contain the same explanatory variables and are conducted
on the sample of respondents who defaulted into the Traditional Plan; the only difference is the
dependent variable. Specifically, Table 4 uses the broad measure of the desire to switch plans
used in Figure 1 (equal to 1 if the respondent would choose a different plan or does not know
which plan they would pick and 0 otherwise), while Table 5 uses the refined measure used in
Figure 2 (equal to 1 if the respondent has a strong or extremely strong desire to choose a
different plan and 0 otherwise). As before, we rescaled the coefficients by multiplying them by
100 so they represent percentage points. Since the results are comparable across the two tables
and the Table 5 analysis focuses only on respondents who strongly desire to re-choose a specific
plan, we focus our discussion on Table 5 and note any important differences across the two
analyses.
First, we examine the effects of decision-making approaches. Recall that in Table 3,
procrastination was correlated with the probability of defaulting. In Table 5, we find that
procrastinators who default are significantly more likely to express a strong desire to switch
plans. A one unit increase on the five-point procrastination scale is associated with a 4.2
percentage point increase in defaulters having a strong desire to switch plans. Given that the
standard deviation on the procrastination measure is 0.7, a one-standard deviation increase in

24

procrastination is associated with a 2.9 percentage point (4.2 * 0.7) increase in the likelihood of
strongly wanting to switch plans – a 17 percent increase relative to the baseline desire to strongly
change plans of 17%. An interpretation of these findings is that procrastinators defaulted not
because the Traditional Plan was the right one for them, but because they never got around to
making a choice. As such, they are more likely to subsequently wish they had made an active
choice, and that choice would have been one of the other two plans.
Vigilance, which we believe is most closely associated with an approach that economists
would label as an optimizing approach, is not correlated with a desire to switch plans. We find
that hypervigilance, which is described in prior literature as an impulsive or contrived decision,
is positively associated with a desire to switch plans. However, as we will discuss below, the
coefficient on hypervigilance becomes insignificant and falls in magnitude by 2/3 when we
include additional controls to measure changes in the circumstances of respondents since they
joined SURS, so this is not a robust result.
We find that “buck-passing” is negatively associated with a desire to switch plans. Buckpassing is the tendency to leave decision-making to others. We expect that “buck passers” are
content having the decision made for them, and thus are unlikely to make an active decision to
change the plan in which they are already enrolled. The significant coefficient on buck-passing is
-5.6. Thus, a one standard deviation (0.7 units on the five-point scale as reported in Table 2)
leads to a -3.9 percentage point reduction in the likelihood of strongly desiring to switch plans, or
a 23 percent reduction relative to the baseline desire to switch. 19
We also find in Table 5 that several demographic and economic measures are associated
19

The coefficients on procrastination, hypervigilance, and buck-passing are similar across Tables 4 and 5, both in
magnitude and statistical significance. One difference across Tables 4 and 5 is the coefficient on a need for cognitive
closure. While a need for cognitive closure is not associated with a strong desire of defaulters to change plans (Table
5), it is negatively associated with the broader measure of the desire to change plans that includes ‘don’t know’
responses (Table 4). This negative effect is consistent with a respondent not wanting to revisit a prior decision.
25

with a strong desire of defaulters to switch plans. The probability of wanting to switch plans is
significantly higher for those who are more tolerant of risk, have higher self-assessed investment
skills, are less likely to stay in SURS for their entire career, are younger, and have a higher share
of family income accounted for by their SURS employment. Interestingly, although political risk
did not affect the likelihood of default in Table 3, it has a strong effect on the desire to switch
plans: those who are not at all confident in the Illinois legislature are 8.0 percentage points more
likely to strongly want to switch plans. We also find that having a higher share of family income
accounted for by SURS is positively associated with a strong desire to switch.
Our survey included 22 questions about changes that the respondent experienced between
the dates s/he joined SURS and our survey. These included changes to marital status and family
structure, unexpected changes to income or expenditures, changes to health, expectations about
length of employment, confidence in the State’s ability to honor pension commitments, market
expectations, and discovery of what retirement plan peers had selected. We run an extension of
the analysis in Table 5 that includes all 22 of these additional questions. Although some are
significant in their own right, the decision to include or exclude these variables has little effect
on the coefficients on the decision-making approach variables, with the exception of the
coefficient on hypervigilance, which falls substantially in magnitude and is no longer
significant. 20 Thus, we are confident that the role of decision-making approaches like
procrastination in explaining the desire to strongly change plans is not spuriously picking up
unobserved changes in other life circumstances or expectations. Rather, these decision-making

20

Specifically, with the addition of the 22 controls for change in circumstance, the coefficients on procrastination
(4.3 with a standard error of 1.7) and buck-passing (-5.2 with a standard error of 1.7) are virtually identical to those
in Table 5, while the coefficient on hypervigilance falls to 2.2 (SE = 2.3). As before, the probability of strongly
wanting to switch plans is significantly higher for those who are more tolerant of risk, have higher self-assessed
investment skills, are less likely to stay in SURS for their entire career, are not at all confident in the Illinois
legislature, are younger, and have a higher share of family income accounted for by their SURS employment.
26

approaches are exerting a direct influence on the desire to switch plans that is largely orthogonal
to changing circumstances. 21

VII. Discussion and Conclusion
We document significant heterogeneity across the population with regard to sensitivity to
defaults. In addition to being influenced by economic and demographic factors such as income,
wealth, knowledge, and investment skills, we find heterogeneity in the likelihood of defaulting
based on measures of different decision approaches. We find an especially robust relation
between individuals’ tendency toward procrastination and the likelihood of default, as well as
procrastinators’ subsequent desire to be in different retirement plans than the one into which they
were defaulted. We also find significant effects of other decision-making approaches. For
example, those with a strong need for cognitive closure are less likely to default, while buckpassing is negatively associated with the desire of defaulters to subsequently switch plans.
The finding that decision-making approaches such as procrastination are associated with
defaulting and the later desire to switch plans is important for assessing the welfare
consequences of defaults. If individuals are subsequently dissatisfied with the default option,
especially in settings where the default is irreversible, this suggests caution in relying heavily on
default options as opposed to alternatives such as forced choice or a need to develop institutional
mechanisms to mitigate procrastination.

21

We also estimated an extension of Table 4 that includes the additional 22 controls to capture changing
circumstances since the respondent joined SURS. The coefficients on procrastination (4.6), buck-passing (-3.7), and
a need for cognitive closure (-5.2) change little from Table 4 (although the coefficient on buck-passing switches
from marginally significant to marginally insignificant). The coefficient on hypervigilance falls in magnitude and is
no longer significant (3.2 with a standard error of 3.0).
27

References
Abadie, Alberto and Sebastien Gay. 2006. “The Impact of Presumed Consent Legislation on
Cadaveric Organ Donation: A Cross-Country Study.” Journal of Health Economics 25: 599620.
Akerlof, George. 1991. "Procrastination and Obedience." American Economic Review 81: 1-19.
Appelt, K., K. Milch, M. Handgraaf, and E. Weber. 2011. “The Decision Making Individual
Differences Inventory and Guidelines for the Study of Individual Differences in Judgment and
Decision-Making Research.” Judgment and Decision Making 6: 252-262.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard Thaler. 2007. “Heuristics and Biases in Retirement Savings
Behavior.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21: 81-104.
Beshears, John, James Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian. 2008. “The Importance of
Default Options for Retirement Savings Outcomes: Evidence from the United States.” In
Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas, edited by Stephen Kay and Tapen Sinha. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Beshears, John, James Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian, 2010(a). “The Limitations of
Defaults.” Unpublished Manuscript, Stanford University, Yale University, Harvard University
and NBER.
Beshears, John, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Brian Weller. 2010(b).
“Public Policy and Saving for Retirement: The ‘Autosave’ Features of the Pension Protection
Act of 2006.” In Better Living Through Economics: How Economic Research Improves Our
Lives, edited by John Siegfried. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bonner, Sarah. 2008. Judgment and Decision Making in Accounting. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Education, Inc.
Brown, Jeffrey. 2009. “Automatic Lifetime Income as a Path to Retirement Security.” White
paper prepared for the American Council of Life Insurers.
http://www.acli.com/NR/rdonlyres/E403B3C1-C827-44E5-8491B3C31491C3B6/21227/Automatic_Lifetime_IncomePaper.pdf.
Brown, Jeffrey and Alessandro Previtero. 2014. “Procrastination, Present-Biased Preferences,
and Financial Behaviors.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign and University of Western Ontario.
Brown, Jeffrey and Scott Weisbenner. 2009. “Who Chooses Defined Contribution Plans?.” In
Social Security Policy in a Changing Environment, edited by Jeffery Brown, Jeffrey
Liebman, and David Wise. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Campbell, Donald. 1988. “Task Complexity: A Review and Analysis.” Academy of Management
28

Journal. 13: 40-52.
Carroll, Gabriel, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2009.
“Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124: 16391674.
Carlin, Bruce, Simon Gervais, and Gustavo Manso. 2010. “Libertarian Paternalism, Information
Sharing, and Financial Decision-Making.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of California
at Los Angeles, Duke University, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2002. “Defined
Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Decisions, and the Path of Least Resistance.”
In Tax Policy and the Economy, edited by James Poterba. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004(a). “For Better or For
Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior.” In Perspectives in the Economics of
Aging, edited by David Wise. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004(b). “Saving for
Retirement on the Path of Least Resistance.” Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard University,
University of Chicago, University of Pennsylvania and NBER.
Choi, Syngjoo, Shachar Kariv, Wieland Müller, and Dan Silverman. 2014. “Who is (More)
Rational?” American Economic Review 104: 1518–1550.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier. 2006. “Paying Not to Go to the Gym,” The
American Economic Review 96: 694-719.
Frost, Randy and Deanna Shows. 1993. “The Nature and Measurement of Compulsive
Indecisiveness.” Behavior Research and Therapy 31: 683-692.
Gale, William, J. Mark Iwry, David John, and Lina Walker. 2008. “Increasing Annuitization of
401(k) Plans with Automatic Trial Income.” Hamilton project discussion paper.
http://www.brookings.edu/papers/2008/06_annuities_gale.aspx.
Glaeser, Edward. 2006. “Paternalism and Psychology.” University of Chicago Law Review 73:
133-156.
Goda, Gopi and Colleen Manchester. 2010. “Incorporating Employee Heterogeneity into Default
Rules for Retirement Plan Selection.” Unpublished Manuscript, Stanford University,
University of Minnesota, and NBER.
Gustman, Alan. Olivia Mitchell, and Thomas Steinmeier. 1994. “The Role of Pensions in the
Labor Market: A Survey of the Literature.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47: 417438.

29

Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier. 2005. “Imperfect Knowledge of Social Security and
Pensions.” Industrial Relations 44: 373-397.
Halpern, Scott, Peter Ubel, and David Asch. 2007. “Harnessing the Power of Default Options to
Improve Health Care.” The New England Journal of Medicine 357: 1340-1344.
Janis, Irving and Leon Mann. 1977. Decision Making: A Psychological Analysis of Conflict,
Choice, and Commitment. New York, NY: Free Press.
Johnson, Eric, Steven Bellman, and Gerald Lohse. 2002. “Defaults, Framing and Privacy: Why
Opting In-Opting Out.” Marketing Letters 13: 5-15.
Johnson, Eric and Daniel Goldstein. 2003. “Do Defaults Save Lives?” Science 302: 1338-1339.
Johnson, Eric. John Hershey, Jacqueline Meszaros, and Howard Kunreuther. 1993. “Framing,
Probability Distortions, and Insurance Decisions.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 7: 35-51.
Kruglanski, Arie. 1990. “Motivations for Judging and Knowing: Implications for Causal
Attribution.” In The Handbook of Motivation and Cognition: Foundation of Social Behavior,
Volume 2, edited by E. Tory Higgins and Richard Sorrentino. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia Mitchell. 2014. "The Economic Importance of Financial
Literacy: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Economic Literature 52: 5-44.
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 1149-1187.
Mann, Leon, Paul Burnett, Mark Radford, and Steve Ford. 1997. “The Melbourne DecisionMaking Questionnaire: An Instrument for Measuring Patterns for Coping with Decisional
Conflict,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 10: 1-19.
Munnell, Alicia and Annika Sundén. 2004. Coming Up Short: The Challenge of 401(k) Plans.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
O'Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin. 1999. "Doing It Now or Later." American Economic
Review 89: 103-124.
Payne, John, James Bettman, and Eric Johnson. 1993. The Adaptive Decision Maker. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Plan Sponsor Council of America. 2012. 55th Annual Survey of Profit Sharing and 401(k) Plans.
Chicago, IL: Plan Sponsor Council of America.
Roets, Aren and Alain Van Hiel. 2011. “Item Selection and Validation of a Brief, 15-Item
Version of the Need for Closure Scale.” Personality and Individual Differences 50: 90-94.

30

Sethi-Iyengar, Sheena, Gur Huberman, and Wei Jiang. 2004. “How Much Choice is Too Much?
Contributions to 401(k) Retirement Plans.” In Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons
from Behavioral Finance, edited by Olivia Mitchell and Stephen Utkus. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
State Universities Retirement System of Illinois. 2009. Traditional Benefit Member Guide.
Champaign, IL: State Universities Retirement System of Illinois.
Sunstein, Cass and Richard Thaler. 2003. “Libertarian Paternalism is Not an Oxymoron.” The
University of Chicago Law Review 70: 1159-1202.
Schwartz, Barry, Andrew Ward, John Monterosso, Sonja Lyubomirsky, Katherine White, and
Darrin Lehman. 2002. “Maximizing Versus Satisficing: Happiness is a Matter of Choice.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 83: 1178-1197.
Thaler, Richard and Cass Sunstein. 2003. “Libertarian Paternalism.” AEA Papers and
Proceedings 93: 175-179.
Thaler, Richard and Cass Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth,
and Happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Webster, Donna and Arie Kruglanski. 1994. “Individual Differences in Need for Cognitive
Closure.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67: 1049-1062.
Wood, Robert. 1986. “Task Complexity: Definition of the Construct.” Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes 37: 60-82.

31

Figure 1: Percent of Respondents Who Would Choose the Same vs. a Different Retirement Plan
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Traditional DB Plan (by
DEFAULT)

ACTIVE CHOICE of Plan Traditional DB Plan (Active
Choice)
Want Different Plan or Don't Know

Portable DB Plan (Active
Choice)

Self-Managed DC Plan
(Active Choice)

Would Pick Same Plan

Survey respondents were asked, “If you could go back in time and re-do your original pension choice (assuming the rules when you joined SURS
are still in place), which plan would you choose?” This figure displays the fraction of respondents who would either choose a different retirement
plan (or don’t know which plan they would pick), or would pick the same plan as their original choice. These tabs are calculated separately for
those who defaulted and by plan enrollment for those who made an active decision.

32

Figure 2: Percent of Respondents Who Would Strongly Desire a Different Retirement Plan

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Traditional DB Plan (by
DEFAULT)

ACTIVE CHOICE of Plan Traditional DB Plan (Active
Choice)

Portable DB Plan (Active
Choice)

Self-Managed DC Plan
(Active Choice)

Survey respondents were asked, “If you could go back in time and re-do your original pension choice (assuming the rules when you joined SURS
are still in place), which plan would you choose?” This figure displays the fraction of respondents who would pick a different pension plan and
who further indicate a strong or extremely strong desire to re-do the choice. These tabs are calculated separately for those who defaulted and by
plan enrollment for those who made an active decision.

33

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Sample, Percent of Respondents Reported
ACTUAL PLAN ENROLLMENT
DEMOGRAPHIC CHARCTERISTICS
Traditional (defined benefit), by DEFAULT
26.9% Age (when joined SURS, in years) – mean
Active Choice of:
Age (when joined SURS, in years) – 25th %
Traditional Plan (defined benefit)
19.0% Age (when joined SURS, in years) – 75th %
Portable Plan (hybrid)
33.6% Female?
Self-Managed Plan (defined contribution)
20.5% Married?
Have children?
CORRECTLY IDENTIFIED PLAN IN SURVEY
Full Sample
91.9% Ranking of health relative to others
Traditional (defined benefit), by DEFAULT
96.4% Very poor or poor
Active Choice of:
Average
Traditional Plan (defined benefit)
97.8% Good
Portable Plan (hybrid)
84.6% Excellent
Self-Managed Plan (defined contribution)
92.8% ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS
Occupation
RISK PREFERENCE & INVEST SKILL
Risk-Return Tradeoff Preference
Support Staff (secretary)
Below average risk and return
15.1% Executive
Average risk and return
65.4% Academic professional
Above average risk and return
19.5% Faculty (tenured)
Take Gamble (50/50, 100% ↑ or 33% ↓)?
Faculty (tenure-track, not tenured)
No
62.1% Faculty (non-tenure track)
Yes
18.8% Police, fire, and public safety personnel
Don’t know
19.1% Maintenance and facilities personnel
Self-assessment of investment skill
Other
Much or slightly worse than others
31.7% SURS-covered job income
Same as others
38.5% Less than $20,000
Slightly or much better than others
29.8% $20,000 to $39,999
$40,000 to $59,999
BELIEF OF HOW LONG STAY IN SURS
Expected to stay rest of career when joined
$60,000 to $79,999
Not at all or slightly likely
50.7% $80,000 to $99,999
Moderately likely
12.5% $100,000 to $119,999
Very or extremely likely
36.8% $120,000 or more
Share of family income in SURS-covered job
BELIEF OF POLITICAL RISK
Not at all confident in Illinois legislature
71.8% 0-24%
Slight or more confidence in Illinois
28.2% 25-49%
50-74%
GENERAL KNOWLEDGE
Basic financial literacy:
75-100%
Correctly answered both questions
43.2% Household net worth
Education
Less than $20,000
Less than Associate’s degree
10.2% $20,000 to $49,999
Associate’s degree
6.2% $50,000 to $99,999
Bachelor’s degree
21.3% $100,000 to $249,999
Master’s or professional degree
42.6% $250,000 to $499,999
Ph.D.
19.7% $500,000 or more
College degree in finance or business?
18.5% FOR SAMPLE OF DEFAULTERS:
Pick a Different Plan if Can Re-do Today?
Work experience in finance?
35.8% Would stay with Traditional Plan (DB)?
Would switch to a diff. plan or don’t know?
SURS-SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE
Basic SURS knowledge:
Have a strong desire to switch plans?
Correctly answered both questions
59.6%
Sample Size of All Respondents
Sample Size of Defaulters

48
35
60
56.8%
72.2%
67.7%
2.9%
21.4%
46.4%
29.3%
17.7%
1.9%
23.3%
3.5%
9.5%
25.0%
1.5%
3.6%
14.1%
18.3%
23.0%
25.1%
17.8%
6.8%
3.9%
5.0%
21.5%
20.5%
21.7%
36.3%
13.7%
11.5%
19.9%
25.3%
14.1%
15.4%
40.2%
59.8%
16.6%
6,065
1,630
34

Table 2: Summary Statistics for Decision-Making Approaches and Being in a Hurry
Mean

S.D.

10th %

25th %

50th %

75th %

90th %

1.9

0.7

1.0

1.2

2.0

2.4

3.0

Vigilance

4.1

0.5

3.5

3.8

4.0

4.3

4.8

Hypervigilance

2.4

0.7

1.6

2.0

2.4

2.8

3.4

Buck-Passing

2.0

0.7

1.0

1.3

2.0

2.3

3.0

Tendency to Regret

2.7

0.7

1.8

2.2

2.6

3.2

3.6

Indecisiveness

2.4

0.5

1.8

2.1

2.4

2.7

3.1

Need for Cognitive Closure

3.1

0.5

2.5

2.9

3.1

3.5

3.7

2.8

1.1

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

4.0

Decision-Making Approaches:
Procrastination

Busy/Hurry:
Often do not have time to fully
consider options because always
in a hurry

The various measures of decision-making approaches are based upon the responses to questions for each
approach, with each individual response scored from1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The
decision-making approach score is then the average of responses for the questions pertaining to that
approach and thus can vary from 1.0 to 5.0. Specifically, measures of procrastination (5-question index),
vigilance (6-question index), hypervigilance (5-question index), and buck-passing (6-question index) are
from Mann et al. (1997), i.e., the Melbourne Decision Making Questionnaire. The tendency to regret (5question index) is from Schwartz et al. (2002). Indecisiveness (15-question index) is from Frost and
Shows (1993). The need for cognitive closure (15-question index) is from Roots and Van Hiel (2011).
Finally, our measure for being busy is based on the response to a single question “To what extent do you
disagree or agree with the following statement: “I often do not have time to fully consider all of my
options because I am always in a hurry”, with the response scored from1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly
agree).

35

Table 3: Regression of Whether Defaulted into Retirement Plan Choice,
Coefficients from OLS Regression Reported
DECISION-MAKING APPROACHES
Procrastination
Vigilance
Hypervigilance
Buck-Passing
Tendency to Regret
Indecisiveness
Need for Cognitive Closure
BUSY/HURRY

BELIEF OF POLITICAL RISK
3.9***
Not at all confident in Illinois legislature
(1.2)
0.9
GENERAL KNOWLEDGE
(1.4)
-0.9
Basic financial literacy:
(1.4)
Correctly answered both questions
-0.5
Education
(1.1)
0.4
Associate’s degree
(1.0)
-0.5
Bachelor’s degree
(1.8)
-4.5***
Master’s or professional degree
(1.5)
Ph.D.

Often do not have time to fully consider options -0.6
because always in a hurry
(0.6)
RISK PREFERENCE & INVEST SKILL
Risk-Return Tradeoff Preference
Average risk and return
Above average risk and return
Take Gamble (50/50, 100% ↑ or 33% ↓)?
Yes
Don’t know
Self-assessment of investment skill
Same as others
Slightly or much better than others
BELIEF OF HOW LONG STAY IN SURS

Very or extremely likely

Work experience in finance?

SURS-SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE
-5.0*** Basic SURS knowledge:
(1.8)
Correctly answered both questions
-9.5*** DEMOGRAPHIC CHARCTERISTICS
(2.1)
Age (when joined SURS, in years)
3.3**
(1.6)
-0.3
(1.6)

Female?
Married?
Have children?

-4.0*** Ranking of health relative to others
(1.5)
-5.7***
Average
(1.7)
Good

Expected to stay rest of career when joined
Moderately likely

College degree in finance or business?

Excellent
0.2
(1.8)
6.3***
(1.4)

-1.9
(1.4)
-0.0
(1.2)
-4.6
(3.0)
-3.4
(2.5)
-4.6*
(2.6)
-8.3***
(2.9)
-2.0
(1.7)
1.9
(1.4)
-4.5***
(1.3)
-0.10
(0.06)
-2.8**
(1.2)
-0.6
(1.5)
2.7**
(1.3)
3.5
(3.6)
-0.5
(3.5)
-0.9
(3.5)

(continued on next page)

36

Table 3 (continued from prior page)
ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS
Occupation
Executive
Academic professional
Faculty (tenured)
Faculty (tenure-track, not tenured)
Faculty (non-tenure track)
Police, fire, and public safety personnel
Maintenance and facilities personnel
Other
SURS-covered job income
$20,000 to $39,999
$40,000 to $59,999
$60,000 to $79,999
$80,000 to $99,999
$100,000 to $119,999
$120,000 or more

-0.0
(4.4)
-2.4
(2.1)
0.5
(3.8)
-5.6**
(2.8)
5.0**
(2.4)
-4.1
(4.9)
2.7
(3.6)
-0.9
(2.1)
-2.3
(2.6)
-2.5
(2.7)
-1.6
(2.9)
-3.0
(3.5)
-8.0**
(3.7)
-7.3*
(3.8)

Share of family income in SURS-covered job
25-49%
-3.3
(2.5)
50-74%
-1.3
(2.6)
75-100%
-0.5
(2.6)
Household net worth
$20,000 to $49,999
$50,000 to $99,999
$100,000 to $249,999
$250,000 to $499,999
$500,000 or more

-0.9
(2.6)
-2.6
(2.3)
-5.3**
(2.3)
-9.1***
(2.6)
-11.1***
(2.6)

Fixed effects for year of enrollment?

Yes

Fixed effects for employer?

Yes

Adjusted R-Squared of Regression

0.100

Sample Size

6,065

The specification is a linear probability model (OLS) in which the binary dependent variable is equal to 1
if respondents defaulted into the Traditional Plan and 0 if they made an active choice of plan. We have
rescaled the coefficients by multiplying them by 100 so that they are expressed in percentage points.
Standard errors, shown in parentheses, allow for heteroskedasticity.
***, **, * indicates significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

37

Table 4: Regression of Whether Those Defaulted into Traditional Plan Would NOT Pick
Same Plan Today, Coefficients from OLS Regression Reported
DECISION-MAKING APPROACHES
Procrastination
Vigilance
Hypervigilance
Buck-Passing
Tendency to Regret
Indecisiveness
Need for Cognitive Closure

4.7*
(2.5)
1.2
(2.8)
6.3**
(3.0)
-4.1*
(2.5)
3.2
(2.1)
2.0
(3.8)
-5.6*
(3.0)

BUSY/HURRY

BELIEF OF POLITICAL RISK
Not at all confident in Illinois legislature
GENERAL KNOWLEDGE
Basic financial literacy:
Correctly answered both questions
Education
Associate’s degree
Bachelor’s degree
Master’s or professional degree
Ph.D.

Often do not have time to fully consider options 1.2
because always in a hurry
(1.4)
RISK PREFERENCE & INVEST SKILL

College degree in finance or business?

Risk-Return Tradeoff Preference
Average risk and return

SURS-SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE
Basic SURS knowledge:
Correctly answered both questions
DEMOGRAPHIC CHARCTERISTICS

Above average risk and return
Take Gamble (50/50, 100% ↑ or 33% ↓)?
Yes
Don’t know
Self-assessment of investment skill
Same as others
Slightly or much better than others

1.4
(3.2)
10.7**
(4.7)

Work experience in finance?

Age (when joined SURS, in years)

3.2
(3.5)
3.2
(3.6)

Female?

-4.2
(3.2)
-2.5
(3.9)

Ranking of health relative to others

Married?
Have children?

Average

BELIEF OF HOW LONG STAY IN SURS

Good

Expected to stay rest of career when joined

Excellent

Moderately likely
Very or extremely likely

-5.9
(4.4)
-13.0***
(3.1)

11.5***
(3.0)
-0.1
(3.0)
4.3
(6.1)
6.7
(5.0)
0.3
(5.2)
0.6
(6.3)
-4.7
(4.3)
1.0
(3.3)
-6.2**
(3.0)
-0.83***
(0.13)
11.3***
(3.0)
-4.3
(3.1)
2.8
(3.1)
-7.6
(7.2)
-12.4*
(7.1)
-8.9
(7.3)

(continued on next page)

38

Table 4 (continued from prior page)
ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS
Occupation
Executive
Academic professional
Faculty (tenured)
Faculty (tenure-track, not tenured)
Faculty (non-tenure track)
Police, fire, and public safety personnel
Maintenance and facilities personnel
Other
SURS-covered job income
$20,000 to $39,999
$40,000 to $59,999
$60,000 to $79,999
$80,000 to $99,999
$100,000 to $119,999
$120,000 or more

-2.3
(12.0)
-6.4
(5.2)
7.3
(9.0)
6.4
(7.0)
3.3
(5.1)
-12.5
(9.1)
4.2
(7.5)
4.8
(4.8)

Share of family income in SURS-covered job
25-49%
8.3
(5.1)
50-74%
5.0
(5.0)
75-100%
3.9
(4.9)
Household net worth
$20,000 to $49,999
$50,000 to $99,999
$100,000 to $249,999
$250,000 to $499,999
$500,000 or more

-3.1
(4.8)
-1.2
(5.3)
-0.1
Fixed effects for year of enrollment?
(5.7)
-2.9
Fixed effects for employer?
(7.4)
-4.0
Adjusted R-Squared of Regression
(9.4)
-26.0*** Sample Size
(10.0)

-10.8**
(5.0)
-2.7
(4.6)
-5.2
(4.8)
-6.4
(5.7)
-15.9***
(6.2)

Yes
Yes
0.144
1,402

The specification is a linear probability model (OLS) in which the binary dependent variable is equal to 1
if the respondent would not pick the same plan today (either by picking a different pension plan or
answering “don’t know” to the would you re-do your original pension choice question) and 0 otherwise.
We have rescaled the coefficients by multiplying them by 100 so that they are expressed in percentage
points.
The sample is all respondents that were defaulted into the Traditional Plan.
Standard errors, shown in parentheses, allow for heteroskedasticity.
***, **, * indicates significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

39

Table 5: Regression of Whether Those Defaulted into Traditional Plan Would Strongly
Desire to Switch Pension Plans Today, Coefficients from OLS Regression Reported
DECISION-MAKING APPROACHES
Procrastination
Vigilance
Hypervigilance
Buck-Passing
Tendency to Regret
Indecisiveness
Need for Cognitive Closure
BUSY/HURRY

BELIEF OF POLITICAL RISK
4.2**
Not at all confident in Illinois legislature
(2.0)
2.1
GENERAL KNOWLEDGE
(2.4)
6.2**
Basic financial literacy:
(2.5)
Correctly answered both questions
-5.6*** Education
(1.9)
-2.7
Associate’s degree
(1.7)
-3.9
Bachelor’s degree
(3.0)
-0.3
Master’s or professional degree
(2.5)
Ph.D.

Often do not have time to fully consider options 0.4
because always in a hurry
(1.1)
RISK PREFERENCE & INVEST SKILL
Risk-Return Tradeoff Preference
Average risk and return
Above average risk and return
Take Gamble (50/50, 100% ↑ or 33% ↓)?
Yes
Don’t know
Self-assessment of investment skill
Same as others
Slightly or much better than others

College degree in finance or business?
Work experience in finance?

SURS-SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE
3.5
Basic SURS knowledge:
(2.5)
Correctly answered both questions
15.9*** DEMOGRAPHIC CHARCTERISTICS
(3.8)
Age (when joined SURS, in years)
4.1
(2.9)
-2.7
(2.8)

Female?

5.3**
(2.5)
5.3*
(3.2)

Ranking of health relative to others

Married?
Have children?

Average

BELIEF OF HOW LONG STAY IN SURS

Good

Expected to stay rest of career when joined

Excellent

Moderately likely
Very or extremely likely

-2.5
(3.6)
-7.7***
(2.4)

8.0***
(2.2)
-1.0
(2.3)
0.7
(4.2)
6.2
(3.8)
-0.6
(3.7)
3.4
(4.6)
4.7
(3.3)
-2.4
(2.3)
2.6
(2.3)
-0.51***
(0.10)
2.9
(2.3)
1.0
(2.4)
1.7
(2.4)
5.5
(5.2)
2.3
(5.0)
7.2
(5.2)

(continued on next page)

40

Table 5 (continued from prior page)
ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS
Occupation
Executive
Academic professional
Faculty (tenured)
Faculty (tenure-track, not tenured)
Faculty (non-tenure track)
Police, fire, and public safety personnel
Maintenance and facilities personnel
Other
SURS-covered job income
$20,000 to $39,999
$40,000 to $59,999
$60,000 to $79,999
$80,000 to $99,999
$100,000 to $119,999
$120,000 or more

-3.0
(7.3)
-3.0
(4.0)
4.3
(7.2)
-3.6
(5.4)
-0.4
(3.8)
7.2
(8.2)
9.8*
(5.7)
3.5
(3.9)
-1.7
(3.5)
-0.2
(3.9)
2.0
(4.6)
-0.7
(6.1)
1.0
(8.3)
-7.9
(7.4)

Share of family income in SURS-covered job
25-49%
10.1***
(3.8)
50-74%
9.2**
(3.8)
75-100%
11.4***
(3.7)
Household net worth
$20,000 to $49,999
$50,000 to $99,999
$100,000 to $249,999
$250,000 to $499,999
$500,000 or more

-1.7
(4.4)
-5.0
(3.9)
-4.4
(4.0)
-4.3
(4.6)
-8.9*
(4.6)

Fixed effects for year of enrollment?

Yes

Fixed effects for employer?

Yes

Adjusted R-Squared of Regression

0.116

Sample Size

1,402

The specification is a linear probability model (OLS) in which the binary dependent variable is equal to 1
if the respondent had a strong or extremely strong desire to switch to a different pension plan and 0
otherwise. We have rescaled the coefficients by multiplying them by 100 so that they are expressed in
percentage points.
The sample is all respondents that were defaulted into the Traditional Plan.
Standard errors, shown in parentheses, allow for heteroskedasticity.
***, **, * indicates significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

41

