                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             ‘TO HAVE AND HAVE NOT’:
                 ARE RICH LITIGIOUS PLAINTIFFS FAVORED IN COURT?

                                            B. Zorina Khan

                                         Working Paper 20945
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20945


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2015




I received valuable comments from Stanley Engerman, Catherine Fisk, William Gallagher, Henry
Gemery, Naomi Lamoreaux, Craig McEwen, Alan S. Taylor, Christopher Tomlins, and participants
in seminars at Bowdoin College, the National Bureau of Economic Research, American Society for
Legal History, and the Economic History Association. Employees at the Maine Archives were very
helpful. I am grateful to Bowdoin College for offering research support for the project, and to Ginny
Hopcroft, Carr Ross and Guy Saldanha for their assistance. Liability for errors is limited to the author.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by B. Zorina Khan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
‘To Have and Have Not’: Are Rich Litigious Plaintiffs Favored in Court?
B. Zorina Khan
NBER Working Paper No. 20945
February 2015
JEL No. K10,K41,N11,O43

                                             ABSTRACT

A long-standing debate centers on the role of the “Haves” and the “Have Nots” in litigation. It is often
suggested that wealthier plaintiffs are more likely to be repeat players, who tend to prevail in disputes
before the courts. Do wealthy repeat players indeed capture courts and succeed in shaping legal rules
regardless of the intent of policy makers? This paper employs a unique historical data set that allows
a direct test of these hypotheses, including information on the wealth of participants in civil district
courts, their occupations, and the total number of lawsuits filed by each litigant over a long period.
 The results show that repeat players indeed tended to be wealthier, in occupations that likely benefited
from creating a reputation for uncooperative litigation strategies. However, outcomes in court were
independent of wealth, and related more to the type of case. Far from being under the sway of the
“Haves,” early courts functioned as an effective enforcement mechanism for extensive markets in
debt, that likely promoted economic growth during this period.


B. Zorina Khan
9700 College Station
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011
and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu
I. INTRODUCTION


                          “Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats?”
                                                                        -- Epistle of St. James, 2:6

Legal institutions are a primary source of socioeconomic capital, and have the potential to enable

market interactions and economic growth if they are objective, predictable and unbiased. At the

most general level, this project responds to Douglass C. North’s call for more research on the

economics of institutions comprising “the rules of the game of a society or, more formally, the

humanly-devised constraints that structure human interaction.”1 Similarly, Stanley Engerman and

Kenneth Sokoloff point out that, although it is widely acknowledged that institutions are a key factor

in explaining divergent economic growth paths, there is less understanding about the way in which

institutions are formed, how they evolve, and why some persist despite their inefficiency.2

        Our understanding of the evolution of institutions has been enriched by a large stock of

historical-legal research on courts and cases. Law and society scholars have been somewhat divided,

however, on the relationship between courts, markets and society. Some have proposed that a

“moral economy” existed at least until the end of the eighteenth century, and that courts were based

on community norms which were hostile to rational economic transactions; whereas others point to a

pervasive commercial market orientation that existed from the earliest years of settlement, and to

court dockets that primarily functioned as an enforcement mechanism for deep and extensive debt

markets that spanned many states.3 Another way in which legal institutions can depart from their


1
  Douglass C. North, p. 3, Institutions, institutional change and economic performance. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Press.
2
  Stanley Engerman and Kenneth Sokoloff, “Institutional and Non-Institutional Explanations of Economic Differences,”
NBER WP 9989, 2003; “Colonialism, Inequality and Long-Run Paths of Development,” WP 11057, 2005; and “Factor
Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of Development among New World Economies,” Economia, vol. 3 (1) 2002.
3
  See, among others, Bruce H. Mann, Neighbors and Strangers: Law and Community in Early Connecticut (Chapel Hill,
NC, 1987), 9-10. David Thomas Konig, Law and Society in Puritan Massachusetts: Essex County, 1629-1692 (Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, 1979); William E. Nelson, Disputes and Conflict Resolution in Plymouth County, Massachusetts,
                                                         3
role as the facilitator of market enterprise is through corruption or biases in favour of special

interests. Recent research highlights the strong negative impact of “the grabbing hand” for

economic progress, whereby talented individuals funnel resources and abilities to wealth-

redistribution, rather than wealth-creation, a problem that is especially prevalent in developing

countries where ancillary institutions are less able to substitute for captured legal processes.4

        Marc Galanter, in what has been called “the most visible, widely cited, and influential article

ever published in the law and society field,” promoted the thesis that the “Haves” tend to prevail in

litigation.5 The Haves comprise repeat players in court who acquire both economic and political

advantages that allow them to defeat their opponents (“the Have Nots”) and to attain their private

long-run objectives, potentially at the cost of social welfare. Such repeat players have access to

extensive specialized resources, accumulate knowledge about what works best, and are able to

benefit from economies of scale and low start up costs. They can also count on privileges beyond

the legal system that enhance their standing in court, such as long-term relationships and influential

social networks. The judiciary itself might be captured and act to further the interests of the Haves,

despite countervailing pressure from those who represent the relatively disadvantaged petitioners.

More generally, the Haves can influence the rules of the game or the path of institutional change,

regardless of the initial intent of policymakers. A corollary of this perspective is that the focus of


1725-1825 (Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 1981). Bruce Mann’s study of early Connecticut, pointed to a
professionalization of the legal system that framed conflicts in a more predictable and uniform fashion than prior
resolutions based on community norms. Mann also found that courts soon became the fora for settling commercial
disputes rather than personal grievances, and argued that more impersonal capital markets had developed in rural
Connecticut by the 1750s. However, in Republic of Debtors: Bankruptcy in the Age of American Independence,
(Harvard University Press, 2002, pp. 2-3) he claimed the existence of a “moral economy of debt” that waned over the
course of the 18th century but still “established the idea against which debtors and creditors measured themselves and
each other and to which they gave legal expression…. Within that framework inability to pay was a moral failure, not a
business risk.”
4
  A. Shleifer, R. Vishny, and K. Murphy, "Why is rent-seeking so costly to growth?" American Economic Review
83.2:409-414 (1993).
5
  Grossman, Kritzer and Macaulay (p. 803), referring to Galanter, Marc (1974) “Why the ‘Haves’ Come Out Ahead:
Speculations on the Limits of Legal Change,” 9 Law and Society Rev. 95-160 .
                                                           4
institutional economists on the rules of the game is misplaced, since the characteristics of the

litigants are more significant.

         Galanter further made specific claims about the patterns of litigation. He contended that the

“great bulk of litigation” comprises plaintiffs who are repeat players bringing cases against one-shot

defendants.6 The Haves are more likely to be repeat players in litigious strategies because of

asymmetries in the distribution of the net expected benefits by income status.7 Repeat players may

“play for precedent” by choosing to take to trial cases in which they can obtain a favourable decision

rule that will have implications for future disputes. Accordingly, this model generates testable

predictions that wealthy individuals will be disproportionately represented among plaintiffs, and that

the Haves will tend to prevail against their opponents.8 Galanter did not consider the possibility that

disproportionate representation might also occur if the wealthy tended to engage in larger numbers

of risk-taking transactions that raised the possibility of legal conflicts. If this were true, we would

expect that repeat plaintiffs would tend to be successful merchants or others whose occupation

indicated that they were involved in multiple transactions to a greater extent than other litigants.

Another alternative is that, in a rent-seeking society, legal disputes might reduce social welfare by

creating incentives for transfers from productive to unproductive activities. If so, the wealthy would

face a higher probability of being sued, leading to their being disproportionately represented among

defendants.

         Economists interpret the legal system in markedly different ways from other social scientists,

and emphasize the rules of the game rather than the characteristics of the players; indeed, market
6
  Galanter (1974), p. 108.
7
  For repeat players, whether as plaintiffs or defendants, "the stakes will almost surely differ between the parties, because
the alternative costs of their future activities are unlikely to be equal" (Priest and Klein, 1984, p. 28). The Haves are
more likely to have higher present discounted values at stake than one-shot defendants, and thus can rationally spend
more on any one case.
8
  See also Bruce Kobayashi, “Case Selection, External Effects, and the Trial/Settlement Decision,” in Dispute
Resolution: Bridging the Settlement Gap, David A. Anderson, ed., 1996.
                                                             5
efficiency implies that trades are atomistic and independent of the identities of the traders. Dispute

resolution is further characterized as a process of rational deliberations regarding expected benefits

and costs, where the optimal (cost-minimizing) outcome is a settlement where risks are allocated to

the party who can bear it at least cost. Economic models, such as the Priest and Klein analysis of the

selection of disputes for trial (discussed later), imply that observed court cases should be related to

unsystematic and unpredictable factors.9 Economic theorists also differ somewhat in their

interpretation of the frequency of cases per person (“repeat play”). In game theory, the Folk

Theorem explains how repeat play can facilitate cooperation, independently of social hierarchies.

Fudenberg and Levine (1992) analyzed the class of all repeated games that involved a long-run

player and a one-shot opponent and showed how the repeat player, if sufficiently patient, can obtain

a superior payoff in any Nash equilibrium. In scenarios with imperfect information, a player who

obtains a reputation for tough bargains can deter potential adversaries from engaging in future

conflict and facilitate socially optimal settlements.

        Is the American legal system inherently biased in favour of, and shaped by, the strategic

manoeuvres of wealthy litigious plaintiffs? Despite more than twenty five years of research that

have produced “a varied and abundant progeny,” we only have mixed insight into the relationship

between the socio-economic standing of litigants and outcomes in legal institutions.10 Part of the

reason for these shortcomings lies in the difficulty in gauging the resources of litigants. Thus,

researchers in this area simply assume that certain categories of litigants have more assets, so the

“Haves” and “repeat players” are usually proxied by governments and organizations -- firms,


9
   Priest, George and B Klein, "The Selection of Disputes for Litigation," JLS, vol 13, 1984:1. See also George
Priest,"Measuring Legal Change," Journal of Law and Economic Organization, Fall 1987, vol. 3(2):193-225.
10
   For a summary of the large body of literature on this issue, see Herbert M. Kritzer and Susan Silbey (Editors), In
Litigation Do the “Haves” Still Come Out Ahead?. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2003. In particular, see
Brian J. Glenn, “The Varied and Abundant Progeny,” pp. 371-419.
                                                         6
corporations, unions, schools -- whereas individual litigants and specific types of businesses such as

sole proprietorships are assumed to “have not.”11 Another difficulty lies in accumulating evidence

of “repeat play” since researchers today typically do not have the full record of court trials at the

level of individual litigants and here, again, speculations are made that particular types of litigants –

such as insurance companies – are likely to be repeat players.12 The conclusion from such empirical

studies is that the Haves (organizations) win more in court, but clearly these findings are limited by

the questions that are raised by the proxies used to measure access to resources and repeat play, and

by the biases of the reported lawsuits and administrative records used. Based on the state of

knowledge so far, it is still unclear even whether repeat play matters in litigation; and it is impossible

to say if or why the “Haves” do better than the “Have Nots.”

         This paper directly examines two key factors that research on the Haves vs. Have Nots so far

has tended to imperfectly measure: a complete assessment of the frequency of litigation per person;

and estimates of the wealth of both parties to the conflict. Information on repeat litigation and on the

wealth of participants in civil district courts is used to test whether the “Haves” tend to prevail over

the “Have Nots” in the legal system. The empirical analysis employs a panel data set of civil

litigation in Maine over the course of market expansion from the Colonial period through to the Civil

War.13 The data set includes some 30,000 lawsuits filed in the counties of Washington, York,


11
   For instance, Ringquist and Emmert (1999) categorized litigants as Haves or Have Nots depending on whether or not
they were Fortune 500 companies; whereas Meeker (1984) modeled the state as a repeat player, and the criminal
defendant as a one-shot player. Tauber (1998) uses the NAACP as his proxy for a repeat player; Levine and Mellema
(2001) study drug dealers and prostitutes.
12
   Appellate cases, which some have used to measure repeat play, are an imperfect proxy because they clearly relate to
quite different issues from multiple litigation. Some researchers have used records from noncourt prosecutions such as
IRS audits.
13
    Maine functioned as an early frontier for the residents of the Northeast and, in keeping with other frontiers, outcomes
exhibited greater variance and risk than in more developed areas. In 1820, 82 percent of the labour force was in
agriculture and 11 percent in manufactures; but by 1860 the agricultural sector accounted for only 40 percent of
employment. Maine’s comparative advantage remained in resource extraction, such as timber and fishing, and in 1860
its fishing industry was the most important in the country after Massachusetts. Natural resources also served as a basis
                                                             7
Cumberland and Kennebec between 1700 and 1860. The lawsuits are categorized by type of case

(property, contract, debt, personal) and type of litigant. These cases also include detailed estimates

of the amount of money at issue, the amount awarded, the costs of the case, and the outcomes. The

primary results in this paper are based on a sub-sample in which the unit of observation is the

individual plaintiff and defendant, identified by place of residence, age, gender and the total number

of lawsuits per person. The sample of litigants were linked to manuscript population censuses to

obtain individual-level information on their occupation, wealth, and household size. The residence

of the plaintiffs and defendants were categorized in terms of town and county-level data on

population, industries, valuation of estates, and urbanization.

         The first section of the paper describes the development of antebellum Maine courts and

general patterns in litigation over time. The second section addresses the characteristics of the

sample from Washington county, and determines the identity of repeat players relative to one-shot

players. These data allow us to better assess claims that repeat players for the most part prevail

against one-shot defendants and that they rarely engage in litigation against each other. The third

section estimates the determinants of legal outcomes and the influence of wealth and other


for a growing secondary sector: the Maine economy rapidly became more diversified as it expanded from the traditional
pursuits of farming, shipbuilding, fishing and lumber to include manufacturing employment.              By 1850, Maine
rivaled its New England neighbours, including Massachusetts, in an impressive number of industries. The lumber trade
peaked in 1840, when Maine provided almost 15 percent of total timber output in the United States, second only to New
York. Maine was able to exploit its large timber endowments and fishing heritage to create the most successful
shipbuilding industry in the United States; indeed, by 1840 it accounted for over a quarter of the national output of
shipping tonnage. The state possessed many of the endowments that potentially contributed to manufacturing
productivity, including inland sources of water for power and transportation, sea ports, and proximity to markets. As
early as 1807, the Maine Cotton and Woolen Manufacturing Company was incorporated in Brunswick, and Boston
capitalists funded other mills including the largest factory in the United States at that time, an enterprise in Saco that was
capitalized at one million dollars. In 1860, Maine cotton manufactures ranked fifth in the United States in terms of
output, and employed some 6,700 workers. Other sources of manufacturing revenues included wool textiles, boots and
shoes, and tanning of leather. Foreign trade expanded when the products of the state’s sawmills were exported to the
Caribbean and other overseas markets, and imports such as raw sugar were processed in Cumberland county seaport
towns. Maine's counties were incorporated in the following years: Androscoggin (1854); Aroostook (1839);
Cumberland (1760); Franklin (1838); Hancock (1790); Kennebec (1799); Knox (1860); Lincoln (1760); Oxford (1805);
Penobscot (1816); Piscataquis (1838); Sagadahoc (1854); Somerset (1809); Waldo (1827); Washington (1790); York
(1652).
                                                              8
characteristics on the disposition of cases in York, Cumberland and Kennebec counties. The final

section offers a brief conclusion.



II. ANTEBELLUM MAINE COURTS

                                                        “An age so prone to litigation”
                                                      --Province and Court Records of Maine (1692-1711)

Maine separated from Massachusetts to become the twenty-third state of the Union in 1820, and the

size and complexity of its economy increased markedly thereafter until the Civil War. Maine courts

were established from the time of early settlement, and incorporated Massachusetts rules and

legislation.14 Decisions were quite expeditious and summary, with rare instances of appeal to the

inferior county court of common pleas.15 In 1700, actions that involved sums above 40 shillings

could be brought before the Court of Common Pleas.16 After 1820, Justices of the Peace were

appointed with jurisdiction in minor civil matters not exceeding $20, and criminal causes involving


14
   This account follows William Willis, A History of the Law, the Courts, and the Lawyers of Maine (Portland, Maine,
1863). In 1640 the first session of the court in June heard 18 civil cases and nine complaints; in the September session
there were 28 civil actions (nine jury trials), and 13 indictments .The first lawyer, Thomas Gorges, arrived in 1640 and
was joined by Thomas Morton of Mass. shortly thereafter; however, no others came for another century. “In cases of
great importance, as well as on ordinary occasions, regularly educated lawyers from New Hampshire and Massachusetts
attended the courts in Maine” (p. 87, Willis). United States President John Adams was one of those who travelled the
Maine circuit, which he did for twelve years before the Revolution (p. 88).
15
   According to Willis (p. 13), legal questions were dealt with in a summary fashion: “The forms of proceeding were of
the simplest character, and the absence of lawyers is found in the entire freedom from all technicalities in the pleadings
and verdicts.” This pattern persisted even in the nineteenth century. Some judges, such as Chief Justice Parsons
disapproved of “discursive displays of rhetoric.” (Parsons tended to write up his decision before listening to the
attorneys) Willis, p. 126. The structure of payments in the legal system created incentives for cases to be treated with
despatch. A 1701 statute fixed the fees that attorneys could charge, so they had an incentive to encourage a greater
number of filings in order to increase their income. Until the separation from Massachusetts, court officers also received
emoluments from fees that litigants paid. The fees that the Cumberland CCP received totalled $15 in 1776 and
remained about $123 per year for the next 20 years. However, they averaged $1975 in the decade before the Civil War,
and in 1808, “a year of extraordinary business,” amounted to $4080.
16
   “This doubtless discouraged the bringing of many small and trifling causes into a county court the jurisdiction of
which was sufficiently wide in any event to insure steady business in an age so prone to litigation,” Neal W. Allen Jr.
(ed.) Province and Court Records of Maine, IV (Portland, Maine, 1958), xxii. Two terms a year were held in York and
Wells, and after 1736 a June term was added for Falmouth or Portland. In 1760 two terms were also held at the courts
for the newly established Cumberland and Lincoln counties. The judges and court clerks were initially compensated with
the court fees, but when Maine became a separate state, the county court system was changed so that the chief justice and
two associates were all salaried.
                                                            9
fines of $5 or less.17 In 1839, the Courts of Common Pleas were renamed District Courts, but they

retained the same jurisdiction and terms and no major changes occurred thereafter until 1852.

        The supply of legal resources in the region kept pace with demand. The number of courts

expanded whenever new counties were formed. Initially, a shortage of qualified lawyers implied

that a majority of the members of the courts were simply prominent men of the region who were

formally untrained in the law. Economic prospects were much improved in and after the second half

of the eighteenth century, and lawyers were quick to take advantage of these opportunities. The

stock of legal personnel was responsive to growing demand and the potential for above-average

returns, and lawyers migrated to expanding towns, including a significant influx from Boston and

other parts of New England. Between 1790 and 1860, their numbers grew from only 16 to 529,

compared to a sixfold increase in the general population. In 1840 the town of Bangor had a

population of only 8634, but 48 of these were lawyers, and even outlying Aroostook and Oxford

counties were well served with four and 26 respectively. In 1850 Cumberland, Kennebec,

Washington and York counties each had approximately one attorney at law practising for every

thousand residents.18

         The function of courts changed rapidly in ways that seem consistent with the notion that

institutional specialization and division of labour were related to the market. In the years between

1700 and 1709, courts predominantly enforced social rules about sexual behaviour, religion,

drinking practices, and swearing.19 During the next few decades a marked change occurred in the

caseload of the lower courts. In the 1720s more than half of all cases related to economic issues


17
   Maine Laws, p. 352, Ch. LXXVI (1821). The Superior Court consisted of a chief justice and two associates until
1847, when a third associate justice was added In 1852 the inferior courts of common pleas were abolished, and their
jurisdiction was absorbed by the Supreme Court, presided over by seven judges.
18
   Cumberland had 87 practising lawyers, Kennebec 64, Washington 32, and York 46 (Maine Register, 1852).
19
   See Khan, “Justice of the Marketplace.”
                                                          10
such as contract, debts, and ejectments from land. By 1730, a decisive shift in orientation had

occurred, and thereafter the overwhelming majority of cases involved economic market transactions.

The total number of lawsuits relating to noneconomic matters (religion, crimes, county

administration, and regulation of behaviour) was relatively constant, but such issues fell as a

proportion of total cases outstanding as well as in per capita terms. Henceforth courts would forego

their role in regulating private behaviour and would instead function as the locus of enforcement for

commercial bargains. This pattern should not be surprising, since it accords well with the notion that

market expansion is accompanied by a rationalization of social and economic rules and practices.

        Alan Taylor documented the sometimes violent struggles between squatters (“Liberty Men”)

and large scale landowners (“Great Proprietors”) that occurred in Maine shortly after the

Revolution.20 However, such conflicts appear to have been rather uncharacteristic of the general

relationships between entrepreneurs and settlers in both temporal and geographical terms.

Resistance among a few “liberty men” may have been genuinely bitter, but in general these were

quite unrepresentative and overall resistance to proprietors was not profound; indeed, any violence

was confined to a relatively small inland area for a brief period of time, around the turn of the

century. Plaintiffs in remote Washington county (on the northern frontier adjacent to Canada)

recorded no more than 10 property disputes out of a sample of 500 cases in the first decade of the

nineteenth century. The more developed regions of York and Cumberland counties also

experienced few lawsuits about property. In York and Cumberland in 1800 only 5.6 percent of 835

cases dealt with property, and almost the same (5.7 percent) was true of 1850. Many of these did not




20
  Alan Taylor, Liberty Men and Great Proprietors, The Revolutionary Settlement on the Maine Frontier, 1760-1820
(Chapel Hill, North Carolina,1990).
                                                        11
involve true conflicts, and simply dealt with standard procedural issues such as a petition to partition

a plot of land.21

         The overall patterns for Maine suggest that the importance of property cases fell relative to

all other types of cases in the 1820s, and debt issues increased dramatically during the industrial

expansion of the next three decades. As was true of many other colonies in early New England, cash

was in short supply among Maine residents and the majority of transactions were in the form of book

credit or agreements that debtors ultimately settled with “sundries” or goods in kind.22 Notes

promising repayment of debts on short and long term circulated as negotiable instruments, endorsed

by third parties, and at times involving an extensive chain of residents in different states. For

instance, in 1837 Benjamin F. Waite, a resident of Calais, in Washington County, who specialized in

endorsing financial transactions, drew on a $900 draft that was payable to Zimri B. Heywood of

Kennebec County at the Suffolk Bank in Boston. Heywood had delivered the draft to Heman

Norton who transferred it to Nathaniel Norton (both of New York) to repay a loan that the latter had

made him several years before to help support his family through hard times.23

         The frequency of such interactions and the relatively small size of the average claim created

an incentive for large-scale collection through the courts to economize on transactions costs. Daniel

21
   Taylor highlights the experience of Kennebec county, and notes that resistance occurred at the turn of the nineteenth
century because Kennebec settlers felt that “proprietors threatened the foundation of liberty in an egalitarian distribution
of property.”
22
   For instance in 42 Me. 229 (1856) Anna Heywood required as rent “ten bushels of corn at 75 cents per bushel, eight
bushels of wheat at $ 1 per bushel, twenty-five bushels of potatoes at 1 shilling per bushel, and two tons of hay at $ 5 per
ton; the balance in cash, or country produce at cash price.” However, prices altered during the course of the contract, so
she “insists that she is entitled to the amount of the actual market value at that time, of ten bushels of corn, eight bushels
of wheat, twenty-five bushels of potatoes and two tons of hay, in addition to the ten dollars to be paid in cash, or in
country produce at cash price, when these articles are shown to have had a value greater than that stated in the lease. On
the other hand, the defendant resists this construction of the contract, and contends that, failing to deliver the specific
articles, he is bound to account only for the rent at its agreed value in cash.” The majority decided in favour of the
defendant, but Judge Rice chivalrously dissented because “to permit the defendant, under such circumstances, to be a
gainer by a voluntary violation of his agreement, especially when that agreement was made with a woman, would not, in
my opinion, be …conducive to good morals.”
23
   Nathaniel Norton v. Benjamin F. Waite, Sup. Judicial Court of Maine for Aroostook and Washington Counties, 20 Me.
175 (1841); judgment for the plaintiff.
                                                             12
Vickers claims that debt was also “an instrument of social power and, as such, often became the

focus of deep social tension,” and that such social tensions were manifested through litigation.24 An

assessment of thousands of legal filings does not support this notion. Instead, from the earliest

period the records point to a systematic, routinized proceeding to which plaintiffs and defendants all

subscribed and understood. There was little dramatic flourish in the January 1713 session of the

York Court of Common Pleas when Elizabeth Alcock and Elizabeth Parker appeared as plaintiffs

claiming that Nathaniel Perkins owed them approximately £10. Perkins failed to appear to contest

the charge, and the courts granted the women recovery of the debt as well as £1 18s 3d in court

costs.16

           Debt collection was quite straightforward, and the certainty of procedures may be inferred

from the substantial amount of secondary or tertiary trades in promissory notes. Other things being

equal, a defendant who is motivated by strong opposition to his creditor’s claims in more likely to

turn up to contest the claim especially since, in his absence, the court will award costs to the

plaintiff. However, the vast majority of debt cases were never opposed by defendants, and the high

fraction of defaults by defendants in 1800 (90.2 percent) had changed little in 1850 (92.4 percent).

The evidence suggests that courts were primarily being used as a third-party enforcement

mechanism for well-developed financial markets rather than as a forum for genuine conflict. This

was not as true of property cases, where about two thirds of the legal claims were contested by

defendants. If social norms were effective, it might be expected that relatively straightforward

disputes would never tend to reach the courts because they could be settled at lower cost out of

court. It is significant that the percent of cases in which both parties did not appear increased from

eight percent in 1800 to 27.1 percent in 1850. Thus, the tendency to reach out of court settlements

24
  Vickers, Daniel, Farmers & Fishermen: Two Centuries of Work in Essex County, Massachusetts, 1630-1850, Chapel
Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1994.
                                                       13
was rising over the period of market expansion, implying a growing tendency toward cooperative

solutions.25



III. ONE-SHOT PLAYERS AND REPEAT PLAINTIFFS

                                   “Because I have learned from a Merchant, said the Judge, that you are a perfidious
                                   wretch, whom justice will punish as you deserve if a second complaint of the same
                                   nature is brought against you…”
                                             --“The Prudent Judge,” in American Moral & Sentimental Magazine (1797)

According to the Galanter school, the repeat player “Haves” tend to bring charges against “one-shot”

“Have not” defendants who are inexperienced in litigation. The former comprise litigious plaintiffs

with greater access to resources, who win disproportionately and are able to “play for rules.” The

issue is worth exploring further for such claims suggest that institutional change in both developed

and developing countries is likely to be stifled by hierarchical social structures. The historical

experience of New England promises to shed more light on this debate because the opportunity to

gain access to unique data.

        A key aspect of these data is insight into the nature of repeat litigation. During the first half

of the eighteenth century repeat litigation was consistently higher in the area of property disputes

than for any other category. Extraordinarily litigious plaintiffs included prominent Maine citizens

such as William Pepperell, the foremost Kittery merchant of his day, who amassed wealth in a

diverse array of industries including lumber, shipping and real estate. Other plaintiffs were

employed as agents of landed proprietors like Pepperell. They brought suits of trespass and

ejectment against squatters and tenants that were decided by justices who themselves tended to be

business associates or relatives. Such descriptive examples might seem to support the notion of rich


25
  Similar patterns have been documented over time in other frontier regions. See B. Zorina Khan, "Commerce and
Cooperation: Litigation and Settlement of Civil Disputes on the Australian Frontier," Journal of Economic History, vol.
60 (4) 2000:1088-1119.
                                                          14
litigious plaintiffs benefiting from social networks to exploit the ordinary tenantry. However, their

interlocking interests were not entirely harmonious, as witnessed by the significant number of court

cases that involved these same individuals as defendants in disputes brought by other multiple

plaintiffs. For instance, several of Nathaniel Donnell’s 44 lawsuits were filed against Malachi

Edwards (a Wells selectman who was plaintiff in 79 cases) whom he accused of trespass, and against

Humphrey Scammon (a wealthy mill-owner and lumberman) who was himself involved in 42 cases

as plaintiff.15

        The data for this section are drawn from the court records of Washington county.26 Table 1

shows the characteristics of the sample. Even in this remote region, approximately 18 percent of all

litigants were out-of-state residents (4 percent were from Boston and a significant number from New

Brunswick, Canada), and one third had been born outside of Maine. The sample consists of 981

litigants who were traced in the manuscript census for 1850. These individuals were involved in a

total of 4,362 cases as either plaintiff or defendant, and each accounted for an average of 6 lawsuits

(with a standard deviation of 4.5). As Galanter had claimed, several businesses such as the Calais

Bank (20 cases) and the St. Croix Manufacturing Company (30) were repeat players. However, the

highest numbers of cases were brought by high-transaction individuals, predominantly lawyers and

traders, whose scale of activity naturally led to a higher proclivity for litigation. Many others were

repeat players, but predominantly appearing as defendants rather than as plaintiffs. For example,

Rendol S Whidden, a wealthy Calais lumberman who had been born in New Hampshire, was a

plaintiff in only 14 of his total 60 cases. Benjamin F Waite, a rich trader who negotiated loans with

26
   Washington county is located in the northeast quadrant of Maine, and covers over 2700 square miles along the border
with Canada. The population increased by 37 percent between 1840 and 1850 to 38711, and the per capita valuation of
real estate in 1850 was $135 (relative to the state average of $172). This area was farmed with corn, wheat, hay, and
potatoes; other activities included timber grants, ship building, fisheries, and granite mining. The main towns were
Calais and Machias, and the latter was a Federal port of entry, with a permanent customs office.

                                                          15
New York lenders, similarly was the plaintiff in only 3 of 48 cases; whereas George M. Chase, who

was one of a dozen lawyers practicing in Calais, was the claimant in 35 of his 43 lawsuits.

        Table 2 replicates the headings from Galanter’s typology of litigants in terms of four

quadrants (plaintiff/defendant and one-shot/repeat player). The table includes information on some

seven hundred litigants who appeared in the Washington county District Court, who were traced

over time to gauge the total number of instances they had appeared in court over the prior ten years.

The proportion of one-shot players is identical for both plaintiffs and defendants. The results in the

table do not support and, indeed, refute Galanter’s argument that repeat player plaintiffs tend to

bring suits against one-shot defendants, and rarely litigate against other repeat players. Less than

twenty percent of the individuals before the court were involved in a case where a repeat plaintiff

was charging a one-shot defendant. Instead, thirty six percent of the sample comprised instances

where a high-frequency (at least three) plaintiff brought a case against another high-frequency

defendant.

        The repeat-play hypothesis is based in part on the notion that multiple litigants take the

initiative in bringing lawsuits as plaintiffs. It does not fully incorporate the possibility that many

individuals appear in court as both plaintiff and defendant at different times. The regressions in

Table 3 exclude one-shot litigants. The first regression explores the determinants of the propensity

to be a repeat plaintiff, in terms of the percent of cases in which the litigant is a plaintiff. Wealth is

significantly related to the propensity to be a plaintiff. Farmers and individuals with large

households are more likely to be defendants, whereas traders and white collar litigants appear more

frequently as a plaintiff. However, higher numbers of cases are not significantly related to the

percent of times the person appears as a plaintiff.



                                                      16
         The dependent variable in the second regression represents the log of the odds that a litigant

had filed more than one case within the previous decade. The results here show that repeat play is

negatively related to the propensity to be a plaintiff: that is, multiple lawsuits tend to involve

individuals who are appearing in court predominantly as defendants. Farmers are somewhat more

likely to be one-shot litigants, whereas white collar individuals (especially lawyers), merchants,

manufacturers and petty traders are more likely to be repeat players. The coefficient on the log of

wealth confirms that repeat litigation is positively and significantly related to wealth holding. Thus,

both regressions to some extent are consistent with the hypothesis that plaintiffs and repeat players

are more likely to be Haves rather than Have Nots, but the evidence also links repeat play to the

scale of participation in market transactions.



IV. WEALTH AND LEGAL OUTCOMES

                                     "Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen nineteen six,
                                     result happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty
                                     pounds ought and six, result misery."
                                                             --Charles Dickens, David Copperfield (1850)

As Galanter had argued, repeat players tend to be the Haves, richer merchants and lawyers, but this

raises the question of whether the Haves also prevail in court. Litigation is a negative-sum game

because of the loss of expenses for the prosecution of each party’s claims, some of which is not

compensated for even if the loser is held responsible for the winner’s costs. A model of rational

litigants suggests that, because the costs of settling a case are lower than the costs of trial, the

majority of disputes will be resolved before trial.27 Thus, the sample of cases that appear in court is

not a random sample from the underlying population of disputes, and instead will consist of issues

27
  In the event of a default judgment, the English rule held (the loser paid the costs of both parties). Costs of the
plaintiff who prevailed in his claim included fees for the writ and entry into the dockets, depositions, travel of the
plaintiff and witnesses, costs of the trial, and travel of the judge; whereas the defendant’s costs excluded filing costs.
                                                              17
where there is genuine uncertainty.28

           Assume that the stakes are identical for both plaintiff and defendant. If Pp and Pd are the

plaintiff's and defendant's perceived probability of the plaintiff's winning a judgment J, and Cp and Cd

are their respective costs of going to trial relative to settlement, then the plaintiff would choose a

settlement S as long as

                                       S >= Pp J – (1-Pp ) (Cp + Cd).

That is, the plaintiff would tend to settle if the amount to be gained, S, exceeds the net expected

benefit of trial (the expected judgment less the expected excess of trial over settlement costs).

Whereas the defendant would settle if


                                       S <= Pd (J + Cp + Cd),

implying a zone of mutually acceptable settlement can be found when

                                       (Pp - Pd) (J + Cp + Cd) <= (Cp + Cd).

If both parties have identical expectations regarding the strength of the plaintiff's case then there will

always exist a range of settlement. But the greater the difference in expectations (Pp - Pd), the higher

the judgment or amount at issue (J), and the lower the excess costs of litigation over settlement costs

(Cp + Cd), the lower the likelihood of settlement and the greater the probability of trial.                              The

implication is that, in a legal system that is predictable, cases would tend to be resolved before trial;

thus, the cases that are not settled are likely to be genuinely uncertain either because of systemic

factors or factors that are specific to the litigants. Under these circumstances, holding other things

constant, we might expect that wealth or other observable characteristics of litigants would have

little or no predictive power in explaining outcomes in trials. By contrast, Galanter contended that

wealthy plaintiffs win or appeal more often because they are able to invest more in each lawsuit.
28
     See George Priest and Benjamin Klein, "Selection," for the classic model that analyzes the selection of disputes.
                                                               18
       Direct tests of such propositions have to this point been impossible, because of the lack of

information on the wealth of plaintiffs and defendants before the courts. The empirical tests here

will address the hypothesis using records on individual wealth-holding. The data on the disposition

of cases comprise a random sample from each of the three legal districts in Maine: the District

Courts of Cumberland, York and Kennebec. These counties included major towns such as Portland

and Augusta, and experienced a rapid expansion in the level and diversity of economic activities

between 1820 and 1860. The court records included the names of litigants, their occupations and

addresses, the type of case, the amount claimed and the amount awarded, costs incurred, the

outcomes and whether the case was appealed. These records were linked to the manuscript

population census of 1850 which provided further information on the litigants including their age,

occupation, family size, and real estate wealth.

       The argument that the Haves were linked by strong personal connections is not strongly

supported by the evidence regarding occupational and geographic proximity. Merchants, dealers and

traders of all levels accounted for a disproportionate share of plaintiffs relative to their share in the

population, but even when professionals such as doctors, lawyers and “gentlemen” are taken into

consideration, the majority of plaintiffs were from less elite occupations. A minimal and unchanging

six percent of plaintiffs and defendants were in a position that might suggest close ties; that is, in the

same job and location. Instead, more than half were from different jobs and lived in different towns

and this did not change during the period under review. Many of the cases were brought by several

plaintiffs from different backgrounds and towns filing as party to one suit. For instance, in 1849

Frederick Sweetser, a young Boston merchant, joined together with Samuel Gookin, a 59 year old

tailor from New Hampshire, to bring a claim for unpaid debts against Stephen True of North

Yarmouth.     Similarly, the records reveal individual lawsuits brought against multiple defendants

                                                   19
who were from very different backgrounds and economic circumstances.                 The lack of class-

identification is unsurprising in a context where one frequently observes the same person following

several different pursuits simultaneously, or describing himself as a fisherman in one year and a

“gentleman” in another.      Moreover, it might be expected that economic growth would create

incentives for risk-sharing among individuals who belonged to different occupational classes.

       Other things being equal, a defendant who is motivated by strong opposition to his creditor’s

claims in more likely to turn up to contest the claim especially since, in his absence, the court will

award costs to the plaintiff. However, the vast majority of cases were never opposed by defendants,

and this was especially true for debt litigation. The high fraction of defaults by defendants in debt

cases in 1800 (90.2 percent) had changed little in 1850 (92.4 percent). The evidence suggests that

courts were primarily being used as a third-party enforcement mechanism for financial markets

rather than as a forum for genuine conflict. This was not as true of property cases, where about two

thirds of the legal claims were contested by defendants. If social norms were effective, it might be

expected that relatively straightforward disputes would never tend to reach the courts because they

could be settled at lower cost out of court. It is significant that the percent of cases in which both

parties did not appear increased from eight percent in 1800 to 27.1 percent in 1850. This finding

indicates that the tendency to reach out of court settlements was rising over the period of market

expansion. Rather than creating more conflicts, the expansion of commerce and economic growth

was enhancing the tendency to cooperative solutions. The results are consistent with the evolution

of dispute resolution in other frontier areas.17

       Those who subscribe to the notion that richer plaintiffs tend to prevail argue that wealthy

claimants are able to afford higher expenditures on their lawsuits. Table 6 examines the determinants

of legal expenditures for each case. The costs of litigation in district courts throughout the nation were

                                                   20
quite modest by design, and the average lawsuit in Maine cost no more than $12 overall, compared to

the average claim of $273 and awards of $127. There is little systematic relationship between legal

costs and the wealth of litigants or the occupations of most plaintiffs. Plaintiffs who were farmers,

not rich merchants, spent the most on cases, but even then the magnitudes are not significantly greater

for any social class. Instead, defendants were more likely to incur higher costs, as did residents in

small rural areas (relative to those from towns with more than 10,000 residents). Debt cases were

cheaper than other types of disputes, in keeping with the lower amounts at issue, and the high default

rate also substantially lowered costs for both parties to the lawsuit.

           Table 7 shows the relationship between characteristics of plaintiffs, defendants, and the

likelihood of a decision in favour of the plaintiff.29 If the Galanter thesis were correct, it would be

expected that wealthier plaintiffs would be more likely to receive a positive ruling in court. The

regressions here indicate that there is no systematic difference between outcomes for rich or poor

litigants, and wealth is largely unrelated to the disposition of cases. Less than four percent of overall

variation is due to variables that relate to the status of litigants. The results support the economic

model of selection, which suggests that cases that go to court will not be associated with predictable

features. In short, there is little reason to believe that early New England courts were biased in favour

of the Haves.

           Rather, in keeping with an economic perspective on litigation, outcomes overall are primarily

related to the nature of lawsuits rather than the nature of litigants. It is interesting to note that out-of-

state plaintiffs are significantly less likely to prevail in lawsuits. New England residents tend to be

caricatured as hostile to “people from away,” but this finding is related more to the types of cases they

brought rather than to a bias against nonresidents. The explanatory power of the regression increases


29
     The results are basically unchanged if OLS, logistic or probit estimation of the regressions is used.
                                                               21
to 55 percent once the type of case is controlled for, and it is clear that an understanding of debt issues

is crucial to understanding the role of nineteenth-century courts. Both the results here and the

regressions on costs imply that a substantive role for courts was to help economize on the enforcement

of financial contracts.

       Appeals from lower court decisions may occur when the defendant and/or the plaintiff receives

a decision that diverges from their expectations. The tendency to appeal thus provides another way of

gauging whether the parties have different expectations or conflicts. The evidence here accords with

the data on defaults, since the likelihood of appeal was significantly higher at the beginning of the

period, and fell over time. In York and Cumberland, 16.8 percent of all decisions in 1800 were

appealed to the superior courts, whereas only three percent of all cases were being appealed by 1850.

Again, although merchants were somewhat less likely to appeal, wealth and occupation were unrelated

to the likelihood of appeals. Instead, in keeping with strictly economic models, appeals were

predominantly higher in cases with larger dollar amounts at issue. The types of disputes that drew

appeals also support the notion that debt transactions were more “rational” in an economic sense, for

they were significantly less likely to be appealed relative to property or emotional charges such as

breach of promise.



V. CONCLUSION

                               “Resolved, That we are in favor of ‘a well regulated credit system … its free
                               and general use is the distinguishing feature between despotism and liberty’ ”
                                                                          --Niles’ Weekly Register (1837)


American conceptions of the history of debtor-creditor relations have been disproportionately shaped

by such unique events as Shay’s Rebellion and accounts of Alan Taylor’s “Liberty Men” battling


                                                    22
against rich unfeeling absentee landlords.30 Popular historical narratives tend to center around such

supposed hostility between creditors and debtors, and to these we can add the claim of disparate

outcomes among the Haves and Have Nots. If these claims were indeed generally true, they raise

questions about the nature of American economic growth and about the prospects for developing

countries today which are even more likely to have institutions that are biased in favour of the rich and

powerful. Adam Smith himself observed that “Commerce and manufactures can seldom flourish long

in any state which does not enjoy a regular administration of justice, in which the people do not feel

themselves secure in the possession of their property, in which the faith of contracts is not supported

by law, and in which the authority of the state is not supposed to be regularly employed in enforcing

the payment of debts from all those who are able to pay.”31

          In an enormously influential paper, Marc Galanter made a number of unsubstantiated claims

about the objectivity of legal institutions in the United States, which had been captured by wealthier

groups. Galanter was pessimistic about the prospects for advances in the law that might improve the

welfare of society in general, because the monolithic advantages of the Haves created a tendency for

legal change to work primarily in their narrow self interest. The large array of empirical studies that

address his hypotheses have been less than ideal, because of the constraints of available data. Some

have used appellate court cases to test the validity of the Galanter model, whereas others proxy the

Haves by organizations and the Have Nots as individuals, regardless of their socio-economic

standing.



30
  See Bruce H. Mann. Republic of Debtors: Bankruptcy in the Age of American Independence. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 2002; Claire Priest, “Colonial Courts and Secured Credit: Early American Commercial Litigation and
Shays' Rebellion,” Yale Law Journal, Vol. 108, No. 8 (Jun., 1999): 2413-2450.
31
     The Wealth of Nations, (Book V, Chap. III).

                                                         23
       By contrast, this paper tested Galanter’s assertions more directly, using data drawn from a

representative sample of the Maine district courts in Washington, York, Kennebec and Cumberland

counties. The analysis centered on the prevalence of repeat plaintiffs relative to one-shot defendants,

the wealth of repeat plaintiffs, the extent to which rich plaintiffs invested disproportionate resources

in lawsuits, and whether the Haves tended to prevail in court relative to the Have Nots. As Galanter

had proposed, plaintiffs and repeat players were more likely to be Haves rather than the Have Nots.

However, they also tended to be merchants who might reasonably be expected to be involved in

larger number of transactions, so one cannot rule out the possibility that they were in fact responsible

for fewer cases per transaction than other litigants.

       Do the Haves also prevail in court? Here the results are quite robust: wealth seems to be

unrelated to the outcome of these lawsuits. The findings here instead support the economic model of

rational litigants who use courts as a mechanism to economize on enforcement costs, regardless of

social or economic status. The American legal system acknowledged that entrepreneurs benefited

society, but that their ventures were associated with risks; individuals of different economic standing

could find themselves as a defendant as well as a plaintiff, depending on the circumstances. The

courts did not favour wealthy creditor plaintiffs above hapless debtor defendants. Early American

courts were remarkably democratic institutions that facilitated the operation of extensive financial

markets that spanned the Northeast from the metropolis of New York City through to the remotest

areas of the Northern New England frontier. Thus, rather than being captured by a wealthy elite, the

legal system proved to be a flexible and open institution that responded effectively to the needs of an

expanding and industrializing society.




                                                   24
                                                   TABLE 1
                      Characteristics of Litigants by Total Number of Cases Per Person
                                    (Percent, Washington County, 1850)

                                 One Shot                             Repeat Player
                        Plaintiff       Defendant                Plaintiff      Defendant         N
Variable

RESIDENCE (row percent)
Maine              12.6%                18.8%                    28.9%           39.7%            761
Out of State       25.3                 10.5                     54.9            9.3              162


HOUSEHOLD (row percent)
Head              13.0                  16.5                     32.7            37.8             569
Not               16.7                  20.8                     29.2            33.3             120


BIRTHPLACE (row percent)
Maine              12.4                 18.6                     26.4            42.6             469
Massachusetts      15.6                 14.4                     51.1            18.9             90
Foreign            22.9                 16.9                     31.3            28.9             83
Other              8.9                  8.9                      48.2            33.9             56

OCCUPATION (column percent)
Farmer            17.0                  27.4                     14.8            27.6             213
Skilled           7.9                   7.5                      5.5             7.5               68
Trade             12.1                  9.1                      29.0            24.5             205
White Collar      9.1                   3.8                      9.7             5.3              69
Labourer          8.5                   12.4                     10.3            15.4             118
None              5.5                   5.9                      4.5             2.2              41
Unknown           40.0                  33.9                     26.1            17.6             266

TOTAL                   (165)           (186)                    (310)           (319)            980
                        16.8%           19.0%                    31.6%           32.6%

______________________________________________________________________________________



Notes: These data represent litigants who brought lawsuits before the Washington County District Court in
1850. There were 18 women, 13 of whom were one shot players. The frequency of cases was estimated from
records from the previous decade. If the litigant was involved in multiple lawsuits, he or she was categorized
as a plaintiff if at least 50 percent of the cases were brought as a claimant.




                                                     25
                                            Table 2
                    EMPIRICAL ESTIMATION OF “TAXONOMY OF LITIGATION”
                              Washington County District Court, 1850

                                     DEFENDANT
                        _________________________________________________

                        ONE-SHOT                           REPEAT PLAYER
                                                           2 Cases    3-10 Cases           >10
PLAINTIFF
ONE-SHOT PLAYER
     N                           41                        24             72               29
     Row %                       24.7                      14.5           43.4             17.5
     Col. %                      24.1                      20.2           25.4             21.6
     (Total=166)

REPEAT PLAYER           ______________________________________________________
Number of Lawsuits
Per Plaintiff
2 Cases
        N                        25                        15             50               15
        Row %                    23.8                      14.3           47.6             14.3
        Col. %                   14.7                      12.6           17.6             11.2
        (Total=105)

3-10 Cases
       N                         49                        56             93               55
       Row %                     19.4                      22.1           36.8             21.7
       Col. %                    28.8                      47.1           32.8             41.0
       (Total=253)

> 10 Cases
       N                  55                  24           69           35
       Row %              30.1                13.1         37.7         19.1
       Col. %             32.4                20.2         24.3         26.1
       (Total=183)
__________________________________________________________________________

TOTAL (N=707)                    170                       119            284              134

___________________________________________________________________________

Notes and Sources: Each quadrant in the table is a crosstabulation of the frequency characteristics of the
plaintiff and defendant in the same case. Thus, the first entry shows the number of plaintiffs whose “litigation
career” was limited to one case, and who brought charges against defendants who had also been involved in
only one case during the previous decade. The total sample consists of 707 litigants drawn from the records
of Washington County District Courts around 1850.



                                                      26
                                                TABLE 3
                             REPEAT PLAY AND WEALTH AMONG LITIGANTS
                                  (Washington County District Court, 1850)
___________________________________________________________________________________________________
(1) OLS Regression of Propensity to be a Plaintiff               (2) Logistic Regression
Dep. Var=Percent of Cases in which Litigant is Claimant          Dep. Var =Log Odds that a Litigant is a
                                                                 Repeat player


        Intercept                35.80***                                0.56
                                 (5.5)                                   (2.06)
        Ln of wealth             1.07***                                 0.06***
                                 (2.29)                                  (4.58)
        Occupations
        Farmer                   -6.67                                   -0.46*
                                 (1.50)                                  (3.15)
        Trade                    13.46***                                0.52*
                                 (2.97)                                  (2.86)
        Skilled                  -4.40                                   -0.06
                                 (0.91)                                  (0.05)
        White-collar             21.12***                                -0.21
                                 (3.62)                                  (0.36)
        Age                      0.01                                    0.01
                                 (0.15)                                  (2.14)
        Household                -1.21***                                -0.04
                                 (2.38)                                  (1.36)
        Servants                 -------                                  0.55***
                                                                         (5.77)
        Out of State             44.51***                                -0.54*
                                  (9.44)                                 (2.87)
        Total Number of           -0.01                                  -------
        Cases                     (0.98)
        Percent of cases          -----                                   -0.004
        Filed as Plaintiff                                                 (3.24)*



        R-sq=0.29; N=465                                                 -2LogL=785.4 N=466

_________________________________________________________________________________




                                                     27
                                           TABLE 4
                    CHARACTERISTICS OF LITIGATION: DEFAULTS AND APPEALS
                       YORK AND CUMBERLAND LOWER COURTS,1800-1850



DEFAULTS (Non-appearance in court)                  1800               1850
                                         Number            %       Number        %

Defendant defaults                       687               68.9    620           62.2
Plaintiff defaults                       23                 2.3     11            1.1
Both parties default                      80                8.0     270          27.1
Neither party defaults                   207               20.8     96            9.6

DEFENDANT DEFAULTS BY TYPE OF CASE      1800                           1850
                                 Number                    %       Number        %

Debt cases                               650               90.2    549           92.4
Property cases                           17                38.6    15            33.3


DEFENDANT DEFAULTS BY RESIDENCE                     1800               1850
                                         Number            %       Number        %

Both parties from same town              158               70.2    219           77.1
Both parties from different towns        524               78.1    400           71.3




                             APPEALS FROM LOWER COURT DECISIONS

                                                    1800                  1850

Total appeals                            167               16.8%   15            3.0%

Type of Case
Debt                                     138               19.1%
Property                                 15                34.1%
Breach of promise                        10                40.0%




                                               28
              TABLE 5: OCCUPATIONAL PROXIMITY OF PLAINTIFFS AND DEFENDANTS,
                        YORK AND CUMBERLAND LOWER COURTS,1800-1850

                                         1800                           1850
Plaintiff’s                       Defendant has                         Defendant has
Occupation                        Same Occupation                       Same Occupation


                                          %                              %
Artisan                                  27.7                           23.3
Farmer                                   53.0                           36.6
Gentleman                                7.8                            0.0
Labourer                                 34.5                           27.8
Legal                                    4.7                            0.0
Professional                             0.0                            0.0
Merchant/Manufacturer                    14.9                           6.1
Woman                                    3.3                            0.0

TOTAL NUMBER                             829                            806



                        Figure 1: Percent of Litigants from Same Town, 1700-1850



                 60

                 50

                 40

                 30

                 20

                 10

                  0
                           1700                 1750             1800               1850




Notes: The figures indicate the percent of all plaintiffs and defendants who lived in the same town at the time
the lawsuit was filed. The count excludes cases in which no information on residence was provided. The
residence of litigants from states other than Maine was categorized as out of state regardless of the town.
Additional information on residence was obtained from the manuscript censuses of 1800 and 1850.

                                                       29
                         TABLE 6: EXPENDITURES ON LAWSUITS
                  (Cumberland, Kennebec and York Counties District Court, 1850)
__________________________________________________________________________________

       Dependent Variable: Log (Costs)
__________________________________________________________________________________

      Intercept                2.18***          2.47***             2.31***
                               (36.76)          (29.57)            (17.48)
      Log Wealth
      Plaintiff               --0.002        --0.001             --0.005
                                (0.36)         (0.25)               (1.05)
      Defendant              -- 0.01         --0.004              --0.002
                                (0.94)         (0.66)               (0.49)
      Plaintiff Occupation
      Farmer                    0.23***         0.18***             0.15***
                               (3.96)           (2.96)             (2.76)
      Lawyer                  -- 0.07           --0.07           --0.01
                               (0.98)           (1.00)             (0.20)
      Commerce                 0.04             0.03                0.02
                               (0.74)           (0.61)             (0.47)
      Labourer                 0.06              0.06               0.06
                               (0.98)           (0.96)             (1.01)
      Defendant Occupation
      Farmer                0.03               0.02                 0.08
                             (0.48)            (0.43)              (1.59)
      Lawyer                 0.35**            0.34**               0.22
                             (2.31)            (2.27)              (1.61)
      Commerce               0.22***           0.22***             0.16***
                             (3.81)            (3.96)              (3.13)
      Labourer             --0.001           --0.001               0.03
                             (0.03)            (0.01)              (0.54)

      Out of State Origin    -- 0.10             0.15**            0.08
                               (1.57)           (2.17)             (1.21)
      Town Pop>10k              -----           --0.09**         --0.10**
                                                (1.92)             (2.14)

      Debt Issue               ----          --0.28***           --0.07
                                               (4.44)              (1.12)
       Log (Amount Claimed) ----               ------               0.13***
                                                                   (6.93)
       Defendant Defaults   ----              -----             --0.70***
                                                                   (9.87)
_________________________________________________________________________________

                    R-Sq =0.07; N=781         R-Sq =0.10; N=782   R-Sq =0.26; N=761
_________________________________________________________________________________

                                           30
         TABLE 7: DETERMINANTS OF THE PROBABILITY OF A PLAINTIFF WINNING
                  (Cumberland, Kennebec and York Counties District Court, 1850)
__________________________________________________________________________________

       Dependent Variable: Probability of Judgment for Plaintiff
__________________________________________________________________________________

      Intercept              0.85***            0.32***           0.62***
                             (26.8)             (9.44)            (13.77)
      Log Wealth
      Plaintiff               0.001          --0.003               0.001
                              (0.32)           (1.40)              (0.35)
      Defendant             -- 0.01          --0.003             --0.002
                              (1.54)           (1.27)              (1.42)
      Plaintiff Occupation
      Farmer               -- 0.14***           --0.02           --0.01
                             (3.62)              (0.65)            (0.43)
      Lawyer                  0.06               0.03              0.003
                             (1.17)              (1.06)            (0.12)
      Commerce               0.05               --0.002            -0.01
                             (1.28)              (0.10)            (0.80)
      Labourer             -- 0.05               --0.04            -0.01
                             (1.28)              (1.45)            (0.31)
      Defendant Occupation
      Farmer               -- 0.14              0.02              -0.00
                             (0.77)             (0.78)            (0.02)
      Lawyer               -- 0.11              0.00               0.06
                             (1.19)             (0.01)            (1.49)
      Commerce               0.01               0.02              0.04*
                             (0.15)             (0.64)            (2.08)
      Labourer               0.01               0.03              0.01
                             (0.20)             (1.12)            (0.60)

      Out of State Origin   -- 0.09**           --0.01            0.01
                              (2.09)             (0.44)           (0.55)
      Town Pop>10k             0.02              --0.01           0.01
                              (0.49)             (0.31)           (0.38)

      Debt Issue             ----               0.68***           0.09***
                                                (32.31)           (3.89)
      Log (Amount Claimed)                      ------            -0.02***
                                                                  (3.52)
      Defendant Defaults     ----               -----             0.41***
                                                                  (19.84)

_________________________________________________________________________________

                    R-Sq =0.04; N=955         R-Sq =0.55; N=957   R-Sq =0.45; N=808
_________________________________________________________________________________

                                           31
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Balleisen, Edward J., Navigating Failure: Bankruptcy and Commercial Society in Antebellum
America

Coleman, Peter J., Debtors and Creditors in America: Insolvency, Imprisonment forDebt, and
Bankruptcy, 1607-1900, Madison: State Historical Society of Wisconsin, 1974.

Cartwright, Bliss, “Conclusion: Disputes and Reported Cases,” vol. 9 Law and Society Review,
1975: 369-84.

Finn, Margot C., The Character of Credit : Personal Debt in English Culture, 1740-1914,
Cambridge Social and Cultural Histories.

Fudenberg, Drew and David Levine, “Maintaining a Reputation when Strategies are Imperfectly
Observed,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 59 (3) 1992: 561-93.

Galanter, Marc , “Why the ‘Haves’ Come Out Ahead: Speculations on the Limits of Legal
Change,” 9 Law and Society Review 1974: 95-160.

Gold, David M., “John Appleton of Maine and Commercial Law: Freedom, Responsibility, and
Law in the Nineteenth Century Marketplace,” Law and History Review, vol. 4, No. 1. (Spring,
1986): 55-69.

Jaffee, David, “Peddlers of Progress and the Transformation of the Rural North, 1760-1860”
Journal of American History 78 (Sept 1991): 522.

Kagan, Robert A., “The Routinization of Debt Collection: An Essay on Social Change and
Conflict in the Courts,” Law & Society Review, vol. 18, No. 3 (1984): 323-372.

Khan, B. Zorina, “`Justice of the Marketplace’: Legal Disputes and Economic Activity on
America’s Northeastern Frontier, 1700-1860,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History, vol. 39 (1)
2008: 1-35.

B. Zorina Khan, "Commerce and Cooperation: Litigation and Settlement of Civil Disputes on the
Australian Frontier," Journal of Economic History, vol. 60 (4) 2000:1088-1119.

Kreps, David and Robert Wilson, “Reputation and Imperfect information,” Journal of Economic
Theory, vol. 27 (2) 1982: 253-79.

Landes, William M. and Posner, Richard A., “Adjudication as a Private Good,” Journal of Legal
Studies, vol. 8 1979: 235-84.

Levine, Kay and Mellema, Virginia, “Strategizing the Street: How Law Matters in the Lives of
Women in the Street-Level Drug Economy,” vol. 26, Law and Social Inquiry, 2001: 169-207.

Mann, Bruce H., Republic of Debtors: Bankruptcy in the Age of American Independence.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2002.

Meeker, James W., “Criminal Appeals Over the Last 100 Years,” Criminology vol. 22 1984: 551-
71.


                                               32
Muldrew, Craig, The Economy of Obligation : The Culture of Credit and Social Relations in
Early Modern England, Palgrave Macmillan, 1998.

Priest, Claire, “Colonial Courts and Secured Credit: Early American Commercial Litigation and
Shays' Rebellion,” Yale Law Journal, Vol. 108, No. 8 (Jun., 1999): 2413-2450.

Ringquist, Evan J. and Craig E. Emmert, “Judicial Policymaking in Published and Unpublished
Decisions: The Case of Environmental Civil Litigation,” vol. 52 Political Research Quarterly
1999: 7-37.

Russell, Thomas D., “The Antebellum Courthouse as Creditors' Domain: Trial-Court Activity in
South Carolina and the Concomitance of Lending and Litigation,” American Journal of Legal
History, vol. 40, No. 3. (Jul., 1996): 331-364.

Skeel, David A., Jr., Debt’s Dominion: A History of Bankruptcy Law in America, Princeton
University Press, 2003.

Daniel Vickers, “Competency and Competition: Economic Culture in Early America,” William
and Mary Quarterly, 47 (Jan., 1990), 3-29.

Vickers, Daniel, Farmers & Fishermen: Two Centuries of Work in Essex County, Massachusetts,
1630-1850, Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1994.

Wheeler, Stanton, et al. "Do the Haves Come out Ahead-Winning and Losing in State Supreme
Courts, 1870-1970," Law & Society Review, vol. 21 (1987): 403.




                                              33
