NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERNATIONALIZATION OF THE RMB, CAPITAL MARKET OPENNESS,
AND FINANCIAL REFORMS IN CHINA
Joshua Aizenman
Working Paper 20943
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20943

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

The author gratefully acknowledge the useful comments by the participants at the China’s financial
market liberalization conference, September 18–19, 2014, the Bank of Finland, Helsinki, sponsored
and supported by Bank of Finland’s Institute for Economies in Transition (BOFIT) and City University
of Hong Kong, Department of Economics and Finance, and Research Center for International Economics.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Internationalization of the RMB, Capital Market Openness, and Financial Reforms in
China
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 20943
February 2015
JEL No. F3,F32,F36,F4,F41
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an overview of Chinese financial and trade integration in recent decades, and
the challenges facing China in the coming years. China had been a prime example of exported growth,
benefiting from learning by doing, and by adopting foreign know-how, supported by a complex
industrial policy. While the resultant growth has been spectacular, it comes with hidden but
growingcosts and distortions. The Chinese export-led growth path has been challenged by its own
success,and the Global Financial Crisis forced China toward rebalancing, which is a work in progress.
Reflectingon the internationalization of the CNY, one expects the rapid accelerating of the commercial
internationalizationof the CNY.

Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
USC
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

This paper overviews the Chinese financial and trade integration in recent decades. We
start by evaluating the history of Chinese growth-cum-financial policies, arguing that the exportled growth of China was a highly successful policy, as has been vividly illustrated by the
unprecedented catching up of Chinese size with the U.S. [either in current dollar or adjusted for
PPP]. Yet, the remarkable success of this process sowed its end, and the need for China to
rebalance its economy. Looking forward, we point out the logic of sequencing financial reforms.
While one expects the rapid acceleration of commercial internationalization of the CNY, and the
growing use of CNY in the sphere of Chinese commercial and outward FDI transactions, there
are no clear-cut reasons to rush with the full CNY internationalization. Chances are that the gains
from a rapid CNY financial internationalization may be overrated, and ignoring the downsides of
this process would be to Chinese (and probably global) peril.

1. The Buoyant 2000s
China has been a prime example of export-led growth, benefiting from learning by doing,
and by adopting foreign know-how, supported by a complex industrial policy. This policy has
been characterized by controlled openness, and internal financial repression. The financial
repression has taxed the saving interest rate, allowing prime borrowers, including the Chinese
state-owned enterprise (SOE), elastic access to cheap and sustainable funding. FDI has been
welcome, subject to China’s rules of the game. These rules leveraged the carrot of Chinese
market size and cheap labor, inducing the foreign investor to operate in China in joint venture
partnership with Chinese producers (Holmes et al. 2013). The outcome has been rapid learning
by doing and transfer of know-how and the rapid climb of China on the ladder of industrial
sophistication, challenging foreign producers in the Chinese and third-country markets down the
road.1

1

Holmes et al. (2013) credited this policy with high welfare gains for China (at about 4.5% per
year in annual consumption), and welfare losses to the U.S. and the EU when compared with the
alternative case, in which technology transfer is not a precondition to investing in China. Pula
and Santabárbara (2011) found that China has gained quality relative to other competitors since
1995, indicating that China is climbing up the quality ladder. The relatively high and
2

Arguably, a modern version of mercantilism has been at work (Aizenman and Lee 2007,
2008). The rapid growth and the growing trade and current account surpluses as a fraction of the
GDP has occurred in tandem with massive hoarding of international reserves (IR) combined with
massive sterilization of expending trade surpluses and financial inflows. These policies aimed at
delaying and slowing the real appreciation associated with successful rapid growth. While the
resultant growth has been spectacular, it comes with hidden, but growing, costs and distortions.
Figure 1, in the top panel, provides diamond chart snapshots of Chinese generalized trilemma
configuration: Financial integration (leftward from the diamond’s center), Monetary
independence (vertically upward from the diamond’s center), Exchange rate stability (rightward
from the diamond’s center), and IR/GDP (vertically downward from the diamond’s center). The
first three scales are capturing Mundell’s open economy trilemma configurations, normalized
between 0 and 1 (Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito 2010). The IR/GDP aims at capturing the growing
use of international reserves to buffer against financial instability. The chart exhibits the
remarkable stability of the Chinese exchange rate during the 1990s and the 2000s, buffered by
rapid increases in IR/GDP, while maintaining controlled financial integration and monetary
independence. Figure 1 also puts Chinese experience in the context of the average experience of
emerging Asia [excluding China] and emerging Latin America during the same decades (the
middle and the lower panel, respectively). The charts validate the greater focus of Chinese
experience on exchange rate stability and IR hoarding, while overall maintaining limited
financial integration relative to other emerging markets.
In the run-up to the financial crisis, the world economy was characterized by enormous
current-account imbalances (Figure 2). China’s surplus alone was 0.7% of world GDP in 2008,
while the United States had a deficit of more than 1% of world GDP that year. The current
account balances of the world’s surplus countries (e.g., China, Germany, Japan, oil exporters)
exceeded 2.5% of global GDP in 2008, co-funding the current-account balances of the world’s
deficit countries, mostly the United States, non-Asian emerging markets, and the Euro area
excluding Germany.

improving quality of China’s exports may be explained by the increasing role of global
production networks in China.
3

In the early 2000s, some suggested large imbalances could be sustained for the
foreseeable future. Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber (2003, 2005) argued an Asian
periphery, primarily China, could pursue a development strategy of export-led growth supported
by undervalued exchange rates and capital controls for many years. Large current-account
surpluses and official capital outflows in the form of accumulated reserve asset claims on the
United States would characterize the Asian periphery for perhaps a decade or more. Moreover,
the strategy was a “win” for the center (e.g., the United States) as well, since virtually unlimited
demand for its financial assets would allow it to run large current-account deficits, living beyond
its means for years.
At some point, the Asian periphery would grow sufficiently to graduate to the center. It
would then undertake financial liberalization and adopt greater exchange-rate flexibility. But
when that happened, another set of developing countries would step forward to become the new
periphery, pursuing the same export-led growth strategy against the center as had China and the
Asian periphery, and before them, post-war Europe and Japan. As a result, global imbalances,
with the periphery running large current-account surpluses and the center large current-account
deficits, would be a regular feature of the international monetary system for years to come.
Dooley et al. (2005) provided an asset-market interpretation of the win-win view of global
imbalances: U.S. deficits supplied international collateral to poorer countries on the periphery
eager to undertake capital formation; the collateral freed them from a reliance on inefficient
domestic financial markets.2
The modern mercantilist view, embraced by Aizenman and Lee (2007, 2008) and others,
provided a less sanguine interpretation for the persistent global imbalances that emerged in the
2000s. While Aizenman and Lee (2007) confirmed that the hoarding of international reserves
that accompanied current-account surpluses was dominated by a precautionary motive prior to
2001, a finding consistent with Aizenman and Marion’s (2003) earlier interpretations, there
appeared to be a regime change afterward. Aizenman and Lee (2008) pointed to the growing
importance of monetary mercantilism as the main reason for the regime change. Accordingly,
following the Asian crisis of 1997-8, which mitigated Chinese competitiveness in the late 1990s,
and the Chinese accession to the WTO in early 2000s, China intensified its drive toward exportCaballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008), Ju and Wei (2010) and others explored this
interpretation in models with FDI and global imbalances.

2

4

led growth. Like earlier mercantilist efforts to expand export markets and accumulate gold
described by Adam Smith (1776), after the year 2000, countries such as China started pushing
exports to promote growth, racking up current-account surpluses and growing stockpiles of
international reserves. The numbers were impressive. On the eve of the financial crisis, China’s
real GDP growth had reached about 14% (Fig. 3), its current-account surplus had grown to 10%
of GDP, and its international reserves had reached almost 45% of GDP prior to the crisis,
peaking at about 50% in 2010 (Fig. 3). However, unlike Dooley’s et al. (2003, 2005) win-win
view of global imbalances buffered by international reserve hoarding, Aizenman and Lee (2008)
noted that modern mercantilism could lead to unintended adverse consequences, such as
competitive hoarding. This concern is in line with the findings of Cheung and Qian (2009) and
Aizenman et al. (2014) supporting regional rivalry in hoarding international reserves.
The view that large East-West global imbalances could be sustained for a long period was
not shared by everyone. Eichengreen (2007) and Feldstein (2008), for example, argued the Asian
periphery was not monolithic; some member of the periphery might abandon fixed exchange
rates against the dollar sooner than later, either willingly or in response to speculative pressures,
thereby reducing East-West global imbalances. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2005) also saw large
imbalances as unsustainable, and worried whether they would unwind gradually or abruptly.
Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych (2011) observed that global imbalances where poorer
countries financed richer ones were driven mainly by government decisions and official capital
flows, since private funds tended to move in the opposite direction, attracted by higher growth
rates in poorer countries. They raised concerns about the global efficiency and sustainability of
these trends.
Aizenman and Sun (2010) also raised doubts that large global imbalances could be
sustainable. They argued that with China growing at triple the rate of the United States, the U.S.
current-account deficits needed to absorb China’s surpluses in coming years, in the absence of
other big countries willing to run large deficits, would be unrealistically high and hence selflimiting in the not-too-distant future.

2. The Global Financial Crisis and China’s Adjustment
The global financial crisis of the late 2000s put an abrupt end to the happy-go-lucky
attitude to U.S. and Chinese imbalances. In the U.S., the private sector was forced to de-leverage
5

and reduced its demand for imports. Other crisis-hit developed countries also cut back on
imports. As China experienced weaker export demand, it took seriously the IMF’s call for more
reliance on domestic spending to sustain growth. It began promoting greater domestic
consumption and investment with the help of a domestic credit boom. It also pursued fiscal
stimulus and allowed its real exchange rate to appreciate (Fig. 4). It attempted to diversify its
holdings of dollar-denominated reserve assets by creating a sovereign wealth fund and
encouraging outward foreign direct investment.
Standard macroeconomic models can account for the reduction in global imbalances in
the immediate aftermath of a financial crisis. Financial frictions and household de-leveraging
reduce import demand as well as aggregate demand in crisis-hit countries, reducing their currentaccount deficits. If weak demand impacts many countries, there are few to take up the slack.
Countries with large current-account surpluses, such as China, faced collapsing demand for their
exports and experienced declining current-account surpluses. Policies that stimulate domestic
demand to make up for the export shortfall can reduce current-account surpluses even more. In
Aizenman, Jinjarak, and Marion (2013), we explore panel regressions as a way to highlight
important correlations between current-account balances and economic variables, both before
and after the financial crisis. The results indicate a structural change post-crisis. The decline in
China’s reserve stockpile post-crisis is shown to be driven by a new wave of outward foreign
direct investment (FDI) into developed economies as China seeks higher-yielding real foreign
assets. These developments suggest that China’s smaller current-account surpluses and more
moderate reserve accumulation may become a longer-term norm as lower global growth forces
China to rely more on domestic demand to expand its economy, and as the high cost of holding
international reserves pushes China to place even more emphasis on outward FDI.
We assembled panel data on current-account balances and other economic variables for a
group of developed and developing countries over the period 1980–2012. The estimation draws
on the empirical framework in Chinn and Prasad (2003) and Gruber and Kamin (2007). The
specification also includes the U.S. demand variable (measured by the U.S. current-account
deficit as a percent of GDP) used in Aizenman and Jinjarak (2009) to capture the notion that the
U.S. acted as a “demander of last resort” for the exports of China and other countries, enabling
them to run big current-account surpluses over part of the sample period.

6

The estimates confirm that a structural change has taken place post-crisis. After the onset
of the financial crisis, the United States no longer plays such an important role as “demander of
last resort” for the exports of other countries. Its private and public sectors have had to undergo
substantial adjustments, making them less able to absorb the world’s exports. The U.S. private
sector has had to de-leverage in response to the negative wealth effects of declining real estate
and portfolio valuations. These private and public sector adjustments post-crisis have required
the U.S. to retreat from its role as “demander of last resort” for the world’s exports.
Prior to the financial crisis, the current accounts of surplus countries are positively and
significantly associated with the increase in international reserves, trade, and the increase in the
U.S. current-account deficit. After the financial crisis, the first two correlations are insignificant
and the correlation with U.S. demand reverses sign; it is now negative and significant. The role
of the U.S. as a “demander of last resort” is different after 2006.
The GFC vividly illustrated the limits of the export-led growth; the Chinese export-led
growth path has been challenged by its own success. The spectacular growth of China in the
2000s was unprecedented for a large economy—the U.S./China market size in current U.S.
dollars dropped from 8 in 2000, to about 2 in 2010 [Fig. 5]. The Economist projected in 2014 that
by 2022, China’s size in current U.S. dollars would exceed that of the U.S. As China approaches
the U.S. size, its ability to keep export-led growth was diminished substantially by the lackluster
growth of the U.S and the Eurozone, inducing lower growth of China, and promoting it to
embark on internal rebalancing.

3. Internal Rebalancing: Challenges and Opportunities
While China’s growth has been spectacular, it comes with hidden, but growing, costs and
distortions. The GFC and the need to rebalance the growth strategy, and the greater recognition
of the demographic transitions facing leading countries in general and China in particular, put to
the fore China’s greater exposure to tail risks. We review in this section several manifestations of
these risks.
Chinese financial repression has resulted in the taxing of private saving, transferring them
via the state banking system and other means to the SOE. Subsidizing the cost of SOE capital
helped in facilitating fast Chinese growth in the earlier decades of the takeoff, yet it comes with
7

the cost of the SOE’s overinvestment bias, inducing faster diminishing marginal productivity of
the SOE, and resulting in growing quasi-public contingent liabilities.
The other side of financial repression has been the fragmentation of financial
intermediation, where small private firms are not served adequately by the official banks, but by
shadow banking. The drawback is that the small and medium private sector, which over time
provides brighter future growth prospects than the SOE, faces much higher real interest rates and
greater rollover risks. The outcome has been growing productivity gaps in favor of the private
repressed firms (Lardy (2008), Song et al. (2014)).
Another cost of Chinese policies may be the collateral damage of mercantilism, the rapid
rise of costly hoarding international reserves in times of running large current account surpluses,
as reflected in Fig. 3. According to the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE),
China’s external financial assets at the end of 2013 were about U.S. $6 trillion, of which
international reserves were about 2/3 (U.S. $3.9 trillion), the outbound direct investment (ODI)
about 10%, securities investment about 4%, and other investment at about 20%. The country’s
external liability position was U.S. $4 trillion, out of which FDI in China was $2.35 trillion, 60%
of total liability. The investment in securities and other aspects took up 10% and 30%,
respectively. Therefore, China’s net external financial assets in 2013 was about U.S. $2 trillion.3
Yet, the real net return on these assets was, at best, close to zero, or even negative. This reflects
two fundamental factors. The first is the low real return on Chinese international reserves (2/3 of
its gross external assets), which in turn reflects both the low nominal interest rate on international
reserves and the real exchange rate appreciation of China. The second is the high return on the
inward FDI, about 60% of Chinese external liabilities. The low return on Chinese foreign assets
is bad news, especially considering the rapid aging of China’s population. This is in contrast to
Japan, where the sizable return on Japan’s foreign asset position helps in buffering the future
income of its rapidly graying population.
The policy stance of China during and after the GFC may mitigate down the road the
hidden costs of Chinese financial repression. First, China embarked on diversifying its holdings

3

Source: State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) information.

http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-cnt.aspx?id=20140407000063&cid=1203 [accessed

8

May 5, 2013].

of dollar IR by channeling surpluses into a sovereign wealth fund (SWF) and encouraging
outward foreign direct investment in tangible assets, offering much higher expected returns.4 The
outcome has been growing FDI in the resource sectors and infrastructure services globally,
especially in underserviced developing countries and emerging markets in Africa and Latin
America. In a way, China joined the trend of other EMs, as detected in Aizenman and Pasricha
(2013), noting that EMs eased outflows of capital more in response to higher stock price
appreciation, higher appreciation pressures in the exchange market, higher IR/GDP, and higher
REER volatility.
The GFC and its aftermath also induced rapid Chinese internal balancing, reducing the
scope of future hoarding. Since the crisis, China’s current-account surplus fell from 10% of GDP
(2007) to 2.3% in 2012, 2% in 2013. The drop in 2009 alone was the largest recorded in the last
30 years. This has happened in tandem with a drop in U.S deficits. The U.S. current-account
deficit was about 6% of U.S. GDP in 2006; it fell to 2.7% in 2009 and 2.8% in 2012. China’s
smaller current-account surpluses, a more moderate IR stance, and allowing faster real
appreciation may become a new normal, as lower global growth forces China to rely more on
domestic demand, while the high cost of holding IR and the secular rise in real wages in China
pushes China to place even more emphasis on outward FDI (Aizenman, Jinjarak, Marion 2013).
These developments are in line with Feenstra and Hong (2010), who raised questions
about the efficacy and sustainability of export-led growth in China as the way to increase future
employment. They calculated that export growth over the period of fast growth during 2000–
2005 could explain the entire increase in China’s employment over that period, but comparable
employment gains could have been achieved by growing domestic demand.
Channeling IR into foreign equity, SWF investment, and outward FDI supported by
targeted loans and swap lines may be part of Chinese rebalancing, aiming at securing a higher
rate of return on its net foreign asset position. Arguably, it may also signal the switch from
export-led growth strategy to outward FDI (Ramasamy et al. 2012) and export of infrastructure
projects and services, possibly bundled with exporting Chinese finance, Chinese labor services,

WSJ, December 19, 2013 BEIJING— “Beijing will ease the approval process for all but the
largest Chinese investments in overseas companies and projects, a major relaxation of regulatory
oversight that analysts say is aimed at encouraging Chinese firms to expand abroad.”
4

9

and high-end capital goods.5 This outward FDI drive has been part of a more comprehensive
Chinese effect to promote the internationalization of the RMB (CNY), the focus of the next
section.

4. The Internationalization of the RMB
Over the past five years, China has strongly intensified its efforts to internalize the RMB.
This agenda has been one of the main aspects of the country’s economic policy, as expressed in
the 12th Five-Year Plan (2011-2015). The plan supports the expansion of the cross-border use of
RMB and the gradual realization of capital account convertibility. The plan also supports the
development of HK as a major offshore RMB market. The internationalization process was put
into effect through several channels. After the financial crisis in 2008, China embarked on large
bilateral currency swap agreements with other countries, such as Argentina, Belarus, Iceland,

5

ChinaDaily USA reported in December 22, 2014: “A leading Chinese railway company said on
Dec 15 that it had won a 1.7 billion yuan ($274 million) contract from the government of
Argentina. The train-maker said it has been supplying trains and other rail products to Argentina
since 2006. In 2013, it won two orders worth about $1 billion together from the country to
supply inter-city trains. It is just another win for the Chinese firm. In November, the company
signed China’s largest single overseas construction deal with Nigeria, a deal valued at $12
billion. Despite the scrapping of bidding in early November for a $3.75 billion project by the
Mexican government, the Chinese company has shown its interest in bidding again. Chinese
railway manufacturers have been stretching their muscle overseas with Chinese Premier Li
Keqiang often promoting "high-speed railway diplomacy" during overseas trips. … A leading
Chinese railway manufacturer, China Railway Construction Corp., along with its consortium, is
expected to win the bid to build a high-speed railway from Kuala Lumpur to Singapore. It will be
the first high-speed rail in Southeast Asia and will reduce the journey overland between the two
neighbors to 90 minutes from around six hours. …In addition, during his visit to Europe,
Premier Li on Dec 17 announced agreements with Hungary, Serbia and Macedonia to build a
land-sea express route by expanding the Budapest-Belgrade rail line to Skopje, the capital of
Macedonia; Athens and the major container port of Piraeus in Greece. The agreement follows the
China-Thailand high-speed railway cooperative program that Thailand has approved… China
estimates it will build its fastest trains and rails at a cost of $17 million to $21 million per
kilometer. In Europe, the range of costs is from about $25 million to $39 million, and the
estimated cost in California is up to $52 million, according to the World Bank report.”
10

New Zealand, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, and others (Table 1). This has been done in
tandem with the unprecedented provisions of swap lines among the OECD countries, and the
more selective provision of four swap lines by the U.S. FED to selected emerging markets (Table
1).
Comparing the bilateral swap lines offered by the U.S. FED and the PBOC reveals key
differences. Most of the swap lines offered by China have been to developing and emerging
market countries, whereas most of the bilateral swap lines offered by the U.S. FED and the ECB
are between the OECD countries, and four emerging markets: Brazil, South Korea, Mexico, and
Singapore. Aizenman and Pasricha (2010) pointed out that the selection criteria explaining the
U.S. FED supply of bilateral swap lines to emerging markets were close financial and trade ties,
a high degree of financial openness, and a relatively good sovereign credit history. Chances are
that similar factors account for Chinese supply of RMB bilateral swap lines to a growing list of
developing and emerging markets, as has been vividly illustrated by Garcia-Herrero and Xia
(2013).6 This strategy blends very well with the trade internationalization of the RMB in the
context of the broader outward FDI strategy of China, and is in line with the channeling of
Chinese net foreign asset position into outward FDI-cum-credit strategy.
Other pillars of the internationalization of the RMB include, since 2009, a pilot program
that allows RMB settlement of trade with foreign partners, limited initially to five cities
(Shanghai, Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Zhuhai, and Dongghuan), and to the trade of Chinese
residents with Hong Kong, Macao, and ASEAN countries. This established the first legal
framework for using RMB to settle current account transactions. From six provinces in 2010, it
was expanded to 20 provinces and cities in mainland China and geographically extended to trade
with the rest of the world. Since October 2010, offshore entities were allowed to open

6

Garcia-Herrero and Xia (2013) concluded that the choice of countries signing an RMBdenominated bilateral swap agreement with China was predominantly by “gravity motifs”:
country size and distance from China, as well the trade motif in terms of both exports to China
and the existence of an FTA with China. Institutional soundness also matters, since countries
with better government and less corruption are more likely to sign an RMB-denominated
bilateral swap agreement.

11

nonresident RMB bank settlement accounts (NRAs) with onshore banks and use these accounts
(NRAs) for lawful cross-border RMB business (Formichella and Toti 2013).
While it may be premature to provide a comprehensive assessment of the
internationalization drive, it has already delivered a rapid increase in trade/credit RMB
internationalization, the use of RMB in trade and investment settlement, and in trade credit. The
CNY is used in about one-third of China’s external trade settlement. At the end of 2014, CNY
SWIFT share was about 2.1% of global volume, with the U.S. dollar at 44% [followed by the
Euro with 28%, the sterling with 8 % and the Japanese yen with 2.7 per cent]. One expects the
settlement share of the CNY will keep increasing rapidly, as there is ample room for further
internationalization of the use of the RMB in trade settlements.7 The rapid trade
internationalization of the RMB, however, does not imply the desirability or the necessity of the
RMB financial internationalization, a process that would require much deeper financial
liberalization. We turn now to look more closely at what past experience may suggest about the
liberalization process.
An ideal global currency supporting commercial and financial transactions may have the
following virtues: liquid, safe, and convertible subject to low transaction costs, supported by
liquid and deep global bond markets, and supplied in “sufficient quantity”. Supplying the global
currency also entails the provision of a global public good, granting the suppliers the benefit of
the “exorbitant privilege.” At times of global peril, the public good is manifested by willingness
to provide global insurance at a “reasonable cost.” (Gourinchas and Rey 2005, 2007; Jeanne
2012). As of 2015, the CNY has not yet met yet these conditions. The CNY remains mostly nonconvertible, lacking a vibrant and deep global bond market.
Moving toward internationalization of the CNY is likely to bring both costs and
benefits. Chances are that China’s financial integration will keep increasing over time. A major
force inducing the weakening of financial controls has been trade misinvoicing, which has been
commonly used for overcoming capital control, forcing over time deeper financial integration.
Yet, this is not a reason to move much faster toward full convertibility without dealing with
7

Ito and Chinn (2013) found that the share of the RMB in export invoicing should have been
higher than the actually observed share of less than 10%. Their model predicted that the share of
RMB invoicing for the PRC’s exports would rise to above 25% in 2015 and above 30% in 2018.
12

domestic sources of future financial instability, including underfunded liabilities, weakening
balance sheets of exposed banks, financial repression, and the like. Reducing the financial
repression would reduce vulnerabilities associated with greater convertibility. Past experience
suggests that financial internationalization before dealing with domestic financial distortions
increases the exposure to financial crises. Frequently, these crises reduce growth sharply (see
Korea 1997-8, Japan 1990s, Eurozone 2010s).
The economic gains from upgrading the CNY into a global currency competing with the
U.S. dollar and the euro are there, but the size of these gains does not match the risk of moving
too fast: estimates range from 1% GDP (Gourinchas and Rey 2005) to a much lower fraction.
The U.S. Treasury may borrows cheaply because of demand from official reserve managers, but
these gains are broadly shared with Australia, Canada and the like through the portfolio balance
effect: lower U.S. yields spread across global bond markets (Genberg et al. 2005; Bauer and
Neely 2014; Rogers et al. 2014). There are also costs, including the loss of monetary autonomy
and financial stability, associated with greater and more volatile demand for CNY bonds. An
international currency also makes a country more susceptible to external monetary shocks. In
times of peril, the supplier of the international currency may be induced to provide global
insurance. Even if other countries merely anchor to RMB, this limits the ability of China to
manage its exchange rate. Furthermore, the gains from capital mobility and capital account
convertibility to the real economy may be overrated. Economic theory does not predict large
benefits from external financing; some models predict potential large costs. The empirical
evidence fails to show consistent sizable effects (Gourinchas and Jeanne 2006).
There are a number of steps that might increase the feasibility of a smoother financial
liberalization, include reducing financial repression, reforming the banking system, and reducing
the preferential treatment of SOE. Improving the funding of the small and medium size private
firms may induce faster growth, as well as allowing the Chinese corporate sector controlled
access to external borrowing, and greater outward FDI. The odds for a smoother transition are
higher with gradual sequencing than with a cold-turkey financial liberalization. Chances are that
the calls in China for faster CNY internationalization have also an internal political economy

13

dimension. 8 While moving faster on domestic financial reforms remains an essential step
toward the financial internationalization of the CNY, moving too fast may come with its own
moral hazard costs, as has been vividly illustrated by past financial crises (Hellmann et al. 2000,
Frankel 2012).

5. Looking Forward
Prior to the global financial crisis, observers noted the possibility of converging toward a
multi-polar global currencies structure. A possible tri-polar configuration would include the U.S.
dollar, dominating the U.S. sphere of influence in the Americas; the euro, dominating the EU
sphere of influence; and the CNY-anchored system, dominating eastern Asia. In principle, a
multi-polar configuration is less stable than a unipolar stable configuration, yet it may be more
stable than an unstable unipolar configuration; a multi-polar system may better fit the underlying
forces shaping the global redistribution of power. Paradoxically, the GFC vividly illustrated both
the susceptibility of the global economy to instability propagated from the U.S., and the
remaining dominance of the U.S. dollar as “a safe haven” at times of global turbulence.9 While
the wish of China to internalize the CNY is understandable, the speed of the converging toward
multiple reserve world currencies would be endogenously determined.
The CNY and the Euro are yet to pass the test of a viable global currency buffered by
liquid global bond markets in these currencies. The U.S. dollar is a mixed bag; it is blessed with
the most liquid global bond market, yet the U.S. was the epicenter of the 2008-9 crisis, the
source of global instability. However, once the crisis took place, the U.S. provided important
global insurance services: bailing out Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and AIG in ways that shielded

8

For example, “Expert: Concerns on capital flows overdone; China Daily,” June 24, 2014
reported “He Fan, a researcher at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, said that the
interesting question is: Since China's capital account is already undergoing de facto opening-up,
‘why do the authorities bother to commit to further opening-up?’ His guess is that the central
bank is seeking to reform the current regulatory system by deepening capital account
liberalization. He said the way to address the ‘clumsy’ and ‘inefficient’ approval system is to
improve exposure to the global monetary system.”
9

14

global players from the brunt of the crisis. The speed of moving toward the multi-polar
configuration will be determined by China’s ability to navigate its internal balancing, increasing
its financial liberalization without a deep crisis, and by the Eurozone’s ability to manage
properly an exit from the present crisis, possibly moving toward the formation of a deep euro
bond market. The transition may be slower if the U.S. deals properly with its fiscal and monetary
overhang. Chances are that this process would be time-consuming, exposing the global economy
to more turbulence, but this is a volatility that the world economy has been learning to live with.

15

References
Aizenman, J, Cheung YW, Ito H. (2014). “International reserves before and after the global crisis: Is there
no end to hoarding?” forthcoming, Journal of International Money and Finance.
Aizenman, J, Chinn M., Ito H (2010) “The Emerging Global Financial Architecture: Tracing and
Evaluating the New Patterns of the Trilemma's Configurations,” Journal of International Money
and Finance, 2010, 29:4, pp. 615-641.
Aizenman J, Lee J (2007) International reserves: precautionary versus mercantilist views, theory and
evidence. Open Econ Review 18(2): 191–214.
Aizenman J, Lee J (2008) Financial versus monetary mercantilism–long-run view of large international
reserves hoarding. World Economy, 31(5): 593–611.
Aizenman, J., Pasricha, G. K. (2010). Selective swap arrangements and the global financial crisis:
Analysis and interpretation. International Review of Economics & Finance, 19(3), 353-365.
__________ (2013). Why do emerging markets liberalize capital outflow controls? Fiscal versus net
capital flow concerns. Journal of International Money and Finance, 39, 28-64.
Aizenman J, Jinjarak Y (2009). The USA as the ‘Demander of Last Resort’and the Implications for
China's Current Account. Pacific Economic Review, 14(3), 426-442.
Aizenman, J., Jinjarak, Y., & Park, D. (2011). International reserves and swap lines: Substitutes or
complements?. International Review of Economics & Finance, 20(1), 5-18.
Aizenman J., Jinjarak Y., Marion N. (2013) "China’s Growth, Stability, and Use of International
Reserves." Open Economies Review: 1-22.
Aizenman J, Sun Y (2010). Globalization and the sustainability of large current account imbalances: size
matters. Journal of Macroeconomics, 32(1), 35-44.
Alfaro L, Kalemli-Ozcan S, Volosovych V (2011) Sovereigns, upstream capital flows and global
imbalances, NBER Working Paper No. 17396.
Bauer, M. D., & Neely, C. J. (2014). International channels of the Fed's unconventional monetary
policy. Journal of International Money and Finance,44, 24-46.
Caballero R, Farhi E, Gourinchas P-O (2008) An equilibrium model of global imbalances and low interest
rates. Am Econ Rev 98(1):358–393.
Cheung, Y. W., & Qian, X. (2009). Hoarding of international reserves: Mrs Machlup's wardrobe and the
Joneses. Review of International Economics,17(4), 824-843.
Chinn, M. D., & Prasad, E. S. (2003). Medium-term determinants of current accounts in industrial and
developing countries: an empirical exploration. Journal of International Economics, 59(1), 47-76.

16

Dooley M, Folkerts-Landau D, Garber P (2003) “An essay on the revived bretton woods system,”
NBERWorking Paper No. 9971.
______ (2005) “Direct investment, rising real wages and the absorption of excess labor in the periphery,”
in G7 current account imbalances: sustainability and adjustment. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge.
Feenstra R, Hong C (2010) China’s exports and employment. In: Feenstra R, Wei S-J Wei (eds) China’s
Growing Role in World Trade. NBER and University of Chicago Press.
Feldstein, M. S. (2008). Resolving the global imbalance: The dollar and the US saving rate (No.
w13952). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Eichengreen B (2007) Global imbalances and the lessons of Bretton Woods. MIT, Cambridge
Formichella L., Toti E. (2013) “The internalization of the Chinese currency” NCTM studies
http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=54bf0e77-82e2-464d-b1a7-736da8a17cfc
(accessed 12_2014).
Frankel, J. (2012). Internationalization of the RMB and Historical Precedents. Journal of Economic
Integration, 27(3), 329-365.
Garcia-Herrero, A., & Xia, L. (2013). China’s RMB bilateral swap agreements: What explains the choice
of countries? (No. 1318).
Genberg H., McCauley, R. N., Persaud, A., & Park, Y. C. (2005). Official reserves and currency
management in Asia: myth, reality and the future. Geneva Reports on the World Economy no. 7,
ICMB.
Gourinchas, P. O., & Rey, H. (2005). International financial adjustment (No. w11155). National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Gourinchas, P. O., & Rey, H. (2007). From world banker to world venture capitalist: US external
adjustment and the exorbitant privilege. In G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and
Adjustment (pp. 11-66). University of Chicago Press.
Gourinchas, P. O., & Jeanne, O. (2006). “The elusive gains from international financial integration.” The
Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 715-741.
Gruber, J. W., & Kamin, S. B. (2007). Explaining the global pattern of current account
imbalances. Journal of International Money and Finance, 26(4), 500-522.
Hellmann, T. F., Murdock, K. C., & Stiglitz, J. E. (2000). Liberalization, moral hazard in banking, and
prudential regulation: Are capital requirements enough?.American economic review, 147-165.

17

Holmes, TJ, ER McGrattan, EC Prescott, 2013, “Quid pro quo: Technology capital transfers for market
access in China,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Staff Reports 486-488.
Ito, H. and M. Chinn (2013), “The Rise of the “Redback” and China’s Capital Account Liberalization: An
Empirical Analysis on the Determinants of Invoicing Currencies,” Working Paper, Portland State
University.
Jeanne, O. (2012). "The dollar and its discontents," Journal of International Money and Finance,
Elsevier, vol. 31(8), pp. 1976-1989.
Ju J. & Shang-Jin Wei (2010) "Domestic Institutions and the Bypass Effect of Financial Globalization,"
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, American Economic Association, vol. 2(4): 173204, November.
Lardy, N. R. (2008). Financial repression in China (No. PB08-8).
Obstfeld, M., & Rogoff, K. S. (2005). Global current account imbalances and exchange rate
adjustments. Brookings papers on economic activity, 2005(1), 67-146.
Pula, G., & Santabárbara, D. (2011). “Is China climbing up the quality ladder? Estimating cross country
differences in product quality using Eurostat's COMEXT trade database.” ECB Working Paper
No. 1310.
Ramasamy, B., Yeung, M., & Laforet, S. (2012). “China's outward foreign direct investment: Location
choice and firm ownership.” Journal of World Business, 47(1), 17-25.
Rogers, J. H., Scotti, C., & Wright, J. H. (2014). Evaluating asset-market effects of unconventional
monetary policy: A cross-country comparison. FRB International Finance Discussion Paper,
(1101).
Song Z., Storesletten K, Zilibotti F. (2014), "Growing (with capital controls) like China"
http://www.econ.uzh.ch/faculty/zilibotti/publications/IMF_140606_final.pdf .

18

Figure 1: Extended Trilemma configurations, China, Emerging Asia [ex-China], and Emerging
LATAM. Source: Aizenman, Chinn and Ito http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/trilemma_indexes.htm

19

Figure 2: The dynamic duo: China’s and USA’s current accounts

Source and further details: Aizenman, Jinjarak and Marion (2013)

20

Figure 3: Chinese IR/GDP, GDP

IR/GDP

GDP Growth

Current account/GDP
21

Figure 4: RMB's nominal and real, 2000 – 2014. Inflation-adjusted trade-weighted exchange
rates relative to its major trading partners have evolved over time (higher indexes reflects an
appreciation of the external value of the renminbi). Sources: Financial Times

22

Figure 5: USA versus China’s relative size. 1981-2012

Figure 6: The Economist (2014) projections of USA and China’s size [current US $]

23

Table 1 Swap lines provided by US FED (billion USD), ECB (billion Euro), and PBOC (billion
Yuan), 12/2007 – 10/2014. Source: Aizenman, Jinjarak and Park (2011), updated 2014.
ds_code

wb_code

Country

FED_USD

ECB_EURO

PBC_CNY

AL

ALB

Albania

2

AG

ARG

Argentina

70

AU

AUS

Australia

30

200

BR

BRA

Brazil

30

190

BY

BLR

Belarus

CN

CAN

Canada

30, standing

standing

DK

DNK

Denmark

15

15

EC

ECB

ECB

300, standing

HK

HKG

Hong Kong

HN

HUN

Hungary

5

10

IC

ISL

Iceland

1.5

3.5

ID

IDN

Indonesia

JP

JPN

Japan

KZ

KAZ

Kazakhstan

KO

KOR

Korea

30

MX

MEX

Mexico

30

MY

MYS

Malaysia

180

MG

MNG

Mongolia

10

NW

NOR

Norway

15

NZ

NZL

New Zealand

15

PK

PAK

Pakistan

PO

POL

Poland

SD

SWE

Sweden

30

SP

SIN

Singapore

30

SW

CHE

Switzerland

60, standing

TH

THA

Thailand

70

TK

TUR

Turkey

1.6

UR

UKR

15

UA

UAE

Ukraine
United Arab
Emirates

UK

GBR

United Kingdom

UZ

UZB

Uzbekistan

20

350
400

100
120, standing

standing

20
7
360

25
10
10

300
standing

35
100, standing

standing

200
0.7

24

