                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          ROBOTS ARE US: SOME ECONOMICS OF HUMAN REPLACEMENT

                                      Seth G. Benzell
                                    Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                                     Guillermo LaGarda
                                      Jeffrey D. Sachs

                                     Working Paper 20941
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w20941


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         February 2015, Revised October 2018




We thank Erik Brynjolfsson, Hernando Zuleta, Dilip Mookherjee, Dietrich Vollrath, Pascual
Restrepo, Stephen Terry, John Seater and Kevin Cooke for useful comments. Contact
corresponding author at sbenzell@mit.edu, 908-892-1032. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Seth G. Benzell, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Guillermo LaGarda, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Robots Are Us: Some Economics of Human Replacement
Seth G. Benzell, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Guillermo LaGarda, and Jeffrey D. Sachs
NBER Working Paper No. 20941
February 2015, Revised October 2018
JEL No. E22,E23,E24,J24,J31,O30,O40

                                         ABSTRACT

Will smart machines do to humans what the internal combustion engine did to horses – make
them obsolete? If so, can putting people out of work or, at least, good work leave them unable to
buy what smart machines produce? Our model’s answer is yes. Over time and under the right
conditions, supply reduces demand, leaving everyone worse off in the long-run. Carefully crafted
redistribution policies can prevent such immiserating growth. But blunt policies, such as limiting
intellectual property rights or restricting labor supply, can make matters worse.


Seth G. Benzell                                            Guillermo LaGarda
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                      Inter-American Development Bank
Initiative on the Digital Economy                          1300 New York Avenue NW
100 Main Street                                            Washington, DC 20577
Cambridge, MA 02142                                        and Boston University
sbenzell@mit.edu                                           the Global Governance Initiative
                                                           culagui@gmail.com
Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics                                    Jeffrey D. Sachs
Boston University                                          Center for Sustainable Development,
270 Bay State Road                                         The Earth Institute
Boston, MA 02215                                           Columbia University
and The Gaidar Institute for Economic Policy               535 West 116th Street, MC 4327
and also NBER                                              New York, NY 10027
kotlikoff@gmail.com                                        and NBER
                                                           sachs@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

Whether it’s bombing our enemies, steering our planes, fielding our calls, rub-
bing our backs, vacuuming our floors, driving our taxis or playing Jeopardy,
it’s hard to think of hitherto human tasks that smart machines can’t already or
won’t soon do. Few smart machines look human. But all combine brains and
brawn – artificial intelligence (AI) and physical capital. And they all share one
creator – us. Indeed, via machine learning, we are now teaching smart machines
to automatically pick our brains.

Will self-precipitated human replacement - the production by ourselves of sub-
stitutes for ourselves - deliver an economic utopia with smart machines satisfying
our every material need? Or will our self-generated redundancy leave us earn-
ing too little to afford what smart machines produce? This paper simulates one
vision of human replacement in a bare bones, overlapping generations (OLG)
model. It features two types of workers consuming two goods for two periods.
Yet it admits a wide range of dynamic outcomes, some quite unpleasant.

The model features high- and low-tech workers. Both work full time, but only
when young. There are two goods – corn and prayer. Corn is produced with
capital and code. Code is the sum of old plus new code. New code is produced
exclusively by high-tech workers.1 Prayers are produced via a combination of
high- and low-tech labor. High-tech workers earn the same whether they produce
code or prayers. Compensation for coding comes from the rent and sale of code.

Code references all rules, instructions, and methods as well as explicit software
that help generate output from given inputs. Conceptually, code is measured
in efficiency units, not literal lines of instructions, as fewer lines are often more
efficient. Old code needs to be retained, maintained, and updated, but is other-
wise a perfect substitute for new code. Hence, the stock of old code undermines
the demand for new code and, thus, for coders.

The potential for old code to obsolesce new coders is illustrated by Junior –
2013’s World Computer Chess Champion. Junior can beat all living and, ar-
guably, all future human beings. Consequently, Junior’s old code has put chess
programmers out of business (insofar as their business is beating humans at
chess). Junior is, of course, a very smart machine – a robot that combines cap-
ital and code. And like other robots, Junior’s code reflects past human brain
   1 In the U.S., computer and mathematical occupational income accounted for 5.25 per-

cent of total wages in 2016 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2017). But a much larger share of
compensation accrues to those engaged in creating code broadly defined.




                                            1
power. In this sense, Junior and all other robots are us.

We capture these features with a code depreciation rate and examine the model’s
reaction to a major reduction in this rate arising from, say, the invention of the
silicon chip. The response is a tech boom that raises the demand for new
code and coders. The resulting rise in high-tech and, indeed, low-tech worker
earnings engenders more national saving and capital formation, reinforcing the
boom. But over time, as the stock of legacy code grows, the demand for new
code and, thus, high-tech workers falls.

The eventual decline in wages of high- and, potentially, low-tech workers limits
what the young save and invest. This means less physical capital available for
future use. If the capital stock falls by enough, the economy ends up producing
less output notwithstanding its higher level of technology. This represents a
dynamic reversal of Say’s Law as extra supply of one input (code) reduces, over
time, the demand for and thus supply of another (capital). This is the sense in
which supply reduces demand. Thus, one of the novelties of our model is that
it studies not just how automation may arise and impact the demand for labor.
It also considers the impact of automation on saving and the supply of capital.

Our model’s potential for immiserating growth echoes that in (Sachs and Kotlikoff
2012) and (Sachs, Benzell and LaGarda 2015). Although our model of techno-
logical change differs from those studies, the selfish OLG setting is common and
crucial. It permits the reduction in workers’ wages to translate into lower sav-
ing and reduced capital formation despite the concomitant rise in the interest
rate. If the capital stock falls by enough, the economy’s long run can feature
less output and lower welfare notwithstanding its improved technology. This
potential for immiserating technological progress would not arise in a single,
infinitely-lived agent model arising from altruistic linkages across generations.
In such a model, national saving depends on the relative size of interest and
time preference rates, not the intergenerational distribution of resources. And
a capital shortage would lead to higher interest rates and immediately induce
                                           2
more saving and capital formation.

Even in our OLG model intergenerational immiseration is not inevitable. It
depends on saving preferences as well as the ability to substitute software and
hardware. If young workers save at high rates or soft- and hardware can readily
substitute for one another, immiseration is less likely to arise.
   2 The evidence against operative intergenerational altruism is very strong, however. See, for

example, Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff (1992,1997), Hayashi, Altonji and Kotlikoff (1996),
and Abel and Kotlikoff (1994).




                                               2
Our main findings assume that code is excludable and rival in its use. This is a
reasonable approximation if software needs bespoke tailoring for each applica-
tion. However, a key economic feature of digital technologies is their replicability
at near zero cost. Therefore, we also consider the case of non-rival code. This
allows us to evaluate the welfare and economic implications of different intellec-
tual property (IP) regimes. This is relevant to policymakers worried about the
effects of emerging AI technologies on market concentration and labor demand
(Benzell and Brynjolfsson 2018a). We find that immiseration from code accu-
mulation is still possible if software is non-rival, and that this is more likely if
intellectual property rules are weak (i.e. code is non-excludable). On the other
hand, weak AI intellectual property protection lowers market concentration by
encouraging more entry by small firms.

Our appendix considers whether long-run immiseration can arise when agents
have more control over technological change à la the directed technological
change models of Acemoglu (2002) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018). In
this extension, firms can create either labor-substituting or capital-substituting
code. We find that immiseration is still possible so long as labor-substituting
code technology is more advanced than capital-substituting code technology.3

The next section references the historic debate over machines and robots and
reviews relevant recent literature. Section 3 presents the model and its solution
method. Section 4 illustrates the model’s surprising range of outcomes arising
from a decline in the rate of code depreciation. The range includes immiseration.
Section 5 shows how code rivalry and property rights matter. Section 6 considers
evidence supporting the model’s main predictions, including a decline in labor’s
share. Section 7 concludes.



2     Background and Literature Review

Concern about new technology dates at least to Ned Ludd’s destruction of two
stocking frames in 1779 near Leichester, England. Ludd, a weaver, was whipped
for indolence before taking revenge on the machines. More than three decades
later, in 1812, 150 armed workers – self-named Luddites – marched on a textile
mill in Huddersfield, England. Their purpose was to smash equipment. The
British army promptly killed 19. Later that year the British Parliament passed
   3 Previous versions of this paper also included a model extension where firms can choose

between a range of production technologies. In such a model immiseration remains pos-
sible. Additionally, Kondratiev-type business cycles, like those seen in our non-rival and
non-excludable code scenario, can arise.



                                            3
The Destruction of Stocking Frames Act, authorizing death for those vandalizing
machines. Nonetheless, Luddite riots continued for several years eventuating in
70 hangings.

Sixty-five years later, Marx (1867) restated Ned Ludd’s warning about machines
replacing humans, stating: “Within the capitalist system all methods for raising
the social productivity of labour are put into effect at the cost of the individual
worker.” Keynes (1933) also raised technology’s potential for job destruction,
writing in the midst of the Great Depression that ”We are being afflicted with
a new disease ..., namely technological unemployment.” But Keynes called this
”only a temporary phase of maladjustment” and predicted a future of leisure
and plenty one hundred years hence. His contention that short-term pain fa-
cilitates long-term gain reinforced Schumpeter’s 1942 encomium to “creative
destruction”.

In the fifties and sixties, with employment high and wage growth rapid, Keynes’
and Schumpeter’s views held sway. Those raising concerns about technology
were derided as “Luddites.” But in recent years the swift loss of all manner of
jobs to smart machines has led economists to rethink Luddism. Erik Brynjolfs-
son and Andrew McAfee (2014)’s book, Race Against the Machine, and Aghion,
et. al.’s (2017) recent paper, Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth, are
just two examples of a burgeoning literature. Brynjolfsson and McAfee empha-
size the ongoing role of machines in changing relative compensation across occu-
pations, increasing inequality and decreasing labor force participation. Aghion
and his co-authors connect AI to the recent decline in labor’s output share. But
they also view AI as potentially just a new form of automation – one likely sub-
ject to Baumol’s Cost Disease, with long-run outcomes ultimately determined
not by what AI can, but what it can’t do.

The long run, though, can take a long time. Moreover, the message of our and
other OLG models is that where the economy ends up depends on how it gets
there. Hence, the focus by Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003), Acemoglu and
Autor (2011), Autor and Dorn (2013) and others on how smart machines are
impacting current employment and wage trends is well placed. Each finds signif-
icant outsourcing of middle-skilled workers by smart machines. Goos, Manning,
and Salomons (2010) offer supporting evidence for Europe. Margo (2013) points
to similar labor polarization during the early stages of America’s industrial rev-
olution. Many economists are now connecting robotization to the ongoing de-
cline in labor’s share of output. Hemous and Olson (2014) is an example. Their
model has capital substituting for low-tech and complementing high-tech labor.
Its calibration can explain trends in labor’s share and income inequality since


                                        4
the 1960s.

The labor-market impact of smart machines is not without its skeptics. Mishel,
Shierholz, and Schmitt (2013) argue that ‘robots’ can’t explain post-1970’s U.S.
job polarization given the observed timing of changes in relative wages and
employment. Autor (2015) is a another skeptic of Luddism, at least over the
long term. He points out that the automobile displaced equestrian drivers but
introduced myriad occupations for humans in the auto and other industries.
Autor’s argument applies to humans, but not horses, who suffered permanent
job loss. And when it comes to AI, the question is whether today’s humans are
yesterday’s horses.

Our model features an endogenous technological and growth response to an
exogenous technology shock – the aforementioned reduction in the rate of code
depreciation). Hence, our study connects, to a degree, to the endogenous growth
literature, whose major contributions include Schumpeter (1939), Arrow (1962),
Uzawa (1965), Sidrauski (1967), Lucas (1988), Romer (1990), Rebelo (1991),
Ortigueira and Santos (1997), Zeira (1998), Acemoglu (1998), Howitt (1999),
Zuleta (2008), and Peretto and Seater (2013).

As for modeling automation, economists have taken a range of approaches. Zeira
(1998) posits the availability, at a cost, of labor-substituting machines and shows
that countries with high labor costs and low interest rates will industrialize
more rapidly than others. This process produces a dispersion in global per
capita income. Zuleta (2004, 2008) considers the choice not of labor-replacing
machines, but of the degree of capital intensivity. As in Zeira (1998), rich
economies expand relative to poor economies, which can’t afford to increase
their degree of capital intensity. Zeira (2004)’s model is OLG. Hence, he too
finds that the decline in labor income can cause economic problems over time.
In his case, it’s the inability to achieve long-run growth absent the presence of
bequests.

Acemoglu (1998) features firms that invest in technology that differentially raise
the productivity of their least expensive inputs. Rourke, et. al. (2013) examines
18th and 19th technological change in England with special focus on the skill
premium. His model, which is similar to Acemoglu’s (1998), appears capable of
matching the trend in the skill premium over the period.

Peretto and Seater (2013) extend Zuleta (2008). They consider monopolisti-
cally competitive firms that invest in particular technologies depending on their
relative costs. In their model, firms may specialize in the use of one technology



                                        5
or produce with multiple technologies.

Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) endogenize the automation of labor as well as the
invention of new labor-intensive products. The former (later) occurs to a greater
(lessor) degree when wages are high (low). They show that balance growth can
arise with the demand for labor performing innovative tasks offsetting job loss
due to automation.

Guerreiro, Rebelo, and Teles (2017), Costinot and Werning (2018) and others
have examined the use of fiscal policy to offset technology-induced redistribu-
tion. Costinot and Werning (2018) tax technology, via a constrained set of
taxes, in a complete market with a continuum of agents. The authors find that
when it is optimal to tax new technologies, such taxes will likely to be small.
Our framework is different. In particular, it doesn’t admit contracting between
current and future generations. Still, as in Sachs, Benzell and Lagarda (2017),
tax and transfer policies could be added to our model to maintain the capital
stock and preserve the intergenerational distribution of welfare in the face of AI
innovation.



3     The Model

Agents consume two products – corn and prayers.4 Corn, which can be con-
sumed or invested, is produced using capital and code.The CES function gov-
erning corn production can be viewed as a smart machine or robot. Prayers
are produced via a CES function of low- and high-tech labor.5 Prayers are
ephemeral. They are consumed when produced. Prayer and corn are stand-ins
for automatable and non-automatable products, and are rough analogues to
mass-produced goods and interpersonal or artisinal services.

Code is durable, with the stock of code equaling the sum of new and existing
code. New code is created by high-tech workers not working in the prayer sector.
Old code requires maintenance, retention, and updating, which we treat as a
form of depreciation. The numbers of high- and low-tech workers remain fixed
through time.6 Both types of workers live and consume for two periods, but
work only when young.
   4 Frey and Osborne (2013) identify the priesthood, psychotherapy and coaching as among

the occupations least subject to automation.
   5 Adding labor to the production function for corn, or capital to the production for prayer,

would not alter our qualitative findings.
   6 Our model can accommodate long-run balanced growth arising from population growth

or labor-augmenting technological change.



                                              6
Production

Time-t production of corn (goods), Yt , and prayers (services), St , satisfy (1)
and (2),
                                        εy −1                     εy −1      εy
                    Yt = DY [α(Kt )      εy
                                                 + (1 − α)(At )    εy
                                                                          ] εy −1 ,        (1)
                                         εs −1                    εs −1      εs
                    St = DS [γ(HS,t )     εs     + (1 − γ)(Gt )    εs     ] εs −1 ,        (2)

where HS,t is the number of high-tech workers in the prayer sector and Gt
references low-tech workers. DS and DY are total factor productivity terms, γ
and α are CES share parameters, and εy and εs are CES elasticities. The stock
of code At grows according to,

                                     At = δAt−1 + zHA,t ,                                  (3)

where the “depreciation” factor is δ ∈ [0, 1). Higher δ means that legacy code is
useful for longer.7 HA,t stands for the supply of high-tech coders and z is their
productivity coefficient.8

The demands for code, high-tech workers, and capital satisfy

                             max Yt (At , Kt ) − mt At − rt Kt ,                           (4)
                            Kt ,At


where corn is the numeraire, mt is the rental rate for code, and rt is the interest
rate. Factor demands for prayer reflect,

                        max qt St (HS,t , Gt ) − wtG Gt − wtH HS,t ,                       (5)
                       HS,t ,Gt



where qt is the price of prayer, wtH is a high-tech worker’s wage in the prayer
sector, and wtG is a low-tech worker’s wage.
    7 Some of our simulations assume a depreciation rate of 30 percent per period, where a

period is roughly 30 to 40 years. This corresponds to a typical company needing to replace
approximately 1 percent of its code base annually to maintain the same level of output. The
current actual rate of code depreciation in the economy is unclear. The IRS allows for a 3 year
useful lifespan for licensed software. For software developed in house or purchased bespoke
software, costs can be amortized over a 15 year period (as a section 197 intangible). Software
which is bundled with hardware is implicitly assumed to deprecate at the rate of the hardware.
On the on the hand, many programs created over 50 years ago are still in use, such as those
written for older nuclear reactors.
    8 The corn production process can be understood by analogy to a firm whose service is

making good chess moves. The firm can improve its service either by increasing the quality
of its chess program (increasing its efficiency units of code) or using more capital (computer
cores) to exploring winning moves.




                                                  7
Factor prices satisfy
                                   εs −1                      εs −1        1                 1
         wtH = qt DS [γ(HS,t )      εs     + (1 − γ)(Gt )      εs     ] εs −1 [γ(HS,t )− εs ],         (6)
                                εs −1                     εs −1       1                          1
       wtG = qt DS [γ(HS,t )     εs     + (1 − γ)(Gt )     εs     ] εs −1 [(1 − γ)(Gt )− εs ],         (7)
                                εy −1                     εy −1        1
                                                                                    − ε1y
              rt = DY [α(Kt )    εy
                                        + (1 − α)(At )     εy
                                                                  ] εy −1 [α(Kt )           ],         (8)


                                               and

                           εy −1                      εy −1       1
                                                                                        − ε1y
         mt = DY [α(Kt )    εy
                                   + (1 − α)(At )      εy
                                                              ] εy −1 [(1 − α)(At )              ].    (9)



Households

Whether high-tech or low-tech, households maximize

  u = (1 − φ)[(1 − κ)logcy,t + κlogsy,t ] + φ[(1 − κ)logco,t+1 + κlogso,t+1 ], (10)

subject to,
                                           co,t+1 + qt+1 so,t+1
                     cy,t + qt sy,t +                           = ij,t ,                              (11)
                                                 1 + rt+1
where cy,t , co,t , sy,t , so,t , are consumption of corn and prayer by the young and
old, respectively and ij,t is total resources of group j. For low-tech workers,

                                           iG,t = wtG .                                               (12)

For high-tech workers in the prayer sector,

                                        i(H,S),t = wtH ,                                              (13)

and for high-tech workers writing code,

                                 i(H,A),t = z(mt + δpt ),                                             (14)

where zmt is revenue from renting out newly produced code and zδpt is the
proceeds from the sale of rights to future use of newly produced code.

Households save in the form of capital and code. Capital and code accumulation
obeys
                                   φIt = Kt+1 + pt δAt ,                                              (15)

where It is the total resources of those born in t, φ is the saving propensity of


                                                8
the young, and pt δAt is the value of code retained from the current period. In
equilibrium the return to both investments is identical.

Figure 1 summarizes the timing of consumption and saving decisions for high-
tech workers in the corn industry.

Demands satisfy,
                                         κ(1 − φ)ij,t
                                sy,t =                ,                   (16)
                                             qt
                            cy,t = (1 − κ)(1 − φ)ij,t ,                   (17)
                                         1 + rt+1
                           so,t+1 =               [κφij,t ],              (18)
                                           qt+1

                                          and


                        co,t+1 = [1 + rt+1 ][(1 − κ)φij,t ].              (19)



Equilibrium

Since high-tech workers are mobile between sectors,

                                wtH = z(mt + δpt ).                       (20)


Asset-market clearing entails equal returns on capital and code, i.e.,

                                  X
                                  ∞
                           pt =         Rs+1,t
                                         −1
                                               δ s−t ms+1 ,               (21)
                                  s=t


where Rs,t is the compound interest factor between t and s, i.e.,

                                          Y
                                          s
                                Rs,t =          (1 + rj ).                (22)
                                          j=t



Finally, equilibrium requires

                         Yt = Cy,t + Co,t + Kt+1 − Kt ,                   (23)

                                Ht = HA,t + HS,t ,                        (24)


                                          and


                                            9
                                 St = Sy,t + So,t ,                             (25)

where Cy , Co , Sy , So , are total consumption demand of corn and payer by the
young and old respectively.



The Steady State

If production functions are Cobb-Douglas, the steady state is implicitly defined
by the following two equations in k = K
                                      A , the capital to code ratio, and q, the
relative price of prayer.



                     (1 − φ)(1 − κ)         (1 − α)Dy k α δ
            Dy k α =[               ][k +                    ]
                           φ              1 + αDy k α−1 − δ
                                                                                (26)
                                      (1 − α)Dy k α δ
                     + (1 − κ)[k +                    ][1 + αDy k α−1 ]
                                   1 + αDy k α−1 − δ

                                        and

                                                    γ        γ          1
         k + pδ = φ[z(m + pδ)H + (1 − γ)G(                ) 1−γ (qDs ) 1−γ ],   (27)
                                                z(m + pδ)

                                       where,



                                m = (1 − α)Dy k α ,                             (28)

                                   r = αDy k α−1 ,                              (29)
                                     (1 − α)Dy k α
                              p=                     .                          (30)
                                   1 + αDy k α−1 − δ

The mechanism for immiseration in the model is low wages. Real wages for
high-tech workers are lowered when the code to capital ratio is lowered (keeping
the price of prayer constant). In the Cobb-Douglas case, we have


                 dk      aDy k α−1 + α(1 − α)[Dy k α−1 ]2 − b
                    =−                                                          (31)
                 dδ    2α(1 − α)cDy2 k 2α−3 + (1 − α)eDy k α−2


where a = [1 + (1−κ)(1−2α)
                       φ      ], b = (1−κ)
                                       φ , c = 1 − (α + δ(1 − α)), and e =
(1 − δ)(1 − αb) − b(1 − (1 − α)δ). One can readily choose reasonable parameter


                                         10
values that make this derivative negative (i.e. such that an increase in code
retention technology lowers the capital to code ratio).



Solving the Model

We calculate the economy’s perfect foresight transition path following an im-
mediate and permanent increase in the rate of code retention (decline in the
code depreciation rate). The solution is via Gauss-Seidel iteration. First, we
calculate the economy’s initial and final steady states. This yields initial and
final stocks of capital and code. These steady-state values provide, based on lin-
ear interpolation, our initial guesses for the time paths of the two input stocks.
Next, we calculate associated guesses of the time paths of factor prices as well
as the price paths of code and prayer. Step three uses these price paths and
the model’s demand, asset arbitrage, and labor market conditions to derive new
paths of the supplies of capital and code. The new paths are weighted with
the old paths to form the iteration’s next guesses of capital and code paths.
The convergence of this iteration, which occurs to an arbitrarily high degree of
precision, implies market clearing in each period.



4    Simulation Results

The models’ main novelty is the inclusion of the stock of code in the production
of goods. When the code retention rate, δ equals zero, corn production is
conventional – based on contemporaneous inputs of capital and labor (code
writers). But when δ rises, corn production depends not just on capital and
current labor, but also, implicitly, on deceased high-tech workers.

The increase in δ initially raises the compensation of coders. This draws more
high-tech workers into coding, raising high-tech worker compensation in both
sectors. In most parameterizations, the concomitant reduction in the supply of
prayers raises the price of prayers. Depending on the degree to which high-tech
workers complement low-tech workers in producing prayer, the wages of low-tech
workers will rise or fall. When the two forms of labor are close substitutes the
wages of low-tech workers track those of the high tech. When low-tech workers
require high-tech workers to complement them, their wages fall as high-tech
workers depart for the corn industry.

The situation of high-tech workers degrades over time. As more durable code


                                       11
comes on line, the marginal productivity of code falls, making new coders in-
creasingly redundant. Eventually the demand for coders is limited to those
needed to cover the depreciation of legacy code, i.e., to retain, retrain, maintain,
and update the AI. The remaining high-tech workers find themselves working in
the prayer sector. The upshot is that high-tech workers can end up potentially
earning far less than in the initial steady state.

What about low-tech workers? The price of prayers peaks and then declines
thanks to the return of high-tech workers to the sector. This puts downward
pressure on low-tech workers’ wages and, depending on the complementarity of
the two inputs in producing prayer, low-tech workers may also see their wages
fall. When low-tech workers are close substitutes for high-tech workers, the
boom-bust in high-tech workers’ compensation generates a boom-bust in low-
tech compensation. In the special case where high and low-tech workers are
perfect substitutes their wages move in lock step.

The economy’s dynamic reaction to a higher δ operates in part through the
impact on capital formation. The initial rise in earnings of at least the high-
tech workers can engender more aggregate saving and investment. The increased
capital makes code and, thus, high-tech workers more productive. But if the
total compensation of workers eventually falls, so too will the saving of the
young and the economy’s supply of capital. Less capital lowers the marginal
productivity of code and raises interest rates. This lowers the price of code and
the wages of those who produce it.

We next consider alternative transition paths that emerge based on different as-
sumptions about technology or preferences. We first consider paths that feature
immiserating growth. Next we show that the opposite is possible - long-run, wel-
fare improving growth. The third type of path involves a change in the relative
income positions of high- and low-tech workers. I.e., we consider paths in which
low-tech workers end up with higher wages than high-tech workers despite the
opposite initial situation. Finally, we show that if the code depreciation shock is
accompanied by an increase in corn’s share of final consumption, immiseration
can be magnified.

Each simulation features an immediate and permanent rise in the code-retention
rate. But the dynamic impact of this technological breakthrough depends on
the size of the shock and the choice of parameters. In addition presenting the
above cases in detail, we perform a sensitivity analysis of outcomes to parameter
assumptions.




                                        12
Immiserating Growth

Figure 2 shows that technological growth, namely the code-retention rate, δ,
rising from 0 to .7, can have negative long-term consequences.9 The simulation
assumes Cobb-Douglas production of corn and linear production of prayer; i.e.,
both types of workers are perfect substitutes in producing prayers (εS = ∞).10

As the top left panel indicates, real national income rises several percent, peak-
ing at 7.8 percent above baseline a period after the shock.11 But it ultimately
declines, ending up 4.2 percent below its initial steady-state value. In the long-
run, corn output decreases 28.0 percent.

The output of prayer dips after the shock, as workers migrate to lucrative coding
jobs, then increases steeply as the automated workers return. The price of
prayers does the opposite. While production of prayers is 27.4 percent higher
in the long run, prayers, at that point, aren’t worth very much at the margin.
In fact, the long-run price of prayers is 43.4 percent lower than before the
technological breakthrough. Both types of workers are perfect substitutes in
the spirituality, which, in our simulations, always employ both. Their common
compensation initially jumps 7.6 percent and then falls gradually. In the long
run all workers earn 24.8 percent less than was originally the case.

What happens to the welfare of different agents through time? The initial elderly
are essentially indifferent to the tech boom. Both interest rates, benefiting them,
and the price of code, hurting them, rise slightly. The initial young experience
a 14.2 percent rise in lifetime utility, measured as a compensating differential
relative to their initial steady-state utility. But those born in the long run are
16.5 percent worse off and national income is 4.2 percent lower.

The top right chart helps explain why good times presage bad times. The stock
of code shoots up and stays high. But the stock of capital immediately starts
   9 Although we sometimes refer to this technological change as a shock, because saving

decisions are not a function of future prices it would not matter if the technological change
were anticipated.
  10 Throughout the paper we only consider equilibria where high-tech workers are employed

in both sectors. Here that assumption is equivalent to assuming workers are perfectly mobile
between high- and low-tech employment.
  11 Unless otherwise noted, national income, personal income, and wages are reported in real

terms. The price index used is a geometric mean of the relative price of corn and prayer. The
weights used are their corresponding shares in consumption. The price index is
                                            qt (Sy,t +So,t )
                                      q (Sy,t +So,t )+Cy,t +Co,t
                              Π t = qt t                           = qtκ                    (32)
Output of corn and prayer are reported in their own units. Other prices (the price of code,
p, interest rate, r, and price of prayer, q) are reported in units of the numeraire (corn) unless
otherwise noted. National income is the sum of all payments to workers and capital.



                                                13
falling. After six periods there is over 50 percent more code, but 65 percent less
capital. The marginal product of capital skyrockets, increasing the long-run
interest rate 110.2 percent above its initial steady-state value.

The huge long-run decline in the capital stock and associated rise in its marginal
product has two causes. First, as just stated, wages, which finance the acqui-
sition of capital, fall almost in half by the implicit competition with deceased
workers. Second, the advent of a new asset – durable code – crowds out asset
accumulation in the form of capital. When δ rises, all workers immediately
enjoy an increase in their compensation. This leads to more saving, but not
necessarily more saving in the form of capital. Instead, much of the short-lived
extra saving is used to acquire claims to legacy code. Initially, when the stock
of code is small, its price is quite high. Later, when the stock of code is large, its
price is quite low. But the product of code’s price and its quantity are always
sufficiently high to crowd out investment in capital.

What happens to labor’s share of national income? Initially it rises slightly
from 75.0 percent in the initial steady state to 75.7 percent. It then declines,
falling to 57.5 percent in the long run. This reflects the higher share of output
paid to legacy code. This long-run decline in both physical capital and labor’s
shares of national income arise in all our simulations.



Welfare-Improving Growth

As figure 3 shows, the tech boom need not auger long-term economic decline.
A higher saving propensity is the key. In the immiserating growth case, we
assumed a saving propensity, φ, equal to .2. Here, keeping all other parameters
fixed, we assume φ equals .85. With this far higher saving rate, workers are bet-
ter off in the long run. However, in the first period, when the code-depreciation
shock hits, the old generation is worse off due to the short-term rise in the price
of prayer.

National income peaks in the period after the technological shock, rising 25.6
percent above baseline. But in the long-run, national income is only 16.8 percent
higher. This reflects a rise and then fall in the capital stock, but not one that
is sufficient to reduce long-run welfare. In the prior simulation the capital stock
immediately declined. Here the capital stock temporarily increases 8.7 percent
above its initial value.

A short-run rise in both the capital stock and prayer price boost the common



                                         14
wage in the short run and leaves it at roughly its initial value in the long run.
After peaking 20.5 percent above its initial value, the wage falls, ending up
2.2 percent lower. The stock of code ends up more than doubling. But the
capital stock, notwithstanding the high rate of saving, ultimately declines by
35.8 percent.

The respective increase and decrease in the stocks of code and capital produce
a significant rise in the economy’s interest rate – 78.0 percent in the long run.
Although the common wage of high and low-tech workers decreases slightly
from its initial level, the rise in the interest rate permits future generations to
consume significantly more.

Why does a high enough saving rate lead the δ shock to increase long-run
welfare? The answer is that whatever happens to the stock of code, a higher
saving rate entails a higher capital stock and, therefore, less of a decline in wages
after code accumulates.

At the end of this section we explore the sensitivity of welfare changes to the
combination of the saving propensity and code depreciation rates. The combi-
nation of low saving and high code retention rates lead to the most negative
outcomes. Conversely, a high saving preference and high code retention rate
lead to the best outcomes.



Inequality-Flipping Growth

If high and low-tech workers are complements in production of prayer, their
relative wage and welfare levels can flip. Consider, for example, simulating the
model based on table 2’s parameters. The results are displayed in figure 4. This
simulation assumes production in the prayer sector is Cobb-Douglas. We also
assume that the saving propensity, φ, equals .7. We normalize high- and low-
tech efficiency units such that their wages are the same in the no-shock steady
state.

As always occurs, the initial effect for high-tech workers is positive. Indeed,
the shock immediately raises the wages of high-tech workers by 26.0 percent. It
also immediately lowers the share of high-tech workers in the prayer sector from
50.0 to 39.8 percent. Consequently, in the short run, low-tech workers, who,
given our complements in production assumption, need high-tech workers to be
productive, see their wages increase only .2 percent.

However, as code accumulates and capital decumulates, high-tech workers earn


                                         15
less and less writing code. In response, they move in great number back to the
prayer sector. Ultimately, 67.6 percent of high-tech workers end up working in
the prayer sector, earning less than was originally the case. Indeed, in the final
steady state, high-tech workers earn 18.1 percent less than in the initial steady
state. Low-tech workers, in contrast, earn 10.8 percent more. Interestingly,
the low-tech wage peaks two periods after the shock at 23.2 percent above its
original value. This rise and fall in the wage of low-tech workers reflects, in
part, the rise and fall in the price of prayer.

Although, the wages of high-tech workers end up below their initial values, they,
like low-tech workers, experience long-run increases in welfare. But the increase
is very small for high-tech workers and very large for low-tech workers.



Increase in Corn’s Share in Final Consumption

Our model’s assumption that corn and prayer are Cobb-Douglas complements
in final consumption is important. Assuming that the shares of spending on
automatable versus non-automatable goods are fixed is reasonable, given that
there is no strong evidence on the elasticity of substitution between them. How-
ever, due to changes in preferences, relative prices, or technology, corn could
command a larger or smaller share of final consumption than corn.

This subsection examines the consequences of a change in the corn preference-
share parameter, κ, arising in conjunction with the reduction in the code de-
preciation rate. Figure 5 shows results for the case that κ decreases from .5 to
.25 at the same time the code retention rate increases. All other parameters
are those in table 2. This alternative assumption has a dramatic and surpris-
ing impact on the path of national income. Unlike figure 4’s results, long-run
national income falls by 30.3 percent rather than rising. As in previous cases,
immiseration is caused by capital decumulation. Capital stocks in this case de-
crease 34.6 percent in the period immediately after the shock and 85.8 percent
in the long-run.

Capital deccumulation is greater when κ is larger for three reasons. First, the
higher demand for corn increases the share of high-tech workers working as
coders. This translates, after one period, into more legacy code and lower labor
compensation – the source of saving and capital formation. Second, the increase
in immediate corn consumption reduces the amount of corn left over to invest.
Third, the higher preference toward corn limits the rise in the price of prayers.
This, too, has a negative impact on wages and capital formation.


                                         16
The Large Range of Potential Outcomes

As just demonstrated, the model’s reaction to the δ shock is highly sensitive
to parameter values. We now consider this sensitivity in more detail. Figure
6 displays our previous results. Table 3 shows additional findings for other
parameter combinations. The table’s baseline simulation (row one) assumes
intermediate parameter values. Subsequent rows show the impact of sequentially
modifying one parameter. Figure 7 plots the path of national income for each
row of the table.

These simulations teach several new things. First, high-tech workers benefit
from higher substitutability between capital and code in the corn sector. This
makes sense. Indeed, when capital and code are perfect substitutes, corn pro-
duction is linear in the sum of the two inputs. Hence, the marginal product of
code is unchanged in response to a rise in the stock of code. Consequently, com-
pensation to coders is unaffected by a reduction in code depreciation and there
is no mechanism for a fall in workers’ saving and investment or for long-run
immiseration.

Second, with both Cobb-Douglas production and preferences, the path of the
capital-to-code ratio in response to a rise in delta, starting from δ = 0, is
independent of the absolute and relative numbers of each type of worker.12

Third, a positive δ shock always produces a tech boom with increases in both
the price of code and the wage of high-tech workers.13 In most simulations, the
boom is short lived, auguring a major tech and saving bust. Finally, the δ shock
generally raises labor’s share in the short run and lowers it in the long run.

Figure 8 presents a contour map of the long-run compensating differential. Its
top half considers combinations of saving preference parameters φ and shocks
  12 Consider a doubling of H. This will double H
                                                       Y in the δ = 0 economy. But if HY also
doubles along the entire transition path, the path of k will remain unchanged. One can see
this by combining the equation for market-clearing in capital with that for market-clearing in
code. This, of course, requires that the path of HS be twice as large as well. But this outcome
as well as a doubling of qt is implied by (16). This k-path invariance to initial levels of H
and G is somewhat surprising and suggests that transforming more low-tech into high-tech
workers may have less impact on the economy than one might have thought. Still, such a
policy, if enacted before the rise in delta, would lower the real wages of skilled workers. (Their
wages valued in corn wouldn’t change, but the higher price of prayer would lower their real
wage.) It would also improve the relative welfare of those who remain unskilled workers since
their wage measured in units of capital will rise thanks to the higher marginal revenue of
their labor. Additional effects would arise were H or G to vary once delta had risen and the
economy was in transition. In this case, the k path would temporarily fall making code and
coding less valuable. However, in the long run, the real wages of each type of worker are
independent of such transition effects on the path of k.
  13 This and the previous result can both be shown analytically.




                                               17
to δ assuming table 1’s values of the other parameters. Because the two types of
workers are perfect substitutes, the compensating differential for both types is
the same. Redder areas reference higher long-run utilities relative to the initial
steady state. Bluer areas reference the opposite. Long-run utility increases most
when δ is large and the saving rate is high. It decreases the most when the δ
shock is high and the saving rate is low.

Figure 8’s lower half considers joint shocks to the saving rate and code-writing
productivity z).14 Higher values of each reinforces their individual positive
impacts on long-run utility. As opposed to δ shocks, increases in code-writing
productivity (z) enhance all agents’ welfare. The reason is simple – this shock
makes living, but not deceased high-tech workers more productive. Increasing
labor’s productivity in other tasks has the same result. As this model posits no
disutility from labor, reducing labor’s productivity is isomorphic to restricting
its supply. Policies that attempt to raise wages by reducing labor supply - such
as increasing the minimum wage - will, therefore, backfire.

Figure 9 considers combinations of the saving rate, φ, and the good sector’s
elasticity of substitution, εy . It visualizes the aforementioned sensitivity of
long-run utility to the substitutability of code for capital. High-tech workers, in
particular, benefit from both higher levels of their scarce complement and from
being more substitutable for it. The figure also indicates that this sensitivity
is greater for low than for high saving rates. Higher substitutability moderates
the negative effects of capital’s crowding out that occurs with a low saving
rate. Low-tech workers also benefit from both monotonically. However, the
relationship is slightly more complex. Low-tech workers benefit when some
high-tech workers cross sectors to complement them. When both the saving rate
and elasticity of substitution in the corn sector are high, the marginal product
of high-tech workers in the corn sector declines very little as code accumulates.
Therefore, few leave to complement low-tech workers, limiting low-tech workers’
gains.



5    The Role of Property Rights and Rivalry

To this point we’ve assumed that code is private and rival. Specifically, we’ve
assumed that when one firm uses code it is unavailable for rent or use by oth-
ers. But unlike physical capital, code represents stored information, which may
be non-rival in its use. Non-rivalry does not however necessarily imply non-
 14 Other   parameters are those in the immiserating growth scenario.



                                             18
excludability. Patents, copyrights, trade secrets, and other means can be used
to limit code’s unlicensed distribution. On the other hand, the government can
turn code into a public good by mandating it be open source. There are sig-
nificant open questions about the legality and desirability of IP protection for
AI and original works created by AI systems (Center for the Fourth Industrial
Revolution 2018).

This section modifies the baseline model to investigate these questions. To do
so we add a firm entry decision. Firm entry is important in the context of IP
because when code can be simultaneously used by multiple parties, the number
of these parties must be determined. Corn producing firms enter by paying a
fixed cost each period, and gain access to the amount of free code available. This
fixed cost corresponds to both the overhead necessary to run a business and the
cost of discovering a new idea for applying AI. When code is excludable, firms
may also rent an additional supply of it at a market price. Strong IP protections
for AI incentives the creation of more code but limit the use of AI that already
exists.15

We first present the modified model in the baseline case of private (rival and
excludable) code. We then explore two alternative scenarios. In the first, code
is non-rival and non-excludable, i.e., it is a public good. In the second, code is
non-rival, but excludable. In other words, those who develop AI can rent it out
to as many companies as they like without friction.



Rival, Excludable (Private) Code

Corn firms maximize their profit, which is equal to

               πj,t = F (kj,t , zHj,t + aj,t + A) − C − rt kj,t − mt aj,t ,            (33)

where πj,t are profits for firm j at time t, F (•) is a constant elasticity of substi-
tution production function, kj,t is the amount of capital rented by the firm, aj,t
is the amount of code rented by the firm, Hj,t is the amount of high-tech labor
hired by the firm, A is the exogenously set amount of free code in the economy,
and C is the per-period fixed operating cost. In equilibrium all firms have zero
profits.
                 0 = F (kj,t , zHj,t + aj,t + A) − C − rt kt − mt aj,t .               (34)
  15 We incorporate some amount of free public code in all institutional scenarios to ensure

entry.




                                            19
Market clearing conditions are,
                                  X
                                      aj,t = δAt−1 ,                           (35)

                                   X
                                       kj,t = Kt ,                             (36)
                                  X
                                      Hj,t = HA,t ,                            (37)

                       Y = co,t + cy,t − Kt + Kt+1 − N C,                      (38)

where N is the number of firms. All other equations are as in the baseline model.
Since all firms are identical, (38) can be converted into an equation for N, the
number of firms.

                    Kt        1
          0 = NF(      , zHt + δAt−1 + A) − N C − rt Kt − mt δAt−1             (39)
                    N         N

Firms enter up to the point that the value of the public code they obtain for
free, namely A, equals their fixed cost of production. Thus,

                                    AFa,t = C.                                 (40)

This fixes the marginal product of code at CA
                                              in every period. Intuitively, new
firms can acquire a perfect substitute for new code, and, thus, new coders at
a fixed cost by setting up shop and gaining access to A in free code. Given
that corn’s production obeys constant returns to scale, fixing code’s marginal
product means fixing the ratio of capital to code. This, in turn, fixes the interest
rate. Hence, the rental rates of code and capital are invariant to the increase in
δ.

To solve the model an additional step is added to the iteration procedure. Given
a guess of prices and stocks in a period, (39) is used to calculate N . This guess
of N in each period is included in the next iteration to calculate new prices.

Figure 10 shows transition paths for this economy, with excludable, non-rival
code, after an increase in the code retention rate. Parameter values are provided
in table 4. Although an increase in δ does not change the marginal productivity
of code, it does raise coder compensation. The reason is that coders can now
sell property rights to the future use of their invention. Immediately after the
shock, the wage of high-tech workers increases 10.2 percent, decreasing to 6.5
percent higher in the long run due to a decrease in the relative price of corn.

The number of firms in the economy decreases as a result of the technology
shock, by 11.3 percent in the long run. Were the number of firms to remain


                                         20
fixed, the jump in δ would entail a higher code to capital ratio (in the short
term the capital stock is fixed, and in the long run it increases by less than
the code stock). This would mean a lower marginal productivity of code, which
equation (40) precludes. It would also mean a negative payoff to setting up a
new firm. Another way of viewing this relationship is that as the rental price
of code decreases, the attractiveness of acquiring code by setting up a new firm
decreases. As the later is fixed, the rental price of code is fixed, with the margin
of adjustment being fewer firms created.

In the period of the shock, welfare for the old decreases by 1.8 percent. This is
because the cost of prayer increases 8.0 percent while the interest rate remains
fixed. In the long run, high and low-tech workers are 6.5 percent better off.
As the wage of high-tech workers can only increase as a function of the tech-
nology shock, this model variant does not admit long-run immiserating growth
absent additional assumptions. For example, if the number of firms were to
be fixed due to oligopilization of the industry, or if the fixed cost of firm entry
were increasing in the number of firms, (40) would not hold, in which case the
marginal productivity of code would decrease as code accumulates. This would
reintroduce the possibility of immiserating growth.



Non-Rival, Non-Excludable (Public) Code

Consider next the case that code, in the period after it is produced, becomes
a pure public good used simultaneously by every firm. This could arise by
government edict, the wholesale pirating of code, or reverse engineering.

Profits are now

                   πj,t = F (kj,t , zHj,t + aj,t + A) − C − rt kj,t ,          (41)

as firms no longer need to rent their stock of code (aj,t ), where

                                   aj,t = δAt−1 ∀j                             (42)

As before, firm entry and exit imply zero profits,

                            Kt
                  0 = NF(      , zHt + δAt−1 + A) − N C − rt Kt .              (43)
                            N

and, because the amount of free code available to newly set up firms changes




                                          21
over time, (40) is modified to

                             (δAt−1 + A)Fa,t = C.                            (44)


Finally, with investment in code no longer crowding out investment in capital,

                                  Kt+1 = φIt .                               (45)

Figure 11 shows the transition path after a δ increase for the case of non-
excludable code with table 4’s parameter values. The initial steady state is the
same as in the prior case of excludable rival code. However, the response to the
jump in δ is dramatically different. It has no immediate effect on the high-tech
wage because workers no longer hold copyright to their code. They, therefore,
have no incentive to move to the corn sector, leaving the economy unresponsive
to the shock in the short term.

In the period after the shock, the economy begins to react. The stock of free
public code, which now includes both A plus all of the economy’s legacy code,
is larger. This induces more firm entry. The number of firms immediately
more than doubles to 112.4 percent above its initial level in the short run and
is 43.4 percent higher in the long run. As indicated in (44), with more free
code available, the break even condition entails a lower rental rate of code. In
equilibrium, this entails more firms operating with less capital per unit of code.

The lower marginal product of code and, thus, of coders leads 30.3 percent of
high-tech workers to move from coding into prayer in the period after the shock.
National income peaks at 10.8 percent above its initial level in this period. The
interest rate rises by 35.5 percent and the wage of low-tech workers increases by
15.0 percent.

The economy’s transition is characterized by a series of damped oscillations.
Periods of relatively high coder hiring and fewer firms is followed by periods
of plentiful free code, more firm entry, and relatively low coder hiring. In the
long run, the share of high-tech workers coding is 12.6 percent higher than its
initial level and the high-tech wage is 23.4 percent lower. Welfare in the long
run for high-tech workers is 9.7 percent lower. For low-tech workers, welfare is
8.0 percent higher. It is easy to select parameters such that both groups are
worse off. As in the baseline model, the main mechanism for immiseration is
the reduction of the high-tech wage leading to less capital accumulation. A
contributing factor is the inefficiency introduced due to coders no longer being
able to internalize the full value of their work.


                                       22
Non-Rival, Excludable (Private) Code

Another possibility is that code is excludable, but non-rival in its use, permitting
high-tech workers to license all their code to all firms in the period after it is
produced. The equations for the rival, excludable model hold with the following
exceptions. First, profits are given by

           πj,t = F (kj,t , zHj,t + δAt−1 + A) − C − rt kj,t − mt δAt−1        (46)

Second, the price of code reflects its use by all firms.

                                X
                                ∞
                         pt =         Rs+1,t
                                       −1
                                             δ s−t ms+1 Ns+1 .                 (47)
                                s=t



As figure 12 shows, the δ shock produces a long-run, welfare-improving growth
path, indeed a significantly better path than in the rival, excludable case. As in
the rival, excludable case, firm entry satisfies equation (40). Hence, the interest
rate and marginal product of new code are fixed, the wage of high-tech workers
must increase, and a long-term welfare improvement is ensured. Welfare for the
old in the period of the shock decreases by 2.6 percent, slightly more than in
the rival, excludable case. Thereafter, however, households are much better off,
enjoying 11.5 percent higher utility in the long run, measured, as always, as a
compensating differential.

This case features less entry. In the long-run, there are 20.8 percent fewer
firms than before the δ shock. In the public code case, there is a 43.4 percent
increase in the number of firms in response to the shock. In the private code
case, the shock reduces the number of firms by 11.3 percent. Intuitively, since
each firm can use all available code, fewer firms are needed. More surprising is
the decrease relative to the rival code case. The reason is that with non-rival,
excludable code, the effective supply and value of code is very high. The higher
value crowds out capital investment. As can be seen from equation (40), the
relatively small number of firms entering is due to a relatively higher effective
stock of code and lower stock of capital.



6    Testable Implications and Supportive Evidence

Each of our simulations feature a temporary rise followed by a decline in labor’s
share of national income as well as a rise in code as a share of total assets. U.S.


                                           23
labor-share data going back four decades provides support for these trends.16
There is also recent evidence of a decline in capital per worker, consistent with
our model’s immiseration scenarios.17

Figure 13 displays three measures of labor’s share of U.S. income based on three
approaches to handing labor’s unknown share of proprietorship and partnership
income. The orange and gray curves use Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
data. The orange curve charts labor’s share of total non-proprietorship national
income assuming that labor’s share of proprietorship income is the same as that
of national income.18 The blue curve displays labor’s share of corporate income,
i.e., it simply ignores the non-corporate sector.

The yellow curve displays labor’s share of private businesses including propri-
etorships as calculated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The BLS im-
putes labor’s share in proprietorship income by assuming proprietors (and part-
ners) earn the annual average wage in their industry. Proprietor income above
this amount is considered capital income. This measure is smaller than the
others because the BLS’s income measure is not net of depreciation.

By all three measures, labor’s share of income is lower in 2015 than in the
mid 1970’s. In the yellow curve, labor’s share peaks in the mid-1970s with
the two lowest shares recorded in 2014 and 2015. The precise percentage-point
decline in labor’s share between 1975 and 2014 are 5.96 percentage points, 5.88
percentage points, or 4.88 percentage points according to the orange, gray, and
yellow curves, respectively.

Other authors, including Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) and Brigdman
(2014), report similar findings using related labor-share measures. The con-
sensus view is that labor’s share has decreased significantly since peaking in
the mid 1970’s. Armenter (2015) considers the possibility that the decrease in
the BLS’s measure is driven by the assumption that the proprietors pay them-
selves the average wage in their industry. When he instead fixes labor’s share of
proprietor’s income at 85 percent, labor’ share since 1975 still falls, but by less.

Our model predicts both a rise in code relative to other economic input and an
increase in the share of output attributable to intangibles, i.e., inputs that are
  16 Other models, without smart machines, deliver this conclusion. Karabarbounis and

Neiman (2013) attribute the decline to capital accumulation and their finding of gross substi-
tutability between capital and labor. Rather than capital abundance, Rognlie (2015) argues
that the decrease in the labor share is due to the scarcity of land. He attributes the decline
in labors’ share to an increase in property values and imputed rents.
  17 Capital-hours ratio; BLS multifactor productivity series, Table PG-2-3. Records date

back to 1949.
  18 National income is measured at producer prices.




                                             24
neither physical capital or labor. Code stocks have certainly increased since the
invention of the digital computer and the silicon chip. Figure 14 reports stocks
of R&D and software as a share of total U.S. fixed assets. According to the
BEA, software grew from essentially zero percent of capital in 1960 to over 1.5
percent today. Combined software and R&D stocks have grown as a share of
                                                                           19
capital by about 3.5 percentage points over the same period.

Many papers suggest that the BEA underestimates the stock of organizational
capital and code complementary to computers. Brynjolfson, Hitt, and Yang
(2002) find that firms with large investments in computer capital have much
higher valuations, that computer-capital investments lead to disproportionately
large increases in firm valuations, and that firms that make such investments
tend to be more productive in future years. Similarly, Hulten and Hao (2008)
find that the book value of R&D-intensive firms in 2006 explains only 31 percent
of their valuation. Both these papers argue that only firms who have made large
investments in organizational and technological capital are able to implement
innovative technologies.

Code and software controlled by firms that are not counted as assets by the BEA
still increase the productivity of firms. Such firms would be more valuable than
they should be based on only their observed assets. Figure 15 shows the value of
the U.S. corporate sector less the replacement cost of its physical and financial
assets.20 This measure of the stock of intangible assets is highly cyclical due
to the volatility of the stock market. Despite this, it shows a dramatic secular
increase starting in the mid 1970s. For firms in the S&P 500, intangible assets
increased from 17 percent of market value in 1975 to 84 percent in 2015 (Ocean
Tomo, 2015).

Hall (2001) argues that the increase in the value of economy-wide intangible
assets, and therefore Tobin’s (average) q, is due to the creation of code and
organizational capital within firms, which he calls ‘e-capital.’ Barkai (2016) and
Barkai and Benzell (2018) also note that US firms’ output per unit of observed
capital has increased even as the marginal cost of capital (as measured by the
real interest rate) has decreased since the mid-1980s. Simultaneous decreases in
  19 These numbers are likely underestimates of the increasing importance of programmers,

scientists and engineers in the economy. Software is decomposed in NIPA table 2.1 into own
account, prepackaged and custom software. The true value of prepackaged software in the
economy is likely undercounted because it is often pirated. It is also often free or sold at a
discount in order to cross subsidize some other product or subscription (see Parker and Van
Alstyne, 2005). BEA estimates of firms’ internal creation of their own software are based on
very conservative assumptions about the share of programmers who are developing new code,
rather than maintaining old code, and the rate at which the software stock decays.
  20 U.S. Corporate intangible assets are calculated as U.S. corporate equity less corporate net

worth from Federal Reserve series Z.1.



                                              25
both capital and labor’s share of income are consistent with an increasing share
for intangibles like code. Barkai (2016) argues that the stock of intangible assets
needed to explain the wedge between the observed average product of capital
and its marginal cost is implausibly large. The level of intangible assets in 2014
would need to be 42 Trillion (or 54% of U.S. wealth) in order to explain the
discrepancy. However, an extremely rapid increase in the share of intangibles
in total assets is a phenomena implied by our model.

Long-run immiseration in our model hinges on a long-run decline in capital per
worker and a corresponding increase in the interest rate. While capital per
worker increased at an average rate of 2.5 percent from 1985 to the present,
it has been decreasing since 2011 at .5 percent per year on average. Whether
this short-term trend continues remains to be seen. But this measure signifi-
cantly underestimates the extent to which physical capital per person has de-
creased. Capital services as measured by the BLS include accumulation of
intellectual property and capital quality increases (through the deflator) that
are attributable in our model not to physical capital per worker but to larger
stocks of code.

On the other hand, real interest rates have decreased steadily and dramatically
since the mid-1980s. Almost all models of automation predict an increase in
interest rates, at least in the short run, as a result of an advance in automation
technology. Benzell and Brynjolfsson (2018) discuss this riddle. They propose
that digital abundance has increased scarcity of an inelastically supplied com-
plement to capital, code and ordinary labor. Integrating this additional factor
of production to our model would generate decreasing interest rates while pre-
serving all other qualitative results.



7    Conclusion

Will smart machines, which are rapidly replacing workers in a wide range of jobs,
produce economic misery or prosperity? Our two-period, OLG model admits
both outcomes. But it does firmly predict three things - a long-run decline
in labor’s share of income (which appears underway among OECD members),
tech-booms followed by tech-busts, and a growing dependency of current output
on past software investment.

In our simple model, long-run immiseration is caused by a reduction in labor
income and, thereby, saving and capital formation. Yes, the economy has bet-



                                        26
ter technology. But it has less capital. With the right parameters, the latter
factor can outweigh the former. Immiseration is more likely the smaller the
propensity to save and the smaller the elasticity of substitution of capital for
code. Our model’s saving propensity. But with different preferences it would
decrease (increase) with the interest rate. In this case, the scope for long-term
immiseration would be greater (smaller). As the appendix shows, our results
can be generalized to consider profit-maximizing, directed technological change
in which AI can replace labor or capital. If AI is better at replacing labor,
immiseration can readily follow.

Making higher code retention a win win for all current and future workers as
well as initial elderly requires taxing high-skilled workers who benefit from the
models technological breakthrough and investing the tax proceeds. This keeps
the capital stock and wages from falling. Other policies for managing the rise
of smart machines may backfire. For example, policies restricting labor supply
will reduce total labor income. While this may temporarily raise wages, it will
reduce saving, investment and the capital formation on which wages depend.

To the extent that AI is non rival, countries must weigh several factors in de-
termining whether to grant AI developers property rights to their creations.
Excludabilty increases the return to software development, increasing long-run
levels of code, wages, national income, and welfare. It also lowers the poten-
tial for technologically driven business cycles. On the other hand, treating AI
as a public good by, for example, denying AI software patents, ignoring AI
copyrights, failing to prosecute software piracy, or mandating that new code be
open-source, produces worse results along these dimensions. On the other hand,
it increases short-term welfare as well as firm entry. This last implication is an
increasingly important desiradatum as countries become concerned about the
concentration of power in the hands of a small number of superstar technology
companies.

Our simple model illustrates the range of things that smart machines can do
for us as well as do to us. Its central message is disturbing. Absent appropriate
fiscal policy, which redistributes from winners to losers, smart machines can
mean collective long-term misery. Ironically, the same AI that helps us produce
more in the present can limit our production in the future.




                                       27
References

Abel, Andrew and Laurence J Kotlikoff, “Intergenerational Altruism and
    the Effectiveness of Fiscal Policy: New Tests Based on Cohort Data,” in
    “Savings and bequests” 1994, chapter 7, pp. 31–42.

Acemoglu, Daron, “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed
    Technical Change and Wage Inequality,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, nov 1998, 113 (4), 1055–1089.

    , “Directed technical change,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2002, 69
    (4), 781–809.

     and David Autor, “Chapter 12 – Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Im-
    plications for Employment and Earnings,” in “Handbook of Labor Eco-
    nomics,” Vol. 4 2011, pp. 1043–1171.

     and Pascual Restrepo, “The Race between Man and Machine: Im-
    plications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment,”
    American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (6), 1488–1542.

    , David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H Hanson, and Brendan
    Price, “Return of the Solow Paradox? IT, Productivity, and Employment
    in U.S. Manufacturing,” jan 2014.

Aghion, Philippe, Benjamin F Jones, and Charles I Jones, “Artificial
   Intelligence and Economic Growth,” 2017.

Agrawal, Ajay K, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, “Prediction, Judg-
    ment, and Uncertainty,” in “Economics of Artificial Intelligence,” Univer-
    sity of Chicago Press, 2017.

Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Is the
    Extended Family Altruistically Linked? Direct Tests Using Micro Data,”
    American Economic Review, 1992, 82 (5), 1177–98.

Altonji, Joseph G, Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence Kotlikoff, “Parental
    Altruism and Inter Vivos Transfers: Theory and Evidence,” dec 1995.

Armenter, Roc, “A bit of a miracle no more: the decline of the labor share,”
   Business Review; Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Research Depart-
    ment, 2015, (Third Quarter), 1–8.

Arrow, Kenneth J., “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing,” The
    Review of Economic Studies, 1962, 3 (June), 155–173.


                                     28
Autor, David, “Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of
   workplace automation,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2015, 29
    (3), 3–30.

Autor, David H. and David Dorn, “The growth of low-skill service job
   and the polarization of the U.S. labor market,” The American Economic
    Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1553–1597.

    , Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane, “The Skill Content of Recent
    Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, nov 2003, 118 (4), 1279–1333.

Barkai, Simcha, “Declining Labor and Capital Shares,” 2016.

     and Seth G. Benzell, “70 Years of US Corporate Profits,” 2018.

Benzell, Seth G. and Erik Brynjolfsson, “Centralization of Information
   and Authority in the Digital Economy,” in “Forthcoming in World In-
    tellectual Property Organization Technology Trends: Report on Artificial
    Intelligence” 2018.

      and        , “Digital Abundance and Scarce Genius: Implications for
    Wages, Interest Rates, and Growth,” 2018.

Bridgman, Benjamin et al., “Is Labor’s Loss Capital’s Gain? Gross versus
    Net Labor Shares,” Washington: US Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2014.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee, The second machine age: Work,
   progress, and prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies, WW Norton &
   Company, 2014.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Occupational Employment Statistics,” March
    2017.

Center for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, “White paper: Artificial
   Intelligence Collides with Patent Law,” April 2018.

Cockburn, Iain M, Rebecca Henderson, and Scott Stern, “The Impact
   of Artificial Intelligence on Innovation,” in “NBER Economics of Artificial
   Intelligence Toronto Conference,” University of Chicago Press, 2017.

Costinot, Arnaud and Iván Werning, “Robots, Trade, and Luddism,”
    mimeo, 2018.

Frey, Carl Benedikt and Michael A Osborne, “The future of employment:
    how susceptible are jobs to computerisation,” Retrieved September, 2013.


                                     29
Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons, “Explaining Job
   Polarization in Europe: The Roles of Technology, Globalization and Insti-
    tutions,” CEP Discussion Papers.

Gordon, Robert J, The rise and fall of American growth: The US standard
   of living since the civil war, Princeton University Press, 2017.

Guerreiro, Joao, Sergio Rebelo, and Pedro Teles, “Should Robots be
    Taxed?,” 2017.

Hayashi, Fumio, Joseph Altonji, and Laurence Kotlikoff, “Risk-Sharing
   between and within Families,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (2), 261–94.

Hemous, David and Morten Olsen, “The Rise of the Machines: Automa-
    tion, Horizontal Innovation and Income Inequality,” CEPR Discussion Pa-
    pers.

Howitt, Peter, “Steady endogenous growth with population and r. & d. inputs
    growing,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (4), 715–730.

Internal Revenue Service, “Publication 535 (2015), Business Expenses.”

Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, “The Global Decline of the
    Labor Share.”

Katz, Lawrence F. and Robert A. Margo, “Technical Change and the
   Relative Demand for Skilled Labor: The United States in Historical Per-
    spective.”

Kelley, Kevin, “The Three Breakthroughs That Have Finally Unleashed AI
    on the World,” Wired Online Edition, oct 2014.

Keynes, John Maynard, “Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren,” in
    “Essays in Persuasion,” New York: W.W.Norton & Co, 1963, pp. 358–373.

Kondratieff, Nikolai D, “The Long Waves in Economic Life,” The Review of
   Economics and Statistics, 1935, 17 (6), 105–115.

Lucas, Robert E., “On the mechanics of economic development,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics, jul 1988, 22 (1), 3–42.

Madrigal, Alexis C., “Inside Google’s Secret Drone Delivery Program,” The
   Atlantic Online Edition, aug 2014.

Mansfield, Edwin, “Long Waves and Technological Innovation,” American
    Economic Review, 1983, 73 (2), 141–45.



                                    30
Marx, Karl, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, 1992 ed., Penguin
   Classics, 1887.

Mishel, Lawrence, John Schmitt, and Heidi Shierholz, “Don’t blame
    the robots. Assessing the job polarization explanation of growing wage
    inequality,” 2013.

Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps, “Investment in Humans, Tech-
    nological Diffusion, and Economic Growth,” American Economic Review,
    1966, 56 (1/2), 69–75.

Ocean Tomo LLC, “Annual Study of Intangible Asset Market Value Ocean
    Tomo, LLC,” 2015.

of Economic Analysis, U.S. Bureau, “National Income and Product Ac-
    counts.”

of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Board, “Financial Accounts
    of the United States - Series Z.1.”

Ortigueira, Salvador and Manuel S Santos, “On the speed of convergence
    in endogenous growth models,” The American Economic Review, 1997,
    pp. 383–399.

O’Rourke, Kevin, Ahmed Rahman, and Alan Taylor, “Luddites, the in-
   dustrial revolution, and the demographic transition,” Journal of Economic
   Growth, 2013, 18 (4), 373–409.

Peretto, Pietro F. and John J. Seater, “Factor-eliminating technical
    change,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (4), 459–473.

Rebelo, Sergio, “Long-run policy analysis and long-run growth,” Journal of
   political Economy, 1991, 99 (3), 500–521.

Rognlie, Matthew, “Deciphering the fall and rise in the net capital share:
   accumulation or scarcity?,” Brookings papers on economic activity, 2016,
   2015 (1), 1–69.

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political
    Economy, 1990, 98 (5), S71–S102.

Rosenberg, Nathan and Claudio R. Frischtak, “Long Waves and Eco-
   nomic Growth: A Critical Appraisal,” American Economic Review, 1983,
    73 (2), 146–151.

Sachs, Jeffrey D and Laurence J Kotlikoff, “Smart Machines and Long-
    Term Misery,” dec 2012.


                                      31
    , Seth G Benzell, and Guillermo LaGarda, “Robots: Curse or bless-
    ing? A basic framework,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
    Research 2015.

Schumpeter, Joseph A., Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical and Sta-
    tistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process, New York: McGraw Hill Book
    Co., 1939.

Sidrauski, Miguel, “Rational choice and patterns of growth in a monetary
    economy,” The American Economic Review, 1967, 57 (2), 534–544.

Stiglitz, Joseph E and Anton Korinek, “Artificial Intelligence, Worker-
    Replacing Technological Change, and Income Distribution,” in “Economics
    of Artificial Intelligence,” University of Chicago Press, 2017.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “May 2013 OES National Industry-Specific
    Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates.”

    , “Multifactor Productivity and Related Measures.”

Uzawa, Hirofumi, “Optimum technical change in an aggregative model of
   economic growth,” International economic review, 1965, 6 (1), 18–31.

Website of the National Archives, “Luddites: The Growth of Political
   Rights in Britain in the 19th Century.”

Zeira, Joseph, “Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth,” The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 1998, 113 (4), 1091–1117.

Zuleta, Hernando, “Factor saving innovations and capital income share in
    OLG models,” 2004.




                                    32
     Young: C1,t + qt S1,t + Kt+1 + pt δAt
                   Saving + Consumption

  Young


                      Labor Income                       Old: C2,t+1 + qt+1 S2,t+1
                                                                  Consumption
                   = z(mt + δpt )
                                             Old


                                                           Return on Savings and Coding
                                                   = (1 + rt+1 )Kt+1 + mt+1 At δ + pt+1 At δ 2

Figure 1: Overlapping generations budget constraint summary for high-tech
worker in the corn industry who is young in period t.

                                 Table 1
                    Parameters for Immiserating Growth
                 Parameter Description             Model Parameter           Value
          Elasticity in Service/Prayer Sector            εs                   ∞
          Elasticity in Goods/Corn Sector                εy                   1
          Prayer High-Tech Input Share Param.            γ                   0.5
          Good Capital Input Share Param.                α                   0.5
          Code Retention Rate                            δ             0 shocked to 0.7
          Saving Preference Param.                       φ                   0.2
          High-Tech Worker Quantity                      H                    1
          Low-Tech Worker Quantity                       G                    1
          Prayer Consumption Share                       κ                   0.5
          Code Writing Productivity                      z                    1
          TFP in Corn                                    Dy                   1
          TFP in Prayer                                  Ds                   1

Table 1: This table gives parameter values for the first pair of illustrations of the
effects of a permanent increase in the depreciation rate, δ, from zero to .7. We take
the intermediate value of .5 for κ, α, and γ. The productivity terms z, DY , and DS ,
are set to one.




                                             33
                                  Figure 2
                             Immiserating Growth




Figure 2: Transition paths based on table 1. Compensating Differential references the
percentage change increase in steady-state consumption needed for initial steady-state
households’ lifetime utility to equal the lifetime utility of households who are old in
a given period on the transition path. Output, capital and code stocks are in units.
Wage and national income are deflated. Wage is total income in youth from labor in
any occupation. Price of code, interest rate, and price of prayer are in units of the
numeraire, corn.




                                          34
                                   Figure 3
                          Welfare Improving Growth
                         (higher saving rate, φ = .85)




Figure 3: Transition paths based on table 1, with the exception of a higher saving
rate (φ = .85). Compensating Differential references the percentage change increase in
steady-state consumption needed for initial steady-state households’ lifetime utility to
equal the lifetime utility of households who are old in a given period on the transition
path. Output, capital and code stocks are in units. Wage and national income are
deflated. Wage is total income in youth from labor in any occupation. Price of code,
interest rate, and price of prayer are in units of the numeraire, corn.




                                          35
                                   Figure 4
                          Inequality-Flipping Growth




Figure 4: Transition paths based on table 2. Compensating Differential references the
percentage change increase in steady-state consumption needed for initial steady-state
households’ lifetime utility to equal the lifetime utility of households who are old in
a given period on the transition path. Output, capital and code stocks are in units.
Wage and national income are deflated. Wage is total income in youth from labor in
any occupation. Price of code, interest rate, and price of prayer are in units of the
numeraire, corn.




                                          36
                                  Figure 5
                           Changed Corn Preference




Figure 5: Transition paths based on table 2, except in addition to the δ shock, κ
is simultaneously shocked from .5 to .25. Compensating Differential references the
percentage change increase in steady-state consumption needed for initial steady-state
households’ lifetime utility to equal the lifetime utility of households who are old in
a given period on the transition path. Output, capital and code stocks are in units.
Wage and national income are deflated. Wage is total income in youth from labor in
any occupation. Price of code, interest rate, and price of prayer are in units of the
numeraire, corn.




                                          37
                                  Table 2
                         Inequality-Flipping Growth
                Parameter Description          Model Parameter        Value
         Elasticity in Service/Prayer Sector         εs                 1
         Elasticity in Goods/Corn Sector             εy                 1
         Prayer High-Tech Input Share Param.         γ                 0.5
         Good Capital Input Share Param.             α                 0.5
         Code-Retention Rate                         δ           0 shocked to 0.7
         Saving Preference Parameter                 φ                 0.7
         High-Tech Worker Quantity                   H                  2
         Low-Tech Worker Quantity                    G                  1
         Prayer Consumption Share                    κ                 0.5
         Code Writing Productivity                   z                  1
         TFP in Corn                                 Dy                 1
         TFP in Prayer                               Ds                 1

Table 2: This table gives parameter values for the second pair of illustrations of the
effects of a permanent increase in the depreciation rate, δ, from zero to .7.




                                          38
                               Figure 6
                      Comparing Four Case Studies




Figure 6: Transition paths from the first 4 cases presented (immiserating growth,
etc.) superimposed.




                                       39
                                             Figure 7
                                National Income, Sensitivity Analysis

                                           National Income

                      150
                      140
                      130
                      120
      Indexed Value




                      110
                      100
                      90              Baseline                  kappa from 0.5 to 0.25
                      80              Low Savings (phi = 0.1)   High Savings (phi = 0.9)
                      70              Subs Prayer               Comp Prayer
                                      Comp Corn                 kappa from 0.5 to 0.75
                      60
                                      Subs Corn                 Shock z
                      50
                            -   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                                Period


Figure 7: Illustration of the 10 sensitivity analysis cases superimposed. ‘Subs’ refer
to cases in which the production technology of a sector is more substitutable. ‘Com’
refer to cases in which the production technology is more complementary.




                                                    40
                           Figure 8
  Long-Run Compensating Differential for Alternative Saving and
            Code-Retention and Productivity Shocks




Figure 8: Compensating Differential references the ratio of consumption needed to
achieve lifetime utility of households in the long run to initial steady-state consumption
less 1. Parameters not on axes are given in table 1. X’s denote parameter combinations
with transition paths discussed in the text.



                                           41
                               Figure 9
  Long-Run Compensating Differential for Alternative Saving and
     Elasticity of Substitution for Low and High-Tech Workers




Figure 9: Compensating Differential references the ratio of consumption needed to
achieve lifetime utility of households in the long run to initial steady-state consumption
less 1. Parameters not on axes are given in table 2. X’s denote parameter combination
in the inequality flipping case study.
                                           42
                                                                                                                               Baseline

                                                                      Labor                            National       Output                                                         Wage                         High-Tech   Compensating Differentials
                    Period           ǫs    ǫy     δ    φ     High-Tech   Low-Tech    κ     γ     z     Income     Corn    Prayers    K       A       p       q        r     Low-Tech   High-Tech    Labor Share    Coding     High-Tech     Low-Tech
              Initial Steady State   1.0   1.0   0.0   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     100      100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0     -     100.0   100.0     50.0          100.0      75.0         50.0        0.0             0.0
                        1            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     107      106.1    93.5     100.0   112.6   100.0   116.3   106.1     43.7          124.4      75.3         56.3        -2.5           -2.5
                        2            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     112      117.5    106.4     96.5   143.0    83.9   116.2   121.7     56.7          109.2      66.1         43.3        20.3            5.2
                        3            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     112      116.0    109.1     88.3   152.4    80.3   110.5   131.4     59.5          101.3      64.0         40.5         8.8           23.3
                        4            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     111      113.2    109.6     82.1   156.0    78.0   106.0   137.8     60.1          96.6       63.3         39.9         4.5           24.4
                        10           1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     110      111.0    109.7     78.1   157.6    74.3   102.9   142.1     60.2          93.8       63.0         39.8         2.3           23.0
                  Steady State       1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     108      107.0    109.6     71.6   159.8    74.1    97.8   149.4     60.0          89.2       62.5         40.0        -1.0           18.8


                                                                                                                Prayer Taste Shock κ from 0.5 to 0.25

                                                                      Labor                            National       Output                                                         Wage                         High-Tech   Compensating Differentials
                    Period           ǫs    ǫy     δ    φ     High-Tech   Low-Tech    κ     γ     z     Income     Corn    Prayers    K       A       p       q        r     Low-Tech   High-Tech    Labor Share    Coding     High-Tech     Low-Tech
              Initial Steady State   1.0   1.0   0.0   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.25   0.5   1.0     100      100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0     -     100.0   100.0     25.0          100.0      62.5         75.0         0.0            0.0
                        1            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.25   0.5   1.0     107      101.7     94.7    100.0   103.4   100.0   111.1   101.7     22.4          117.3      62.8         77.6         -0.8          -0.8
                        2            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.25   0.5   1.0     112      114.1    112.9     91.4   142.5   55.3    107.1   124.9     31.9           94.9      49.7         68.1        22.4            9.8
                        3            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.25   0.5   1.0     108      108.7    118.0     74.8   158.2   49.9     96.0   145.4     34.8           81.3      46.2         65.2         5.7           34.8
                        4            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.25   0.5   1.0     105      102.6    119.6     63.9   164.8    46.9    88.0   160.6     35.7           73.6      44.9         64.3         -4.1          33.5
                        10           1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.25   0.5   1.0     102       98.2    120.0     57.5   167.7    43.2    83.1   170.8     36.0           69.2      44.3         64.0         -9.8          28.9
                  Steady State       1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.25   0.5   1.0      98       91.6    120.1     49.3   170.5    43.0    76.3   186.0     36.1           63.6      43.8         63.9        -17.3          19.2




43
                                                                                                                Prayer Taste Shock κ from 0.5 to 0.75

                                                                      Labor                            National       Output                                                         Wage                         High-Tech   Compensating Differentials
                    Period           ǫs    ǫy     δ    φ     High-Tech   Low-Tech    κ     γ     z     Income     Corn    Prayers    K       A       p       q        r     Low-Tech   High-Tech    Labor Share    Coding     High-Tech     Low-Tech
              Initial Steady State   1.0   1.0   0.0   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.75   0.5   1.0     100      100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0     -     100.0   100.0     75.0          100.0      87.5         25.0         0.0            0.0
                        1            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.75   0.5   1.0     106      119.0     92.8    100.0   141.5   100.0   120.9   119.0     64.6          130.3      86.9         35.4        -4.9           -4.9
                        2            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.75   0.5   1.0     109      130.6    101.1    103.8   164.3   119.0   127.0   125.8     76.6          125.6      81.9         23.4        14.1           -1.7
                        3            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.75   0.5   1.0     109      132.8    102.4    105.1   167.7   119.4   128.4   126.3     78.6          125.5      81.2         21.4         7.6           10.0
                        4            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.75   0.5   1.0     110      133.4    102.6    105.9   168.0   119.7   129.1   126.0     79.0          125.8      81.2         21.0         6.8           11.9
                        10           1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.75   0.5   1.0     110      133.6    102.7    106.4   167.8   120.5   129.5   125.6     79.0          126.2      81.2         21.0         6.7           12.4
                  Steady State       1.0   1.0   0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.75   0.5   1.0     110      134.1    102.7    107.6   167.2   120.7   130.5   124.7     79.1          127.1      81.2         20.9         6.9           12.7


                                                                                                                      Low Saving Rate f = 0.1

                                                                      Labor                            National       Output                                                         Wage                         High-Tech   Compensating Differentials
                    Period           ǫs    ǫy     δ     f    High-Tech   Low-Tech    κ     γ     z     Income     Corn    Prayers    K       A       p       q        r     Low-Tech   High-Tech    Labor Share    Coding     High-Tech     Low-Tech
              Initial Steady State   1.0   1.0   0.0   0.1      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     100      100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0     -     100.0   100.0     50.0          100.0      75.0         50.0         0.0            0.0
                        1            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.1      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     102      101.2     98.8    100.0   102.3   100.0   105.6   101.2     48.8          106.9      75.4         51.2         -0.1          -0.1
                        2            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.1      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     104      100.8    110.5    78.7    129.0   47.4     93.2   128.0     61.1          84.4       65.5         38.9          6.7          4.3
                        3            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.1      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     101      93.2     113.1    63.6    136.5   43.9     83.4   146.5     64.0          73.7       63.4         36.0         -9.4          10.7
                        4            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.1      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     99       88.0     113.8    55.7    138.8   42.2     77.9   157.8     64.7          68.4       62.8         35.3        -15.9          7.6
                        10           1.0   1.0   0.5   0.1      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     98       84.9     113.9    51.7    139.6   40.3     74.8   164.4     64.9          65.7       62.6         35.1        -19.0          4.8
                  Steady State       1.0   1.0   0.5   0.1      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     96       81.4     114.0    47.3    140.2   40.2     71.5   172.2     64.9          62.7       62.5         35.1        -22.4          0.8


                                                                                                                      High Saving Rate f = 0.9

                                                                      Labor                            National       Output                                                         Wage                         High-Tech   Compensating Differentials
                    Period           ǫs    ǫy     δ     f    High-Tech   Low-Tech    κ     γ     z     Income     Corn    Prayers    K       A       p       q        r     Low-Tech   High-Tech    Labor Share    Coding     High-Tech     Low-Tech
              Initial Steady State   1.0   1.0   0.0   0.9      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     100      100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0     -     100.0   100.0     50.0          100.0      75.0         50.0        0.0             0.0
                        1            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.9      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     111      110.2     88.6    100.0   121.5   100.0   117.7   110.2     39.2          132.9      74.3         60.8        -4.7           -4.7
                        2            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.9      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     117      126.9    103.2    104.4   154.3   106.5   126.1   121.6     53.2          122.3      65.6         46.8        25.0           -1.9
                        3            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.9      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     118      129.4    106.3    102.0   164.1   104.4   125.2   126.8     56.6          117.7      63.8         43.4        16.4           23.9
                        4            1.0   1.0   0.5   0.9      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     117      128.9    107.0    99.2    167.4   102.9   123.2   129.9     57.3          115.1      63.2         42.7        13.7           28.6
                        10           1.0   1.0   0.5   0.9      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     117      128.0    107.2    97.0    168.9   100.1   121.5   131.9     57.4          113.4      62.9         42.6        12.4           28.8
                  Steady State       1.0   1.0   0.5   0.9      1.0           1.0   0.5    0.5   1.0     116      125.7    107.0    92.4    171.0   99.7    117.7   136.0     57.2          110.0      62.5         42.8        10.5           26.5




     Table 3: Sensitivity Analysis. In all examples, the δ is shocked from 0 in the initial steady state to .5. Simulations subsequent to the baseline have
     one (highlighted) parameter changed. Output of both products are in units, not at market prices. All endogenous variables are indexed.
                                                                                   Table 3 Sensitivity Analysis (Continued)

                                                                                               Perfect Substitutability in Prayer Sector ǫs = ∞

                                                              Labor                           National      Output                                                          Wage                         High-Tech   Compensating Differentials
           Period           ǫs     ǫy    δ     φ     High-Tech   Low-Tech   κ     γ      z    Income     Corn    Prayers    K       A       p       q        r     Low-Tech   High-Tech    Labor Share    Coding     High-Tech     Low-Tech
     Initial Steady State   ∞     1.0    0.0   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     100      100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0     -     100.0   100.0    100.0          100.0      75.0         66.7         0.0            0.0
               1            ∞     1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     108      109.3     90.3    100.0   119.4   100.0   122.8   109.3    100.0          122.8      75.2         79.6        -3.2           -3.2
                2           ∞     1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     113      116.1    111.0     97.9   137.7   85.8    112.2   118.6    100.0          112.2      65.4         52.0        17.6           17.6
                3           ∞     1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     111      111.3    112.9     86.6   143.0   81.4    103.6   128.5    100.0          103.6      63.9         49.4        14.1           14.1
                4           ∞     1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     109      107.3    112.9     79.0   145.6    78.7    98.1   135.8    100.0           98.1      63.3         49.4        10.3           10.3
               10           ∞     1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     108      104.6    112.8     74.4   147.2    74.4    94.7   140.7    100.0           94.7      63.0         49.6         7.8            7.8
         Steady State       ∞     1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     106      100.3    112.5     67.2   149.8    74.1    89.3   149.4    100.0           89.3      62.5         50.0         3.6            3.6


                                                                                              Strong Complementarity in Prayer Sector ǫs = 1.0

                                                              Labor                           National      Output                                                          Wage                         High-Tech   Compensating Differentials
           Period           ǫs     ǫy    δ     φ     High-Tech   Low-Tech   κ     γ      z    Income     Corn    Prayers    K       A       p       q        r     Low-Tech   High-Tech    Labor Share    Coding     High-Tech     Low-Tech
     Initial Steady State   1.0   1.0    0.0   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     100      100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0     -     100.0   100.0     31.5          100.0      75.0         43.8         0.0            0.0
                1           1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     107      106.0     93.6    100.0   112.3   100.0   116.0   106.0     25.8          124.4      75.3         49.2        -2.4           -2.4
                2           1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     112      117.7    106.1     96.5   143.6    83.7   116.6   122.0     38.0          108.8      66.1         38.3        20.4           -1.6
                3           1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     112      116.6    108.6     88.5   153.7    80.1   111.5   131.8     41.1          101.0      64.0         35.9        8.3            30.5
                4           1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     111      114.1    109.2     82.6   157.6    77.9   107.2   138.1     41.8           96.4      63.3         35.4        3.7            35.1




44
               10           1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     110      111.9    109.2     78.7   159.3    74.3   104.2   142.3     41.9           93.6      62.9         35.3        1.5            34.4
         Steady State       1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0     109      108.0    109.1     72.3   161.4    74.1    99.1   149.4     41.7           89.2      62.5         35.4        -1.7           30.0


                                                                                               Strong Complementarity in Corn Sector eǫy = 0.8

                                                              Labor                           National      Output                                                          Wage                         High-Tech   Compensating Differentials
           Period           ǫs     ǫy    δ     φ     High-Tech   Low-Tech   κ     γ      z    Income     Corn    Prayers    K       A       p       q        r     Low-Tech   High-Tech    Labor Share    Coding     High-Tech     Low-Tech
     Initial Steady State   1.0   0.8    0.0   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    100.0     100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0     -     100.0   100.0     52.1          100.0      72.9         47.9         0.0           0.0
                1           1.0   0.8    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    106.1     105.0    94.7     100.0   111.3   100.0   113.4   106.3     46.7          119.8      72.9         53.3        -1.8           -1.8
                2           1.0   0.8    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    110.4     113.1    108.2     96.7   137.1    74.6   110.5   121.5     61.0          102.1      64.0         39.0        18.4            6.1
                3           1.0   0.8    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    109.1     109.1    111.1     87.9   143.1    69.8   102.9   131.1     64.3           92.7      62.1         35.7         5.3           23.3
                4           1.0   0.8    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    107.2     104.4    111.7     80.8   144.6    66.6    96.8   137.8     65.1           86.6      61.4         34.9         0.0           23.3
               10           1.0   0.8    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    105.5     100.7    111.9     75.7   144.9    59.6    92.3   142.8     65.2           82.5      61.0         34.8        -3.1           20.9
         Steady State       1.0   0.8    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    101.5      92.3    111.9     65.2   145.0    58.5    82.7   154.3     65.3           73.9      60.3         34.7        -9.3           13.6




                                                                                                Strong Substitutability in Corn Sector ǫy = 10

                                                              Labor                           National      Output                                                          Wage                         High-Tech   Compensating Differentials
           Period           ǫs     ǫy    δ     φ     High-Tech   Low-Tech   κ     γ      z    Income     Corn    Prayers    K       A       p       q        r     Low-Tech   High-Tech    Labor Share    Coding     High-Tech     Low-Tech
     Initial Steady State   1.0   10.0   0.0   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    100.0     100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0     -     100.0   100.0     45.8          100.0      79.6         54.2         0.0           0.0
                1           1.0   10.0   0.7   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    122.2     114.9    83.7     100.0   125.3   100.0   149.2   101.4     32.0          178.3      82.8         68.0        -9.2           -9.2
                2           1.0   10.0   0.7   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    130.9     147.9    98.1      87.7   190.9   160.7   170.7   105.4     44.0          174.1      72.0         56.0        42.5           -0.3
                3           1.0   10.0   0.7   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    133.0     160.4    101.4     63.2   231.3   156.9   173.2   109.8     47.0          170.8      68.9         53.0        35.0           29.8
                4           1.0   10.0   0.7   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    133.7     166.8    102.5     44.2   257.7   154.0   172.5   114.2     48.0          168.4      67.3         52.0        33.1           36.7
               10           1.0   10.0   0.7   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    134.2     170.8    103.1     31.7   275.2   148.0   171.7   118.4     48.6          166.6      66.3         51.4        32.3           38.9
         Steady State       1.0   10.0   0.7   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    136.4     178.0    104.5     12.9   304.8   147.6   170.6   130.0     50.0          163.3      64.6         50.0        31.4           43.2




                                                                                              Code Writing Productivity Shock z from 1.0 to 1.5

                                                              Labor                           National      Output                                                          Wage                         High-Tech   Compensating Differentials
           Period           ǫs     ǫy    δ     φ     High-Tech   Low-Tech   κ     γ     z     Income     Corn    Prayers    K       A       p       q        r     Low-Tech   High-Tech    Labor Share    Coding     High-Tech     Low-Tech
     Initial Steady State   1.0   1.0    0.0   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.0    100.0     100.0    100.0    100.0   100.0     -     100.0   100.0     50.0          100.0      75.0         50.0         0.0            0.0
                1           1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.5    119.1     132.7     90.9    100.0   176.2   100.0   136.0   132.7     41.3          149.7      74.1         58.7        -1.5           -1.5
                2           1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.5    130.5     157.7    105.3    112.3   221.7    76.8   149.6   140.5     55.5          142.1      65.0         44.5        35.1           11.6
                3           1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.5    132.8     162.2    108.6    112.4   234.0    75.8   150.4   144.3     59.0          138.5      63.3         41.0        25.9           39.6
                4           1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.5    133.1     162.3    109.4    110.9   237.6    75.2   149.4   146.4     59.8          136.6      62.8         40.2        23.3           45.3
               10           1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.5    133.0     161.7    109.5    109.5   238.8    74.1   148.3   147.7     60.0          135.4      62.7         40.0        22.2           46.2
         Steady State       1.0   1.0    0.5   0.5      1.0           1.0   0.5   0.5   1.5    132.4     160.1    109.5    106.9   239.9    74.1   146.2   149.8     60.0          133.5      62.5         40.0        21.0           45.2
                                   Figure 10
                       Rival, Excludable (Private) Code




Figure 10: Transition paths based on table 4’s parameters. Compensating Differential
references the percentage change in initial steady-state consumption needed for the
utility levels of workers in the initial steady state to equal their respective transition-
path utility levels. Prayer sector output is measured in units of prayers. Corn output
is net of firm entry fixed costs.




                                            45
                              Table 4
             Parameters for Institutional Simulations
 Model Parameter                  Role                      Value
       εs         Elasticity in Service/Prayer Sector         1
       εy          Elasticity in Goods/Corn Sector            1
        γ        Prayer High-Tech Input Share Param.         0.5
        α         Good Capital Input Share Param.            0.5
        δ                Code Retention Rate          0 shocked to 0.25
        φ                     Saving Rate                    0.5
       H             High-Tech Worker Quantity                1
        G             Low-Tech Worker Quantity                1
        κ             Prayer Consumption Share               0.5
        z             Code Writing Productivity               1
       Dy                TFP in Good Sector                   1
       Ds                TFP in Prayer Sector                 1
        C                   Firm Setup cost                 .055
        A                Exogenous Free Code                 .25

Table 4: This table gives parameter values for illustrations of the effects of a one-
time, permanent increase in the depreciation rate, δ, from zero to .25 given different
institutional settings.




                                         46
                               Figure 11
                 Non-Rival, Non-Excludable (Public) Code




Figure 11: Transition paths based on table 4’s parameters. Compensating Differential
references the percentage change in initial steady-state consumption needed for the
utility levels of workers in the initial steady state to equal their respective transition-
path utility levels. Prayer sector output is measured in units of prayers. Corn output
is net of firm entry fixed costs.




                                            47
                                 Figure 12
                    Non-Rival, Excludable (Private) Code




Figure 12: Transition paths based on table 4’s parameters. Compensating Differential
references the percentage change in initial steady-state consumption needed for the
utility levels of workers in the initial steady state to equal their respective transition-
path utility levels. Prayer sector output is measured in units of prayers. Corn output
is net of firm entry fixed costs.




                                            48
                             Figure 13
        Three Measures of Labor’s Share of Income in the U.S.




Figure 13: Three measures of the U.S. labor share. The orange curve, labor’s share
of non-proprietorship income, is calculated as employee compensation divided by na-
tional income at producer prices less proprietorship income (NIPA table 1.12, lines
2/(1-25+26-18). The gray curve, labor’s share of income in the corporate sector, is
calculated as corporate employee compensation divided by corporate business income
less corporate taxes net of subsidies (NIPA table 1.13 lines 4/(3-9)). The yellow curve
is the BLS’s measure of labor share in the private business sector (from the BLS
multi-factor productivity series). Dashed lines are fitted third-degree polynomials.

                            Figure 14
  The Stock of Software and Software and R&D as a Share of U.S.
                           Fixed Assets




Figure 14: The stock of software (solid line) and software plus R&D assets (dashed
line) as a share of total fixed assets (authors’ calculation based on NIPA table 2.1).



                                          49
                             Figure 15
     U.S. Corporate Intangible Assets as a Share of U.S. Wealth




Figure 15: U.S. corporate intangible assets as a share of U.S. wealth is calculated by
subtracting the net worth of U.S. corporations from their equity value. Net worth is
the replacement cost of fixed assets plus the market value of other assets less liabilities
apart from owners’ equity. This imputed value of intangible corporate assets (goodwill)
is divided by total U.S. wealth (authors’ calculation based on Federal Reserve financial
accounts series Z.1).




                                            50
                               Appendix

A     Directed Technological Change

An important critique of the above models is that technological change is purely
(directly) labor-substituting. Recent models of technological change, such as
Acemoglu (2002) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018) have emphasized the di-
rectedness of technological change. That is, rather than only deciding how
much technology to develop, individuals and firms can choose between a suite
of research projects that each enter the production function in different ways.

Here we relax both assumptions in a striped down, one-sector model, with only
high-tech workers who can write both labor-substituting and capital-substituting
software. This extension captures the spirit of the directed technological change
literature in that workers can develop either a labor substituting or labor com-
plimenting technology. As we’ll show, immisserizing technological change due
to higher code retention can still occur, at least in cases when the code-retention
shock disproportionately impacts labor-substituting software.

Production of the economy’s single good, corn, satisfies

                                                                1
                Yt = D((1 − γ)(Wt + AL  α            K α α
                                     t ) + (γ)(Kt + At ) ) .                  (48)

This production function deviates from the baseline model in two ways. First,
we introduce a type of labor, W that is a perfect substitute for software but
that doesn’t create software as a byproduct. Second, we add a type of software
AK which is a substitute for capital.

Producers face the following profit maximization problem.

     πt = Yt (Wt + AL         K                      L L     K K
                    t , Kt + At ) − wt Wt − rt Kt − At mt − At mt ,           (49)

where wt is the wage of non-coders and mL             K
                                             t and mt are the rental prices of
labor substituting and capital substituting software, respectively.

Both types of code are written by software companies with fixed costs of entry
and decreasing returns to scale. Production of code satisfies

                                AL          L βL
                                 t,i = zL (Lt,i )                             (50)




                                        51
                               AK          K βK
                                t,j = zK (Lt,j ) ,                           (51)

where LL        K
       t,i and Lt,j are demands for coders by labor substituting and capital
substituting software companies, respectively and zK , zL , βL and βK are pa-
rameters. Both βL and βK are between zero and 1.

Software firms maximizes profits – revenues from renting code net of paying
coders and covering each period’s fixed cost of operation, F L or F K . Firms
rent out their software at its marginal product and then sell their software after
depreciation at prices pL       K
                        t and pt .

                      L
                     πt,i = AL     L    L L         L      L
                             t,i (mt + δ pt ) − wt Lt,i − Ft                 (52)

                     K
                    πt,j = AK     K    K K         K      K
                            t,j (mt + δ pt ) − wt Lt,j − Ft                  (53)


Total software of each type accumulates as in the baseline model.


                                   X
                            AL
                             t =       AL         L
                                        t,i + δL At−1                        (54)
                                   X
                            AK
                             t =       AK         K
                                        t,i + δK At−1 .                      (55)

Firms enter until profits are zero. This implies

                                      L
                                     πt,i =0                                 (56)

                                      K
                                     πt,i =0                                 (57)

Combining equations gives

                                                    1
               0 = zL (LL   L αL
                        t /Nt )  (mL    L L             L    L
                                   t + δ pt ) − wt Lt /Nt − Ft               (58)

                                                 1
            0 = zK (LK   K αK
                     t /Nt )  (mK    K K             K    K
                                t + δ pt ) − wt Kt /Nt − Ft ,                (59)

where NtK and NtL are the number of K and L software companies, respectively.

Both types of software are priced as the present discounted value of their
marginal product. The capital stock equals saving of the young net of their
purchase of ownership rights to software.

                        Kt+1 = φIt − pL   L    K   K
                                      t δAt − pt δAt                         (60)




                                        52
Labor market equilibrium requires

                              L = LL     K
                                   t + L t + Wt .                            (61)

Since workers can move freely between the tasks of ordinary worker, capital-
substituting coder, or labor substituting coder, the wage, wt , is the same across
all task. Hence, the total income of the young is

                                    It = wt L.                               (62)

There is no depreciation of capital. Output is either consumed, invested or used
to cover fixed costs.

               Yt = Cy,t + Co,t + Kt+1 − Kt − FtK NtK − FtL NtL ,            (63)

Appendix figure 1 reports steady-state results based on the parameters in ap-
pendix table 1. As can be seen, steady-state outcomes for an economy with
a higher δ L are worse, while those with relatively higher δ K are better. The
mechanisms for immiseration are similar to the baseline model. The increase in
AL stocks decreases wages and increases interest rates. The decrease in wages
decreases capital stocks, which decreases wages yet further. Immiseration can
arise if the exogenous shock makes it disproportionately easier to accumulate
labor- than capital-substituting software.




                                       53
                        Appendix Table 1
       Parameters for Directed Technical Change Simulation
 Model Parameter                         Role                                           Value
        α               Elasticity Param. in Final Good Prod.                            .952
        γ                    Capital Input Share Param.                                   .7
        L                         Total Labor Supply                                      25
       δL                 Labor Subs. Code Retention Rate                            0 initially
       δK                Capital Subs. Code Retention Rate                           0 initially
        φ                             Saving Rate                                         .8
       FL                      L Code Firm Fixed Cost                                5 ∗ 10−13
       FK                      K Code Firm Fixed Cost                                5 ∗ 10−13
       ZL                    L Code Productivity Param.                                .00013
       ZK                    K Code Productivity Param.                                .00013
       βL         L Decreasing Returns to L-Software Coding Param.                        .6
       βK        K Decreasing Returns to K-Software Coding Param.                         .6
       D                       TFP in Final Production                                     1

Appendix Table 1: This table presents parameter values for illustrations of the effects
of a one-time, permanent increase in the depreciation rate of labor substituting and
capital substituting software as displayed in appendix figure 1.




                                          54
                        Appendix Figure 1
    Long-Run Compensating Differential for Alternative δ Shocks




Compensating Differential references the ratio of consumption needed to achieve life-
time utility of households in the long run to initial steady-state consumption less 1.
Parameters not on axes are given in appendix table 1.




                                         55
