                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHO IS COMING TO THE ARTEFACTUAL FIELD EXPERIMENT? PARTICIPATION
                 BIAS AMONG CHINESE RURAL MIGRANTS

                                             Paul Frijters
                                           Tao Sherry Kong
                                            Elaine M. Liu

                                        Working Paper 20953
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20953


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2015




We would like to thank Xin Meng for helpful discussion and Adam Reger for providing editorial assistance.
The collection of the RUMICI data used in this paper is financed by IZA, ARC/AusAid, the Ford Foundation,
and the Ministry of Labor and Social Security of China. Elaine Liu thanks Chiang Ching-kuo Foundation
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Paul Frijters, Tao Sherry Kong, and Elaine M. Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Is Coming to the Artefactual Field Experiment? Participation Bias among Chinese Rural
Migrants
Paul Frijters, Tao Sherry Kong, and Elaine M. Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 20953
February 2015
JEL No. C81,C90,C93

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper, we compare participants in an artefactual field experiment in urban China with the survey
population of migrants from which they were recruited. The experimental participants were more educated,
more likely to lend money to friends, and worked fewer hours than the general population. They differ
significantly from non-participants in terms of regression coefficients, such as the effects of wealth
and marital status on the probability of being self-employed and distance migrated. We thus find that
there was selection into our experiments on the basis of both observable characteristics and on unobserved
differences in behavioral relations.


Paul Frijters                                       Elaine M. Liu
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
University of Queensland                            University of Houston
St Lucia, Brisbane, Qld 4072 Australia              McElhinney Hall 223D
p.frijters@uq.edu.au                                Houston, TX 77004
                                                    and NBER
Tao Sherry Kong                                     emliu@uh.edu
Institute of Social Science Survey
Peking University
Haidian District, Beijing, China
tao.kong@pku.edu.cn
             1. Introduction

    Choice experiments are increasingly relied on in economics to glean information about

subjects’ preferences and behavioral traits. A key question about choice experiments, whether in

the lab or in the field, is the external validity of the results. This hinges on whether the behavior

displayed is natural, and on whether the behavior of subjects who participate in the experiments

is representative of larger populations.1 This paper addresses this second issue by comparing

participants in an artefactual field experiment2 in China with the survey population of migrants

from which they were recruited.

    Selectivity of experimental subjects is a problem for generalizability if the experimental

participants are not representative of the groups of interest and if behavior differs significantly

by group: if behavior does not differ by group, selectivity does not matter. We thus look both at

the selectivity of participants and at whether their estimated behavioral patterns differ from non-

participants; i.e., whether regression coefficients on important variables for outcomes of

particular interest vary with participation in the experiment.

    Lab experiments conducted in universities are usually done with university students. They

are clearly selective in that students who show up for experiments are not representative of the

non-student population, and might not even be representative of the general student population.

For example, Camerer and Lovallo (1999) find that students’ entry into competition games

depends on their level of overconfidence and that participating students thus differ from the

general student population.

1
  See Harrison and List (2004) for more elaborate details of this criticism and Deaton (2009) for a wider discussion
of the limits of what can be learned by experiments. Other papers that also examine related issues include Harrison
et al. (2009), Lazear et al. (2012), Levitt and List (2007), Von Gaudecker et al. (2012), Cleave et al. (2013), Falk et
al. (2013), and Andersen et al (2013).
2
  In the taxonomy of Harrison and List (2004), artefactual field experiments include a conventional lab experiment
but with a nonstandard subject pool.


                                                                                                                          1
    Whether the behavior of participating students differs from other groups in society is an

active question in the literature. Anderson et al. (2013) find that students are less pro-social than

the general population. In contrast, Falk et al. (2013) find that students behave similarly to the

general population in terms of their revealed social preferences, including pro-social behavior

and trust.

    In the past few years, artefactual field experiments, which recruit subjects outside of

universities, have tried to circumvent the problem of the selectivity of students. Yet artefactual

field experiments could possibly face worse selection biases in recruitment compared to lab

experiments that mainly involve university students. At the university level, both subjects and

experimenters often belong to the same institution, making it easy for subjects to verify the

authenticity and purpose of the experiment. This creates trust between experimenters and

subjects, which would reduce the importance of trust and risk preferences for selection. In an

artefactual field experiment, subjects and the experimenters often have little or no contact prior

to the experiments, arguably making trust and risk preferences more important for the

participation decision.

    Also, university students need to go to university anyway for classes, making the marginal

travel costs to university computer labs comparable for most potential participants. In the case of

artefactual field experiments, however, the location and time costs of the experiment are crucial

as they generate differential transaction costs for different populations, potentially worsening

selectivity.

    Additionally, the objective function of university students may be quite different from the

objective function of other subjects. Slonim et al. (2013), for instance, postulate that student

participation depends on income, leisure time, intellectual curiosity, and social preferences.



                                                                                                   2
These may not reflect the motivations of non-students: the participants in our experiments (rural

migrants working in major Chinese cities) nearly all have full-time jobs and might put more

weight on income than on intellectual curiosity and leisure time. They probably also face higher

opportunity costs compared to university students. Our first objective is then to find out just how

representative participation in our artefactual field experiment is. Determining whether the

behavior of the participating migrants differs from the non-participating ones in terms of

regression coefficients is the second objective of the paper.

    The findings of this paper are of particular relevance to artefactual field experiments in

developing countries.3 To our knowledge, our paper is the first to discuss participation bias in

artefactual field experiments in a development setting, a literature in which it is not a common

practice to report participation rates and hence for which it is largely unknown how bad the

potential selectivity is. Our paper aims to serve as a useful benchmark for that literature. It

furthermore adds to the existing literature on selectivity into artefactual field experiments

(Harrison et al. 2009; and von Gaudecker et al. 2012) by having a survey of relatively poor

migrants as the base population. It supplements the literature on selectivity in lab experiments

with university students (Slonim et al. 2013; Krawczyk, 2011; Falk et al. 2013).



                  Preview of results and brief data introduction

    The dataset we use as our base is the Urban Migrant Survey (UMS), which includes 5,240

migrant households across 15 cities in China in 2009. This survey contains detailed information




3
 Our work is most applicable to those papers that recruit subjects from working populations in an urban setting.
This includes Dasgupta and Mani (2013), Dulleck et al. (2013), and Carpenter et al. (2004). See Cardenas and
Carpenter (2008) for a review of earlier works.


                                                                                                                   3
on many variables, including education, income, wealth, birth order, family size, a general risk

preference measure, and general trust measures.

   Within months after the survey, we invited all household heads from surveyed households to

participate in an artefactual field experiment involving real lotteries. This experiment, which

lasted about 2.5 hours, elicited particular traits—such as risk preferences, time preferences and

trust measures, as well as cognitive ability. The fixed show-up fee was the equivalent of more

than half a day's average wage (50 Yuan), and participants earned additional income depending

on the outcome of the experiments. Despite our efforts to make the experiment accessible by

scheduling multiple sessions in the evenings and on the weekends, and along with the non-

negligible compensation, only one-third of the initial survey respondents decided to participate

in the experiments.

       Using the UMS dataset, we examine the differences in characteristics between

experiment participants (EP) and non–experiment participants (NEP). We find that the EPs, on

average, are more educated, are more likely to lend money to their friends, have a higher risk

tolerance, and work fewer hours. This is in line with what one would expect from the point of

view of experimental subjects being more risk-taking. While we expected a lack of trust in the

survey agency to play a role, we do not find any consistent pattern in the self-assessed trust

measure between EP and NEPs. Nor do we find any difference in hourly wages, meaning that

opportunity costs do not provide a robust explanation for the selection. Rather, we seem to select

on whether someone is young and adventurous.

       We look at whether selectivity matters by checking two commonly examined relations in

the field of migration economics, where we look for parameter heterogeneity in the coefficient

estimates across EP/NEP groups. If the coefficient estimates for the two groups are drastically



                                                                                                4
different, then we interpret this as selectivity on relationships between observable variables. It

would mean that the relations found between the observed characteristics of lab participants do

not provide an inference for the same relationship in the underlying population. We indeed find

statistically robust evidence that the results from regressions we often see in the literature differ

for the NEPs versus the EPs, though in absolute terms the differences are small.

       The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides a literature review. Section 3 describes

the survey methodology and the experimental methodology. Section 4 gives summary statistics

and analyzes the participation decision. Section 5 provides evidence of the importance of

selection for estimates of underlying relations and gives a suggested interpretation. Section 6

concludes.



             2. Literature review

   Is there selectivity and does behavior differ by group? We approach the literature on these

two constituents of participation bias as pertaining to students and non-students separately.



             Participation Bias of Student Subjects

   Most lab experiments use students as subjects, leading to numerous studies comparing

students who participate with students who do not (Peterson 2001; Carpenter, Burks, and

Verhoogen 2005; Carpenter, Connolly, and Myers 2008).

   Slonim et al. (2013) look at which students of an initial pool of surveyed students participate

in lab experiments and found, somewhat surprisingly, that more risk-averse individuals were

more likely to participate. They attributed this result to the sizable payoff and to there being little

perceived risk to participation.



                                                                                                     5
   In contrast, Falk et al. (2013) used an unrelated donation decision to compare the pro-social

inclinations of students who participated in experiments and of students who did not participate,

finding no significant differences. Cleave et al. (2013) used classroom experiments to gain

knowledge of the preferences of the recruitment population before they compared those from the

classroom population who chose to participate with those who did not. Similar to Falk et al.

(2013), they found no presence of significant selection bias among students who participated in

the lab experiments.

   A number of studies varied participation incentives to generate selectivity. For example,

Rutström (1998) explored the role of recruitment fees in attracting experimental participants and

concluded that changes in fees created group differences (e.g., male versus female, white versus

non-white) in some but not all treatments. Krawczyk (2011) varied pecuniary and non-pecuniary

benefits of experiments, documenting significant differences in corresponding experimental

subject pools.

   On behavior and selectivity, Anderson et al. (2013) find that students are less pro-social than

the general population, but Falk et al. (2013) find no such difference.

   There are thus conflicting results on the issues of both selectivity and heterogeneity in

behavior across studies looking for participation bias among laboratory experiments that use

students as subjects, which may be related to the studies being done in different countries with

underlying student pools that differ in their attitudes toward experiments. This makes it useful to

look at more subject pools and different contexts.



                  Participation Bias of Non-Student Subjects




                                                                                                 6
   In terms of selectivity of participants in non-student populations, Harrison et al. (2009) study

the participation bias in both lab and artefactual field experiments in Denmark, finding that

higher show-up fees generated samples of more risk-averse participants for artefactual field

experiments.

   Von Gaudecker et al. (2012) look at behavioral differences between different subject pools in

lab experiments in the Netherlands. They first found that behavior differed between those doing

experiments on the internet versus those doing experiments in the lab. Furthermore, they found

that university student populations had lower levels of risk aversion and loss aversion compared

to samples from the general population, suggesting that behavior indeed differs between the

“usual lab participants” and the general population.

   On the issue of behavioral differences more generally, experimental results have been found

to vary across broad population groups, such as by age, occupation, and nationality (Benz and

Meier 2008; Baran et al. 2010; Cleave et al. 2013), suggesting a large potential role for

participation bias. Similarly, Belot et al. (2010) compared behavior between students and non-

students, finding that students are more likely to behave as homo economicus agents than non-

students in games involving other-regarding preferences (for example, dictator games, trust

games, and public good games). In games that do not engage other-regarding preferences (for

example, beauty contests and second-price auctions), they found only limited evidence of

differences in behavior between subject pools. Falk et al. (2013) similarly found non-student

participants to be more pro-social.

   Summarizing these various strands, no robust lessons have as yet emerged: selectivity is

important for some subject pools, but not others, and some behavior varies, but not all behavior.




                                                                                                 7
And we know virtually nothing on these issues for artefactual field experiments in developing

countries. Our paper thus contributes to an unresolved and ongoing debate.



             3. The Survey and Recruitment into the Experiment

    The dataset used in this paper comes from the 2009 Urban Migrant Survey (UMS) in China,

which took place from March/April to July of 2009. 4 The UMS covers 15 cities across nine

provinces or metropolitan areas, selecting 5,240 migrant households randomly from a mini-

census of representative enumeration areas in each city, which forms the population from which

we recruited participants for artefactual field experiments.5 The face-to-face interviews elicited

detailed information about every family member living in the surveyed household, and included

questions about work, family expenditures, income, health, social networks, subjective risk

preferences, and trust measures.

         Each household head of the 2009 survey received multiple calls and texts in the months

following the survey.6 They were reminded that they had participated in the UMS survey and

were invited to participate in an individual preference experiment. They would receive 50 Yuan

as a show-up fee (more than half a day’s wage) to compensate for transportation costs and time.

4
  This is a part of the Rural–Urban Migration in China and Indonesia (RUMiCI) research project, which includes a
longitudinal survey in both countries. For more details about the RUMiC sample scheme, the distinction between the
head of the household and the respondent, as well as the use of proxy-respondents, see http://rumici.anu.edu.au/ or
Chapter 7 of Meng et al. (2010).
5
  Within each city, all data collection occurred within a one-month period.
6
  This started in mid-June, with some cities having the experiment as late as September 2009. The phone
methodology was dictated by local circumstances: in a developing country, survey participants often do not have
email addresses, nor do they come to particular areas where they would see posters or other advertising material, as
students in universities do. Yet in 2007, China had a high mobile phone coverage rate of 93% of the urban
population (China Telecommunication Report 2007), while email coverage was scant. Also, calls could be made in a
standardized manner and we could better ensure that identical information was provided to all potential participants.
In our case, all subjects who participated in the survey had given us their phone numbers (we did not ask for their
email addresses). We called all potential participants at most three times. In contrast, most other papers that use
artefactual field experiments do not report their recruiting methods or their participation rates. The few papers that
we could find that reported recruiting methods used a wide range of options, including face-to-face requests,
snowball sampling, and soliciting phone interviews. None discuss their participation rates.


                                                                                                                    8
They were told the experiment would take approximately 2.5 hours and that there would be an

additional payoff depending on the outcomes of strategic games and lotteries. If they could not

participate in person, we asked if their spouses would be able to come. If they agreed to

participate, they were given a list of available sessions at the designated venue, usually rented

school classrooms or conference rooms at hotels in the center of each city.7 The experimental

sessions were mostly on the weekends, to suit a variety of working schedules. Out of the 5,240

households we contacted, 1,693 households sent a “valid participant” for whom we have survey

information and self-reported preference measures, including 1,601 household heads (94.5%), 74

spouses (4.4%), and 18 (1.1%) other household members.

         Each of the participants would complete experimental modules consisting of four parts—

including a set of lotteries eliciting risk preferences, a set of lotteries eliciting time preferences, a

game eliciting their attitudes on trust and trustworthiness, and a 30-minute Raven’s Progressive

Matrices test measuring their cognitive ability. We omit a detailed discussion of these

experiments in this paper, and simply mention that they were fairly standard economic

experiments.8

         Given that the EP sample contains a particular proportion of household heads, spouses,

and others, there are various ways to construct the appropriate counterfactual NEP sample. Since

our primary experimental target was the household heads who were present during the time of

7
  As one referee pointed out, the distance from the subject’s household to the city center is a proxy for transaction
cost and could be predictive of their likelihood to participate in the experiments. Unfortunately, we do not have that
information, but we can say that residing in the city center is extremely expensive and nearly all migrant workers
live on the outskirts of the city.
8
  To our knowledge, other than the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS), this is the only other large-scale panel
dataset to include such an elaborate version of an experimental module with real lotteries. Most other large
representative samples, including the Italian Survey of Household Income and Wealth (SHIWor the Health and
Retirement Survey (Barsky et al. 1997), as well as the CentER Savings Survey in the Netherlands (Donkers et al.
2001), measure risk preferences with abstractly framed, hypothetical lotteries. The German Socioeconomic Panel
(SOEP) does include 450 subjects who were also involved in a real lottery, but in their case the lotteries were
conducted by trained interviewers visiting subjects’ houses (Dohmen et al. 2011).


                                                                                                                         9
the survey (which held for 4,967 surveys out of the 5,240 surveys in total), the most

straightforward comparison is between the household heads who attended both survey and

experiments to the household heads who attended the survey but did not attend the experiments.

Sample 1 then includes 1,601 EP and 3,366 NEP household heads.

         In order to use the information on the non–household heads who attended the

experiments, we created a second NEP sample as the relevant baseline population by randomly

adding spouses and other relatives to the NEP sample to achieve 4.4% spouses and 1.1% other

household members, mimicking the EP sample. Essentially, the distinction between Sample 1

and Sample 2 is that Sample 1 consists of household heads who participated in the experiment

and household heads who did not participate in experiment. Sample 2 consists of households that

sent a valid participant and households that did not send a valid participant.9



4. Who Comes to the Artefactual Field Experiment?

4.1 Differences in descriptive statistics

         In Table 1, column 1, we show the summary statistics of the household heads in Sample 1

who had participated in the experiments and, in column 2, of the heads who did not participate in

the experiments. In column 3 we show the summary statistics of the EP part of Sample 2, with

column 4 showing the concomitant averages for the NEP. Table 1 reveals minor differences

between Sample 1 and Sample 2: Sample 2 contains more females and fewer married individuals,

which makes sense as Sample 2 includes spouses and children of household heads.


9
  Sample 2 includes 1,693 households that sent valid participants and 3,513 households that did not send a valid
participant. Valid participants are those who were present at the main survey, so we have their self-reported risk and
trust measures. Numbers of households do not add up to 5,240 because we want to maintain the same proportion of
household representatives (household head, spouse, other members) in Sample 2 EP and NEP. We use a random
draw of surveyed households to maintain the proportions, so some of the households were not included.


                                                                                                                   10
                                   [Insert Table 1 About Here]

       Since the objective of the experiment was to elicit risk and trust attitudes, differences in

them across EP and NEP groups are of primary interest. We can examine these differences by

comparing the responses regarding trust and risk in the survey.

       The risk-taking question in the survey was self-assessed: “Some people in a society are

more likely to take risks while others are less likely. On a scale from zero to ten, where zero

indicates you do not take any risks and ten indicates you like to take risks very much, could you

please rank your own risk taking level?”

       Table 1 shows that in both Sample 1 and Sample 2, experimental participants report a

significantly higher degree of average risk-taking, contrary to what Slonim et al. (2013) found

for lab participation among university students, which probably reflects the fact that travelling to

participate in an experiment was considered an unusual and previously unknown activity for our

baseline population.

       There were two measures of trust in the survey, one self-assessed and one derived from

revealed behavior. The trust question was “In general, do you think most people can be trusted

or one should be careful when he/she deals with others. Select either ‘Yes, most people can be

trusted’; ‘No, one should be careful’; or ‘Do not know’.” The revealed choice measure went:

“Do you lend money or objects to your friends or acquaintances? Select either ‘usually’;

‘sometimes’; ‘seldom’; ‘never’.”

       We found that experiment subjects were significantly more likely to have lent money to

friends, but did not self-assess as having a higher or lower level of general trust than non-

participants, suggesting that they are more trusting in their behavior though not in their self-

perceived level of trust.



                                                                                                 11
       The EP sample also differs from the NEP sample in other dimensions: the experiment

participants were younger and were more likely to be migrants who are from the same province

where the experiment took place; more likely to have a shorter distance from where they

currently live to their hometown (laojia); more likely to have more years of schooling; more

likely to work fewer hours; and less likely to be self-employed.

       While these differences are highly significant, the size of these differences is small in a

statistical sense: the difference in risk preferences, marital status, self-employment levels, age,

and whether the respondent comes from the same province as the city in which (s)he lives, is

about 1/10th of a standard deviation. The biggest difference in observed characteristics is for

education, with almost 2/10th of a standard deviation.

                        [Insert Table 1 Panel A and Panel B About Here]



4.2 Participation regressions

       To learn more about selectivity, Table 2 shows the coefficients in a linear probability

model with the dependent variable being participation in the experiments and with the first four

columns relating to Sample 1 and the next four to Sample 2, whereby more variables are added

progressively within the sets of columns. We use random, nonparametric bootstraping to obtain

standard errors.

       The results in columns 1 and 4 show significant selection on trust and risk preferences

when those are the only variables looked at: those who are more risk-loving and more likely to

lend money to their friends are significantly more likely to show up for the experiments at the




                                                                                                12
1% and 10% significance levels, respectively. The coefficient on the self-reported measure of

trust is negative, but insignificant.10

         In columns 2, 3, 6, and 7, we include more individual characteristics as well as city-level

fixed effects. These latter effects might be quite strong, because the experiments were organized

by different local survey agencies in their respective cities. 11 It is thus possible that some

particular survey agencies worked harder than others at persuading their respondents to come to

the experiment, affecting the selectivity of the sample over cities. In addition, migrants may also

have some unobserved characteristics that differ across areas.

         The risk and social preferences variables become insignificant when we control for other

individual characteristics and city fixed effects for Sample 1, though risk preferences remain

significant for Sample 2. Throughout the specifications, though, when we test for the joint

significance of risk and trust measures combined, they are consistently significant at the 10%

level (except column 3, in which the coefficients are the same, where the p-value is 0.12). There

is hence weak support for the importance of risk and trust preferences in the participation

decision.

         Papers such as Andersen et al. (2009), Roe et al. (2009), and Slonim et al. (2013) also

suggest that risk and uncertainty related to experiments can lead to a selection on participants’

risk attitudes, though these papers pertained to students and Cleave et al. (2013) found no

significant selection on risk attitudes. Our finding suggests that outside the university setting,


10
   This variable is statistically insignificant even when it is the only independent variable in the regression. There is
no major issue of multicollinearity in this finding: the correlation between subjective risk and lending money to
friends is only 0.13. The correlation between subjective risk and trusting people is 0.08. The correlation between
lending money to friends and trusting people is 0.17. The correlation between trusting people and being self-
employed is -0.065.
11
   We hired a private survey company with a main office in Beijing and several branches in China to manage the
survey collection and experiment process. In different cities, different persons would be in charge, potentially
allowing for a divergence in recruitment effort.


                                                                                                                       13
risk attitudes and trust (as proxied by lending money to friends) can play an important role in

selection into experiments, probably because going to an experiment is a bigger deal for non-

students.

       The main other characteristic of importance is education: for every additional year of

education, the probability of experimental participation increases by 0.8 to 0.9 percentage points.

This tallies with previous papers that find or argue that intellectual curiosity can result in

differences in participation (see the discussions in Levitt and List 2007; Kagel et al. 1979; and

Slonim et al. 2013).

       Interestingly, we find conflicting evidence for the hypothesis that opportunity costs drive

participation. On the one hand, the coefficients for hourly wages are consistently insignificant

and small. Yet we do find that those who work fewer hours are more likely to participate in all

specifications.

       In columns 3 and 7, we examine the nonlinearity of this work-hour effect. We divide

subjects into four quartiles based on their weekly hours worked, and find that most of the

negative effect of work hours is driven by those who are in the third and fourth quartiles: those

who work 70 hours or more per week are less likely to show up. We also find that those who

work for bigger firms are more likely to participate, perhaps because it is easier for them to take

time off, suggesting that while selection might not operate on hourly wages, it does depend on

the time demands of the job.

       One important aspect of determining one’s likelihood of attending the experiment could

be the distance from the experimental location. To look at this indirectly (lacking information on




                                                                                                14
subjects’ place of residence12), we included a set of 150 district-of-workplace fixed effects in

columns 4 and 8. These dummies correspond to various districts in a city and capture some of the

residence variation since many migrants live at their job. Comparing the results to those in

columns 2 and 4, we are able to explain 5% more of the variation in experimental participation

when adding workplace areas. The set of dummies are jointly significant at 1% level, but in

general the coefficients of observable characteristics remain unchanged, suggesting only a

limited role for the distance to the experiment: all the participants had to actively take time off

and travel to the experiments, a cost that will only have been marginally higher for those who

needed to travel longer.

         The results thus suggest that a lack of time constraints, a risk-taking and trusting attitude,

and curiosity are the main predictors of participation in our artefactual field experiment.

                                          [Insert Table 2 About Here]



5.       Possible impacts of the experimental selection on outcome variables


         In this section, we examine whether the self-selection bias in the experimental sample

affects the representativeness of linear regression coefficients of interest. We do this by looking

at whether the interaction between participation and variables of interest is significant. Such

differences can be interpreted as differences in behavioral relations between the EP group and

the NEP group. Since the regressions will include the variables already included for the selection

equation, which are usually available in most surveys and some experiments too, any


12
  We do not know their place of residence. This information is not available in the dataset we have access to.
Additionally, even given the same geographic distance, transportation costs can be drastically different depending
on precisely where in the city residents live, so a geographic distance calculated from a place of residence/workplace
to an experimental location would be a very noisy measure of travel costs


                                                                                                                   15
significance of this interaction can be interpreted as selectivity on unobserved characteristics that

mediate effects. For instance, there might be unobserved personality traits that make it both more

likely that someone goes to an experiment, but that also impact how observed characteristics

relate to each other. “Curiosity” might thus affect participation as well as, for example, whether

someone is self-employed, and might help some part of the population to get wealthier while

impeding other parts of the population. Selection on such an unobserved trait would then lead to

different effects in regressions of interest. Note that we make no claim at all about causality,

merely as to whether the statistical relationship between observed characteristics is different for

participants in experiments compared to non-participants.


5.1 The correlates of self-employment and distance of migration

       In this sub-section, we want to test differences in coefficients between the EP and NEP

samples for some commonly studied outcomes, including self-employment and distance of

migration. These outcomes were chosen since both risk attitudes and trust arguably play major

roles in these outcomes. The idea is to see whether regression coefficients in the experimental

sample differ from the non-experimental sample.

       In an earlier version of this paper, we examined outcomes commonly looked at in applied

microeconomic research (income regressions, health regressions, and happiness regressions) and

found significant (but modest) differences in regression coefficients between EP and NEP

samples.

       Table 3 presents the results for a linear probability model where the dependent variable is

whether one is self-employed or not. Using a linear probability model allows us to include and

interpret interaction terms between participation and several covariates. By contrast, the




                                                                                                  16
interpretation of interaction terms in a non-linear model, such as a probit or logit model, is less

intuitive (Norton et al. 2004). Columns 1–3 use Sample 1 and columns 4–6 use Sample 2.

                                              [Insert Table 3 About Here]

         In column 1 we control only for basic individual characteristics with a set of city

dummies that capture cross-city variation in self-employment industries, policy, etc. In column 1,

age, wealth, being married, and years since migrated are all positively associated with being self-

employed; attitudes toward risk are positive but insignificant; those who are more trusting are

less likely to be self-employed; and more years of education is negatively associated with being

an entrepreneur. These are reasonable outcomes for migrants in urban China, as it takes several

years of savings to be able to afford to be self-employed. While the opposite holds in many other

development contexts where self-employment is a bottom-of-the-ladder activity, being self-

employed in urban China is very much a higher-paying and a higher entry-barrier occupation,

often involving large loans from the family (thus favoring individuals who take fewer risks), and

selecting those with less favorable outside options such as the lower-educated.13

         In columns 2 and 3, we include the experimental participation dummy (EP) and a set of

interaction terms between EP and other characteristics. In column 3, we add a set of interaction

terms between city dummies and EP. The most significant interaction variables are wealth and

marriage, showing that wealthier participants would be less likely to be self-employed than non-

experimental participants with the same wealth, while the married experimental participants are

7.1 percentage points less likely to be self-employed than the married non-participants.

Compared to the coefficients among the NEP sample, these two interactions are 30% to 50% of

the magnitude of their overall effect, showing that the relation between wealth/marriage and

13
  We cannot determine causality in these regressions. Thus, it is also possible that people who are entrepreneurs
become wealthier and less trusting.


                                                                                                                    17
being self-employed differs both statistically and substantially between the EP and the NEP

samples.

        The joint significance test at the bottom of the table shows that the null-hypothesis that

the interaction coefficients are all zero, is rejected at the 1% significance level. The joint

significance test for the “social parameters” also shows that the social preferences and risk

preferences are jointly significant at the 10% level in determining entrepreneurship. In columns 4

to 6, we perform a similar analysis based on Sample 2 and find similar but statistically stronger

results, reinforcing that there are significant interaction effects.

        The outcome variable in Table 4 is the log of migration distance, which we take to be a

measure of unfamiliarity between the migrant and the city in which he or she works. In columns

1 and 4, we control for basic individual characteristics and city dummies, just as in Table 3. In

columns 2 and 5, we include a set of interaction terms between EP and various characteristics. In

columns 3 and 6, we also add a set of interaction terms between city dummies and EP.

        We find across the specifications that being female is correlated with migrating shorter

distances and that being non–Han Chinese is associated with a longer distance of migration. Both

of these are reasonable: females are typically found to be less risk-taking, and most ethnic

minorities reside in the far Western/Southwestern provinces; therefore, the few non–Han Chinese

in this sample would have migrated farther than their Han Chinese counterparts. Interestingly,

conditional on gender, we do not find that self-reported risk preferences have any predictive

power on the distance of migration. Lending money to friends is negatively correlated with the

distance migrated, meaning that more trusting people migrate closer to their hometowns. An

alternative explanation is that those who moved far from their hometowns are less likely to trust




                                                                                               18
the friends around them and to lend them money. These results are similar for Sample 2, as

reported in columns 4–6.

       Importantly, we test for the joint significance of EP and the set of interaction terms

between EP and other characteristics. Similar to entrepreneurship, these interaction terms play an

important role in determining the average distance of migration: we can reject the null hypothesis

that the full set of interaction terms between the socio-economic characteristics are all zero in all

columns at the 1% significance level. The greatest difference in the EP and NEP behavioral

relations can be seen in log-wealth: for the NEP sample, high wealth is associated with

significantly lower distance to migration, while among the EP sample, the opposite holds. Indeed,

the effect is in absolute terms almost 150% higher for the EP sample and in the opposite

direction (+0.06 versus -0.04).

                                       [Insert Table 4 About Here]


5.2 A possible mechanism

       We were primarily interested in documenting the presence of selectivity and in whether

participants in our artefactual field experiment were associated with different estimated

coefficients in typical regressions of interest: we had no prior expectations of whether we would

find something.

       Ex post, though, what might account for the observed selectivity and found differences in

regression coefficients across the EP and NEP samples? That is, what mechanism might one

want to watch out for in subsequent work based on the results reported here? We suggest that a

possible mechanism is provided by a personality trait like being “opportunistic”, akin to

“autonomy” and “curiosity”.




                                                                                                  19
       Consider that only one-third of the migrants make the effort to travel across a big city to

do experiments in a classroom, an activity they will never have done before in a place they will

never have been before, all for the promise of about half a day’s income. To do this might well

select on very opportunistic people who trust their own judgment and are used to taking risks and

trying different things.

       Opportunism would then be associated with risk-taking and with trusting one’s own

judgment enough to lend money to friends, i.e., observed trust behavior, which fits the observed

pattern of sample selectivity in Tables 1 and 2. Yet opportunism might also lead that same

person to be less trusted and helped by others, making it less likely that spouses will help them to

be self-employed and that they cannot become self-employed even if they have the wealth to

afford to be one. This fits the pattern of Table 3 where the experimental participants who were

married and wealthy were found less likely to be self-employed than the comparable non-

participants, something that would be counterintuitive in most circumstances but not in urban

China, where becoming self-employed is mainly about being seen as sufficiently trustworthy and

stable by the family and by partners whose investments and help are needed to succeed in

business. Finally, opportunism might help the migrant to become wealthier in the absence of

family and friends close by because that is the advantage of opportunism, but might be

counterproductive when one is in more familiar territory where there are lots of potential friends

and family members who could help. This rationalizes the results of Table 4, where it was found

that migrants who came to the experiment and who originated from far away were wealthier,

while the migrants who came to the experiment and who originated from nearby were poorer.

       This explanation is close to that of Slonim et al. (2013), who speculated that intellectual

curiosity might have a lot to do with what kind of student shows up to university lab experiments.



                                                                                                  20
Without direct good measures of such related traits as curiosity or opportunism though, we can

here only note that the results seem consistent with such a hypothesis and that future studies

looking at selectivity might want to measure such traits in their baseline population.



6. Discussion and Conclusion

       In this paper, we looked at who among a set of surveyed Chinese migrants in 15 major

Chinese cities showed up for artefactual field experiments, and whether their regression

coefficients on two particular outcomes of interest (self-employment and distance of migration)

differed.

       We found significant differences in terms of both composition and regression coefficients.

The participants who showed up were more educated, less likely to be self-employed, more

likely to lend money to friends, to work for bigger firms, and to work fewer hours than the more

general population. The regression coefficients in standard analyses of entrepreneurship and

migration distance differed significantly, indicating that inferences drawn from experimental

samples may not in general hold for more representative groups of the population. Though the

differences were usually relatively small, some particular differences in coefficients were

substantial, such as the importance of marriage for entrepreneurship and the importance of

wealth for the distance of migration.

       In this paper, the show-up rate in the artefactual field experiment was about 1/3, which is

high relative to other papers that had also reported response rates (e.g., Slonim et al. 2013). We

suspect that our show-up rate is also high relative to artefactual field experiments in developing




                                                                                                 21
countries because the subjects already had already agreed to a long interview and were promised

a relatively large show-up fee as an incentive to come to the experiments.14

        As a result of the high show-up rate, one might expect the sample that showed up for the

artefactual field experiments to be relatively representative of the underlying survey population,

meaning we should probably expect bigger effects for settings with lower show-up rates.

        Our study thus casts additional doubt on the generalizability of artefactual field

experiments in developing country settings and suggests that traits like opportunism and

curiosity might be involved, making it important to measure them. More generally, it brings into

focus the importance of selectivity in socioeconomic research based on voluntary cooperation.




14
  Unfortunately, since most artefactual field experiments do not report the show-up rates, comparisons are difficult.
Based on the exchanges we had with various authors who conducted artefactual field experiments in developing
countries, the show-up rates in artefactual experiments vary drastically. We would recommend that future papers
report the show-up rates so readers can assess the extent to which selection into experiments may play a role.



                                                                                                                  22
Reference

Anderson, J., Burks, S. V., Carpenter, J., Götte, L., Maurer, K., Nosenzo, D. & Rustichini, A.
(2013). Self-selection and variations in the laboratory measurement of other-regarding
preferences across subject pools: evidence from one college student and two adult samples.
Experimental Economics, 16(2), 170-189.

Andersen, S., Harrison, G.W., Lau, M.I., Rutström, E., 2009. “Preference heterogeneity in
experiments: comparing the field and laboratory”. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization. 73 (2), 209–229.

Ashraf, N., Karlan, D., & Yin, W. (2006). “Tying odysseus to the mast: Evidence from a
commitment savings product in the Philippines”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2),
635-672.

Baran, Nicole, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2010). “Can We Infer Social Preferences
from the Lab? Evidence from the Trust Game”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP7634.

Barsky, R. B., Juster, F. T., Kimball, M. S., & Shapiro, M. D. (1997). “Preference parameters
and behavioral heterogeneity: An experimental approach in the health and retirement study”.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), 537-579.

Belot, Michèle, Raymond Duch and Luis Miller (2010). “Who Should be Called to the Lab?
A comprehensive comparison of students and non-students in classic experimental games”.
Nuffield centre for experimental social sciences discussion paper series 2010-001

Benz, M. and S. Meier. (2008). “Do People Behave in Experiments as in the Field? Evidence
from Donations”, Experimental Economics, 11, 268{281.

Camerer, C., & Lovallo, D. (1999). “Overconfidence and excess entry: An experimental
approach”. The American Economic Review, 89(1), pp. 306-318.

Cardenas, J. C., & Carpenter, J. (2008). Behavioural development economics: lessons from
field labs in the developing world. The Journal of Development Studies, 44(3), 311-338.

Carpenter, J. P., Burks, S., & Verhoogen, E. (2005). Comparing students to workers: The
effects of social framing on behavior in distribution games (Vol. 10, pp. 261-289). Emerald
Group Publishing Limited.

Carpenter, Jeff, Cristina Connolly and Caitlin Myers (2008). “Altruistic Behavior in a
Representative Dictator Experiment”, Experimental Economics, 11(3), 282-298.

Carpenter, Jeffrey; Amrita Daniere and Lois Takahashi. (2004). “Cooperation, Trust, and
Social Capital in Southeast Asian Urban Slums”, Journal of Economic Behavior. Org.55:4,
pp. 533-51.



                                                                                                 23
China Telecommunication Report (2007), Ministry of Industry and Information Technology

Cleave, B. L., Nikiforakis, N., & Slonim, R. (2013). Is there selection bias in laboratory
experiments? The case of social and risk preferences. Experimental Economics, 16(3), 372-
382.

Dasgupta, U., & Mani, S. (2013). Only Mine or All Ours: An Artefactual Field Experiment
on Procedural Altruism (No. dp2013-01). Fordham University, Department of Economics.

Deaton, A. S. (2009). “Instruments of development: Randomization in the tropics, and the
search for the elusive keys to economic development”, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Dohmen, T. J., Falk, A., Huffman, D., Sunde, U., Schupp, J., & Wagner, G. G. (2011).
“Individual risk attitudes: measurement, determinants, and behavioral consequences”.
Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(3), 522-550.

Donkers, B., B. Melenberg, and A. V. Soest (2001), “Estimating Risk Attitudes lotteries: a
large sample approach”. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 22 (2), 165{195.

Dulleck, U., Fooken, J., & He, Y. (2012 ). Public policy and individual labor market
discrimination: An artefactual field experiment in China. Unpublished paper, Queensland
University of Technology.

Falk, A., Meier, S., & Zehnder, C. (2013). Do Lab Experiments Misrepresent Social
Preferences? The Case of Self-Selected Students Samples. Journal of the European
Economic Association, 11(4), 839-852.

von Gaudecker, H. M., van Soest, A., & Wengström, E. (2012). Experts in experiments.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 45(2), 159-190.

Harrison, G. W., & List, J. A. (2004). “Field experiments”. Journal of Economic Literature,
42, 1009-1055(47).

Harrison, G. W., Lau, M. I., & Elisabet Rutström, E. (2009). “Risk attitudes, randomization
to treatment, and self-selection into experiments”. Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 70(3), 498-507.


Kagel, J., Battalio, R., Walker, J., 1979. “Volunteer artifacts in experiments in economics:
specification of the problem and some initial data from a small scale field experiment”.
Research in Experimental Economics, 1.

Krawczyk, M. (2011). What brings your subjects to the lab? A field experiment.
Experimental Economics, 14(4), 482-489.



                                                                                               24
Lazear, E. P., Malmendier, U., & Weber, R. A. (2012). “Sorting in experiments with
application to social preferences”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1),
136-163.

Levitt, S. D., & List, J. A. (2007). “What do laboratory experiments measuring social
preferences reveal about the real world?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 153-
174.

Liu, E. M. (2013). Time to change what to sow: Risk preferences and technology adoption
decisions of cotton farmers in China. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(4), 1386-1403.

Meng, X., Manning, E., Shi, L., Effendi, Tadjuddin., The great migration: Rural-urban
migration in China and Indonesia. Edward Elgar, 2010.

Norton, Edward C., Hua Wang, and Chunrong Ai. (2004) . “Computing interaction effects
and standard errors in logit and probit models. ” Stata Journal 4 (2004): 154-167.

Peterson, Robert A. (2001). “On the Use of College Students in Social Science Research:
Insights from a Second-Order Meta-analysis”. Journal of Consumer Research 28:450 461.

Roe, Brian E., Timothy C. Haab, David Q. (2009) . “Beversdorf, Howard H. Gu, and
Michael R. Tilley”. Risk-attitude Selection Bias in Subject Pools for Experiments Involving
Rutström, E. E. (1998). Home-grown values and incentive compatible auction design.
International Journal of Game Theory, 27(3), 427-441.

Schechter, L. (2007). “Theft, gift-giving, and trustworthiness: Honesty is its own reward in
rural Paraguay”. The American Economic Review, 97(5), 1560-1582.

Slonim, R., Wang, C., Garbarino, E., & Merrett, D. (2013). Opting-in: Participation bias in
economic experiments. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 90, 43-70.




                                                                                               25
Table 1 Panel A: Summary Statistics by Experiment Participation
                                        Sample 1:Household Head Only                Sample 2: All Valid Participants
                                        (1)                 (2)                     (3)                 (4)
                                        Experiment          Not in                  Experiment          Not in
                                        Participants        Experiments             Participants        Experiments
Trust and Risk Taking Measures
Subjective Risk Preference a            4.399               4.117***                4.351                4.093***
    (0=Risk Averse..10=Risk Seeking) (2.575)                   (2.665)              (2.571)              (2.661)
Often/Sometimes Lend Money to        0.712                     0.676**              0.713                0.674**
   Acquaintances and Friends b       (0.453)                   (0.468)              (0.452)              (0.470)
Trusting People (Yes=1)c                  0.573                0.574                0.573                0.573
                                          (0.495)              (0.495)              (0.495)              (0.495)
Labor Market Outcome
Self-Employed (Yes=1)                       0.188                 0.247***            0.197               0.234***
                                            (0.391)               (0.431)             (0.397)             (0.424)
Total monthly wage (1,000 Yuan)             1.782                 1.857               1.770               1.812
                                            (1.180)               (2.154)             (1.183)             (2.106)
Weekly work hours                           59.01                 61.79***            59.14               61.30***
                                            (18.94)               (20.06)             (19.33)             (20.35)
Size of Work Unit has                       0.237                 0.292***            0.254               0.304***
                 < 5 employees              (0.425)               (0.455)             (0.435)             (0.460)
Size of Work Unit between                   0.325                 0.303               0.320               0.298
                 5-50 employees             (0.469)               (0.459)             (0.467)             (0.457)
Size of Work Unit has                       0.438                 0.405**             0.425               0.398*
                 above 50 employees         (0.496)               (0.491)             (0.495)             (0.490)
Hourly wage (Yuan)                          8.454                 8.315               8.350               8.204
                                            (5.150)               (8.028)             (5.147)             (7.862)
Note : Sample 1 consists of only household heads (hh) who were present at the survey. Column 1 consists of hh who
participated in the experiments and column 2 consists of hh who did not participate in the experiments. Column 3 consists
of all valid experimental participants. Valid participants for a household are those who were present at the survey. Thus,
we have their self-reported preference measures. They can be household head, spouse, or close relatives. Column 4
maintains the sample proportion of household members as Column 3 but draws from the non-participating households.
Standard deviation is reported in parentheses. Asterisks correspond to p-values from the two-sided t-tests of equality
between Columns 1 & 2, Columns 3 & 4.. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
a. Question from the survey: "Some people in a society are more likely to take risks while others are less likely. On a scale
from zero to ten, where zero indicates you do not take any risks and ten indicates you like to take risks very much, could
you please rank your own risk-taking level?"
b. Question from the survey: "Do you lend money or objects to your friends or acquaintances?" The four choices were
"usually"; "sometimes"; "seldom"; and "never." Those who answered usually or sometimes would be assigned 1, otherwise
0.
c. Question from the survey: "In general, do you think most people can be trusted or one should be careful when he/she
deals with others?" The choices were “Yes, most people can be trusted”; “No, one should be careful”; and “Do not
know.” Those who answered "Yes, most people can be trusted" would be assigned 1, otherwise 0.




                                                                                                                           26
Table 1 Panel B: Summary Statistics by Experiment Participation
                                        Sample 1:Household Head Only              Sample 2: All Valid Participants
                                        (1)                 (2)                   (3)                 (4)
                                        Experiment          Not In                Experiment          Not In
                                        Participants        Experiments           Participants        Experiments
Individual Characteristics
Female                                  0.321               0.326                 0.350                0.362
                                        (0.467)             (0.469)               (0.477)              (0.481)
Age                                     30.88               32.14***              30.90                31.84***
                                        (9.820)             (10.71)               (9.803)              (10.70)
Ethnic Minority (yes=1)                 0.0166              0.0205                0.0171               0.0225
                                        (0.128)             (0.142)               (0.130)              (0.148)
Married (yes=1)                         0.530               0.575***              0.537                0.560
                                        (0.499)             (0.494)               (0.499)              (0.496)
From the same province                  0.631               0.565***              0.634                0.563***
                                        (0.483)             (0.496)               (0.482)              (0.496)
Distance from the current city to       366.2               401.4***              360.2                395.3***
                the hometown (km)       (422.4)             (441.2)               (418.4)              (437.8)
Distance to the closest major city      119.2               116.2                 119.0                116.0
              from hometown (km)        (74.89)             (72.58)               (74.47)              (72.59)
Network in cities ('100 persons) d      0.0359              0.0364                0.0363               0.0367
                                         (0.0695)            (0.0918)             (0.0732)             (0.0925)
Years of Education                       9.752               9.301***             9.710                9.299***
                                         (2.607)             (2.495)              (2.613)              (2.507)
Estimated Wealth (Yuan)e                 12,919              11,797               15,208               12,912
                                         (92,634)            (59,536)             (98,836)             (62,648)
With Reported Wealth = 0                 0.0187              0.0229               0.0189               0.0225
                                         (0.136)             (0.150)              (0.136)              (0.148)
Time Elapsed since Migrating (Years)     8.238               8.518                8.183                8.295
                                         (6.482)             (6.832)              (6.442)              (6.662)

Observations                              1601                   3366                1693                3513
Note: Sample 1 consists of only household heads (hh) who were present at the survey. Column 1 consists of hh who
participated in the experiments and column 2 consists of hh who did not participate in the experiments. Column 3 consists
of all valid experimental participants. Valid participants for a household are those who were present at the survey. Thus,
we have their self-reported preference measures. They can be household head, spouse or close relatives. Column 4
maintain the sample proportion of household members as Column 3 but drawn from the non-participating households.
Standard deviation is reported in parentheses. Asterisks correspond to p-values from the two sided t-tests of equality
between Columns 1 &2, Column 3 & 4.. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
d. Question from the survey: how many people who reside in urban area have you contacted/phoned/visited/greeted
during Chinese New Year?
e.Wealth is estimated based on the market value of durable goods & properties owned in urban area.




                                                                                                                        27
Table 2: Linear Probability Model of Participating in Experiments
                                      Sample 1                                 Sample 2
                                      (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)
Subjective Risk Preference            0.009*** 0.004       0.004     0.005     0.008***   0.003     0.003     0.004
  (0=Risk Averse..10=Risk Seeking) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)             (0.003)    (0.003) (0.002) (0.003)
Often/Sometimes Lend Money            0.030** 0.023        0.024     0.025     0.034***   0.030** 0.031** 0.032**
 to Acquaintances and Friends         (0.013) (0.015) (0.016) (0.016)          (0.013)    (0.015) (0.014) (0.016)
Trusting People (Yes=1)               -0.013     -0.022    -0.022    -0.020    -0.012     -0.021    -0.021    -0.019
                                      (0.014) (0.014) (0.014) (0.016)          (0.014)    (0.013) (0.014) (0.016)
Female                                           -0.021* -0.021      -0.021               -0.027** -0.027** -0.028
                                                 (0.013) (0.015) (0.018)                  (0.013) (0.013) (0.019)
Age                                              0.013*** 0.012*** 0.012*                 0.013*** 0.013** 0.013*
                                                 (0.005) (0.005) (0.007)                  (0.004) (0.005) (0.007)
(Age)2                                           -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000*              -0.000*** -0.000** -0.000*
                                                 (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)                  (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
Ethnic Minority (Yes=1)                          -0.008    -0.010    -0.024               0.011     0.010     -0.004
                                                 (0.046) (0.052) (0.060)                  (0.052) (0.048) (0.062)
Married                                          -0.011    -0.011    -0.006               -0.011    -0.011    -0.006
                                                 (0.019) (0.018) (0.021)                  (0.019) (0.019) (0.022)
Years of Education                               0.009*** 0.008*** 0.008**                0.009*** 0.009*** 0.009***
                                                 (0.003) (0.003) (0.004)                  (0.003) (0.002) (0.003)
Hourly wage                                      -0.001    -0.001    -0.001               -0.001    -0.001    -0.001
                                                 (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)                  (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
Log (Wealth)                                     -0.001    -0.002    -0.003               -0.001    -0.001    -0.003
                                                 (0.004) (0.004) (0.005)                  (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)
Weekly Work Hours                                -0.001***           -0.001               -0.001***           -0.001
                                                 (0.000)             (0.001)              (0.000)             (0.001)
Weekly Work Hours 2nd Quartiles                            -0.043**                                 -0.033
              (48-60 hours)                                (0.022)                                  (0.024)
Weekly Work Hours 3rd Quartiles                            -0.065**                                 -0.055**
              (61-70 hours)                                (0.025)                                  (0.026)
Weekly Work Hours 4th Quartiles                            -0.086***                                -0.076***
              (70 hours above)                             (0.023)                                  (0.026)
Size of Work Unit between                        0.055*** 0.054*** 0.081***               0.051*** 0.048*** 0.075**
             5-50 employees                      (0.017) (0.018) (0.028)                  (0.019) (0.019) (0.033)
Size of Work Unit                                0.086*** 0.083*** 0.102***               0.082*** 0.076*** 0.097***
             above 50 employees                  (0.018) (0.018) (0.027)                  (0.018) (0.020) (0.033)
District of Work FE  a                                               X                                        X
City FE                                        X          X                               X        X
H0: Trust=Risk=Lending Money=0 0.000           0.025      0.123     0.071      0.000      0.0873   0.0431    0.0505
b



H0: District of Work FE = 0c                                           0.000                                  0.000
R-squared                               0.003       0.065    0.066     0.112     0.003      0.063   0.064     0.111
Number of Observations                  4,743       4,743    4,743     4,491     4,952      4,952   4,952     4,691
Note : *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients from linear probability model are reported. Columns 4 and 8 have
fewer observations since some people's districts of work location are unidentified or some districts have only one
observation, thus are dropped from the analysis. All regressions include a dummy indicating whether wealth is
recorded as zero or not. The omitted work hours are those who work less than 48 hours a week. The omitted work
units are those with less than 5 employees. Bootstrap standard errors are in parentheses.
a. A set of dummies for city-district of work location.
b. P-values of joint significance test (risk preference= lend money = trusting people = 0 )
c. P-values of joint significance test (District of Work Dummies = 0 )

                                                                                                                        28
                              Table 3: Determinants of Self-Employment
                                                 Sample 1                       Sample 2
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)     (4)        (5)         (6)
Experiment Participants (EP)                    0.016       0.047              -0.046      -0.061
                                                (0.155)     (0.161)            (0.137)     (0.143)
Subjective Risk Preference           0.002      0.001       0.002   0.003      0.002       0.003
  (0=Risk Averse..10=Risk Seeking) (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.002) (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.002)
Often/Sometimes Lend Money           0.001      -0.004      -0.007  0.000      -0.009      -0.011
 to Acquaintances and Friends        (0.013)    (0.016)     (0.016) (0.011)    (0.014)     (0.014)
Trusting People (Yes=1)              -0.037*** -0.047*** -0.043*** -0.038***   -0.052***   -0.047***
                                     (0.011)    (0.014)     (0.013) (0.012)    (0.014)     (0.011)
Female                               0.004      0.005       0.008   0.020      0.017       0.020
                                     (0.012)    (0.016)     (0.012) (0.012)    (0.015)     (0.012)
Age                                  0.015*** 0.013** 0.014*** 0.017***        0.015***    0.015***
                                     (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.005) (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.005)
(Age)2                               -0.000*** -0.000** -0.000*** -0.000***    -0.000***   -0.000***
                                     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000) (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
Ethnic Minority (yes=1)              -0.014     -0.037      -0.037  -0.009     -0.052      -0.054
                                     (0.030)    (0.038)     (0.035) (0.041)    (0.042)     (0.037)
Married                              0.106*** 0.128*** 0.131*** 0.112***       0.131***    0.135***
                                     (0.015)    (0.020)     (0.020) (0.015)    (0.018)     (0.020)
Year of edu                          -0.017*** -0.015*** -0.015*** -0.019***   -0.017***   -0.017***
                                     (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.003) (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
Log(Wealth)                          0.064*** 0.071*** 0.069*** 0.062***       0.069***    0.066***
                                     (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.004) (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.005)
Years since Migrating to City        0.004*** 0.005*** 0.005*** 0.004***       0.005***    0.005***
                                     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.002) (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.002)
Size of Social Network               -0.011     -0.010      -0.002  -0.011     -0.006      0.004
                                     (0.021)    (0.025)     (0.024) (0.021)    (0.027)     (0.024)
EP* Subjective Risk Preference                  0.005       0.003              0.003       0.001
                                                (0.004)     (0.005)            (0.005)     (0.004)
EP* Lending Money                               0.023       0.026              0.034       0.039*
                                                (0.025)     (0.027)            (0.028)     (0.023)
EP* Trusting People                             0.029       0.021              0.042**     0.032
                                                (0.023)     (0.022)            (0.020)     (0.020)
EP*Female                                       -0.011      -0.023             0.002       -0.011
                                                (0.025)     (0.022)            (0.023)     (0.024)
EP*Age                                          0.005       0.006              0.007       0.009
                                                (0.009)     (0.009)            (0.007)     (0.008)
EP*Age2                                         -0.000      -0.000             -0.000      -0.000
                                                (0.000)     (0.000)            (0.000)     (0.000)
EP*Minority                                     0.097       0.099              0.151**     0.154**
                                                (0.069)     (0.071)            (0.076)     (0.076)
EP*Married                                      -0.071** -0.076**              -0.063**    -0.072**
                                                                                                   29
                                                (0.034)     (0.034)            (0.028)     (0.035)
EP*Years of Education                           -0.003      -0.004             -0.004      -0.003
                                                (0.004)     (0.005)            (0.005)     (0.005)
EP*Married                                       -0.071**     -0.076**            -0.063**       -0.072**
                                                 (0.034)      (0.034)             (0.028)        (0.035)
EP*Years of Education                            -0.003       -0.004              -0.004         -0.003
                                                 (0.004)      (0.005)             (0.005)        (0.005)
EP*log(wealth)                                   -0.024***    -0.019**            -0.021***      -0.015*
                                                 (0.007)      (0.008)             (0.007)        (0.007)
EP*Years since Migrating to City                 -0.003       -0.003              -0.004         -0.005*
                                                 (0.003)      (0.003)             (0.003)        (0.003)
EP*Network Size                                  -0.013       -0.037              -0.028         -0.059
                                                 (0.042)      (0.039)             (0.039)        (0.042)
Constant                               -0.465*** -0.459***    -0.482*** -0.478*** -0.455***      -0.463***
                                       (0.081)   (0.097)      (0.079)   (0.071)   (0.086)        (0.090)
City Fixed Effect (FE)                 X         X            X         X         X              X
EP*City Dummies                                               X                                  X
H0: Trust=Risk=Lending Money=0a 0.002              0.006      0.013       0.015      0.002       0.0001
H0: EP and EP interaction terms=0b                 0.000      0.000                  0.000       0.000
H0: EP*Trust=EP*Risk= EP*lending                   0.193      0.450                  0.093       0.047
money= 0c
Observations                             4,722      4,722       4,722       4,934      4,934      4,934
R-squared                                0.233      0.242       0.249       0.242      0.251      0.257
Note : *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients from linear probability model are estimated. All
regressions include a dummy indicating whether wealth is recorded as zero or not. In Columns 2, 3, 5
and 6, the interaction term between EP and wealth equals 0 dummies are also included. Bootstrap
standard errors are in parentheses.
a. P-values from F-test for the joint significance of three preference parameters are reported.
(Trust=Risk=Lending money=0)
b. P-values from F-test for the joint signficance of all in-experiment interaction terms and in-experiment
dummy are reported. (EP and EP interaction terms =0)
c. P-values from F-test for the joint significance of in-experiment * preferences interaction terms are
reported. (EP*Trust=EP*Risk= EP*lending money=0)




                                                                                                             30
                          Table 4: Determinants of Log (Distance of Migration)
                                                   Sample 1                       Sample 2
                                       (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)
Experiment Participants (EP)                      -1.953*** -1.661***            -1.729***   -1.430***
                                                  (0.485)    (0.552)             (0.438)     (0.493)
Subjective Risk Preference             0.004      -0.003     -0.002    0.003     -0.002      -0.001
  (0=Risk Averse..10=Risk Seeking) (0.006)        (0.008)    (0.007)   (0.006)   (0.007)     (0.006)
Often/Sometimes Lend Money             -0.054** -0.060       -0.065* -0.056**    -0.059*     -0.063
 to Acquaintances and Friends          (0.023)    (0.042)    (0.037)   (0.028)   (0.034)     (0.039)
Trusting People (Yes=1)                -0.024     -0.018     -0.017    -0.023    -0.009      -0.010
                                       (0.028)    (0.038)    (0.036)   (0.028)   (0.029)     (0.035)
Female                                 -0.106*** -0.120*** -0.114*** -0.116***   -0.125***   -0.120***
                                       (0.034)    (0.032)    (0.034)   (0.026)   (0.035)     (0.033)
Age                                    0.009      0.001      0.002     0.009     0.004       0.005
                                       (0.010)    (0.012)    (0.013)   (0.009)   (0.011)     (0.013)
(Age)2                                 -0.000* -0.000        -0.000    -0.000*   -0.000      -0.000
                                       (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)     (0.000)
Ethnic Minority (yes=1)                0.717*** 0.832*** 0.830*** 0.715***       0.842***    0.843***
                                       (0.142)    (0.160)    (0.182)   (0.136)   (0.156)     (0.165)
Married                                -0.015     -0.012     -0.011    -0.008    -0.011      -0.012
                                       (0.039)    (0.046)    (0.048)   (0.040)   (0.049)     (0.057)
Year of Education                      -0.000     -0.004     -0.004    -0.000    -0.005      -0.004
                                       (0.006)    (0.008)    (0.007)   (0.006)   (0.008)     (0.007)
Log(Wealth)                            -0.021** -0.043*** -0.044*** -0.020**     -0.040***   -0.042***
                                       (0.009)    (0.011)    (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.010)     (0.011)
Size of Social Network                 0.023      0.051      0.047     0.010     0.051       0.049
                                       (0.081)    (0.097)    (0.086)   (0.072)   (0.081)     (0.088)
Log (Distance to Closest               0.643*** 0.587*** 0.588*** 0.652***       0.598***    0.598***
            City from Hometown)        (0.037)    (0.038)    (0.045)   (0.033)   (0.039)     (0.038)
EP* Subjective Risk Preference                    0.021*     0.018               0.018       0.014
                                                  (0.012)    (0.012)             (0.011)     (0.012)
EP*Lending Money                                  0.017      0.034               0.006       0.022
                                                  (0.061)    (0.065)             (0.060)     (0.067)
EP*Trusting People                                -0.025     -0.021              -0.044      -0.037
                                                  (0.057)    (0.053)             (0.046)     (0.060)
EP*Female                                         0.050      0.023               0.031       0.010
                                                  (0.057)    (0.059)             (0.059)     (0.062)
EP*Age                                            0.026      0.022               0.018       0.012
                                                  (0.021)    (0.020)             (0.020)     (0.020)
EP*Age2                                           -0.000     -0.000              -0.000      -0.000
                                                  (0.000)    (0.000)             (0.000)     (0.000)
EP*Minority                                       -0.446* -0.427                 -0.453*     -0.439*
                                                  (0.253)    (0.282)             (0.266)     (0.254)

                                                                                                    31
EP*Married                                          0.005      0.010                   0.024      0.037
                                                    (0.078)    (0.085)                 (0.082)    (0.090)
EP*Years of Education                               0.012      0.009                   0.016      0.012
                                                    (0.012)    (0.012)                 (0.013)    (0.012)
EP*log(wealth)                                      0.063***   0.067***                0.055***   0.059***
                                                    (0.017)    (0.017)                 (0.017)    (0.019)
EP*Network Size                                     -0.057     -0.032                  -0.093     -0.071
                                                    (0.154)    (0.143)                 (0.123)    (0.134)
EP*log(Distance to Closest City                     0.167**    0.160**                 0.158**    0.154**
                   from Hometown)                   (0.069)    (0.068)                 (0.062)    (0.062)
City Fixed Effect (FE)                  X           X          X        X              X          X
EP*City Dummies                                                X                                  X
H0: Trust=Risk=Lending Money=0a         0.046       0.355      0.268    0.146          0.217      0.431
H0: EP and EP interaction terms=0b                  0.000      0.000                   0.001      0.000
H0: EP*Trust=EP*Risk= EP*lending                    0.345      0.367                   0.324      0.643
          c
money= 0
Observations                              4,823       4,823       4,823      5,040      5,040      5,040
R-squared                                 0.579       0.584       0.585      0.581      0.586      0.587
Note : *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regressions include a dummy indicating whether wealth is
recorded as zero or not. In Columns 2, 3, 5 and 6, the interaction term between EP and wealth equals 0
dummies are also included. Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.
a. P-values from F-test for the joint significance of three preference parameters are reported.
(Trust=Risk=Lending money=0)
b. P-values from F-test for the joint signficance of all in-experiment interaction terms and in-experiment
dummy are reported. (EP and EP interaction terms =0)
c. P-values from F-test for the joint significance of in-experiment preferences interaction terms are
reported. (EP*Trust=EP*Risk= EP*lending money=0)




                                                                                                             32
