                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE REAL VALUE OF CHINA'S STOCK MARKET

                                      Jennifer N. Carpenter
                                          Fangzhou Lu
                                       Robert F. Whitelaw

                                       Working Paper 20957
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20957


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2015




We thank Viral Acharya, Franklin Allen, Yakov Amihud, Jennifer Arlen, Michael Brennan, Kalok
Chan, Hui Chen, Zhiwu Chen, Will Goetzmann, Joel Hasbrouck, Peter Henry, Kose John, Alexander
Ljungqvist, Anthony Lynch, Thomas Philippon, Qi Bin, Qian Zhiyi, Alexi Savov, Antionette Schoar,
Myron Scholes, Kim Schoenholtz, Mike Spence, Johannes Stroebel, Jiang Wang, Shujin Wang, Jeff
Wurgler, Hongjun Yan, and seminar participants at the China International Conference in Finance,
China Securities Regulatory Commission, NBER Chinese Economy meeting, Renmin University Alumni
Association, Shanghai Stock Exchange, and Yeshiva University for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jennifer N. Carpenter, Fangzhou Lu, and Robert F. Whitelaw. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Real Value of China's Stock Market
Jennifer N. Carpenter, Fangzhou Lu, and Robert F. Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 20957
February 2015
JEL No. E44,G12,G15,G18,O16,O53,P20,P34

                                              ABSTRACT

China is the world’s largest investor and greatest contributor to global economic growth by wide margins,
and will remain so for many years. The efficiency of its financial system in allocating capital to investment
will be important to sustain this growth. This paper shows that China’s stock market has a crucial role
to play. Since the reforms of the last decade, China’s stock market has become as informative about
future corporate profits as in the US. Moreover, though it is a segmented market, Chinese investors
price risk and other stock characteristics remarkably like investors in other large economies. They
pay up for large stocks, growth stocks, and long shots, and they discount for illiquidity and market
risk. China’s stock market no longer deserves its reputation as a casino. In addition, the trend of stock
price informativeness over the last two decades is highly correlated with that of corporate investment
efficiency. China’s stock market appears to be aggregating diffuse information and generating useful
signals for managers. On the buy side, because of its low correlation with other stock markets and
high average returns, China’s stock market offers high alpha to diversified global investors who can
access it. Yet this high alpha amounts to an inflated cost of equity capital, constraining the investment
of China’s smaller, more profitable enterprises. Further reforms that open this market to global investors
and improve stock price informativeness will be important to increase China’s investment efficiency and
fuel its continued economic growth. Finally, we interpret the stock market’s recent gyrations through the
lens of this research, arguing that its post-crisis lag was a rational downward adjustment to competition
from the rapidly expanding shadow banking sector, and its enormous rally last year is a cheer for the
roll out of deposit insurance and other Third Plenum reforms. More than ever, China’s stock market
is a crucial counterpart to its extraordinary, relationship-driven, but opaque banking sector. China’s
stock market may now be the world’s most important crystal ball.


Jennifer N. Carpenter                                 Robert F. Whitelaw
New York University                                   New York University
Stern School of Business                              Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190                       44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126                               New York, NY 10012-1126
jcarpen0@stern.nyu.edu                                and NBER
                                                      rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu
Fangzhou Lu
MIT Sloan
50 Memorial Dr.
Cambridge, MA 02142
luf@mit.edu
    China became the world’s largest investor in 2010 and will remain so for many years. In
2014, China made $4.9 trillion of total fixed-asset investment, compared with $3.4 trillion
in the US and $1.1 trillion in Japan. China has also been the greatest contributor to global
growth since 2007, contributing $0.9 trillion to the increase in global GDP in 2014, compared
with $0.6 trillion from the US and $0.3 trillion from the UK. Adjusted for purchasing power,
China’s investment and contribution to growth are almost twice as large. The efficiency
of China’s financial system in allocating capital across investment opportunities will be an
important determinant of global economic growth in the coming decades. This paper presents
evidence indicating that China’s stock market has a crucial role to play.
    Though it has become the second largest in the world, with a market capitalization
of $6 trillion at the end of 2014, China’s stock market is still a sideshow in a financial
system dominated by a massive state-controlled banking sector. After a rocky first decade
from 1990 to 2000, China’s stock market earned a reputation as a casino manipulated by
speculators and insiders. In the years after the financial crisis, China’s stock market recovery
lagged those of other large economies, as its rapidly expanding shadow banking sector,
issuing new high yielding but implicitly guaranteed wealth-management products to finance
both market-driven and centrally planned investment, pulled in financial capital and raised
required equity returns. Only recently has the market caught up, earning a 60% return in
2014, in anticipation of deposit insurance and other financial reforms that will reduce the
implicit subsidy to the interconnected banking and shadow banking sector and stimulate
economic growth.
    This paper presents evidence that overturns two widely held perceptions about China’s
stock market and suggests that China would do well to open this market to international
investors and let it pick winners, too. First, we show that China’s stock market no longer
deserves its reputation as a casino. On the contrary, over the last decade, the informativeness
of stock prices about future corporate earnings has increased steadily, reaching levels that
compare favorably with those in the US. Moreover, although China’s financial market is
largely inaccessible to foreign investors, the cross-sectional pattern of its stock returns is
strikingly similar to that in global equity markets. Like global investors, Chinese investors
pay up for large stocks, growth stocks, and long shots, and discount for illiquidity and market
risk. In addition, the trend of stock price informativeness in China over the last two decades
is highly correlated with the efficiency of its corporate investment. Stock prices in China
have become strongly linked with firm fundamentals and appear to play an important role
in aggregating diffuse information and generating useful signals for managers.
    Second, although the buy-and-hold return earned by undiversified domestic investors in
China’s stock market is depressed by the market’s extremely high volatility, the market


                                               1
offers very attractive returns to diversified international investors who can access them.
Unlike stock returns in integrated financial markets, stock returns in China exhibit very low
correlation with those in other large economies. At the same time, the average monthly
excess return on China’s stock market is twice that in the US. As a result, China offers high
alpha with respect to global risk factors to international investors who can access it.
     However, this high alpha to potential international investors amounts to an inflated
cost of equity capital for China’s firms, constraining the investment of its smaller and more
profitable enterprises. In addition, the high volatility of China’s stock market represents high
systematic risk to Chinese investors who cannot diversify it. Both of these problems would
be mitigated by opening financial capital flows between China and the global investment
community. Regulatory reforms over the last decade, such as the unlock of state-owned
shares, the introduction of the Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (QFII) program, and
rules that have strengthened minority shareholder protection, dividend policy, and disclosure,
have done much to improve the functioning of China’s stock market. But further reforms
that liberalize capital flows and improve stock price informativeness will be important to
increase China’s investment efficiency and fuel its continued economic growth.
     A large literature in economics, finance, and accounting going back to Hayek (1945)
and Fama (1970) links good legal and market institutions, informativeness of stock prices
about future profits, and efficiency of corporate investment and economic growth. Relative
to other components of the financial system, such as banks, stock markets can improve the
efficiency of capital allocation by creating stronger incentives for information generation and
by aggregating that information across a broader set of market participants. In addition,
listing standards and auditing and disclosure processes for publicly traded firms provide
transparency. Stock markets also channel tradable equity capital to firms, lowering the cost
of equity capital, and enriching the portfolio choice of investors. Relative to other financing
channels, stock markets can also be the preferred access point for foreign portfolio investors
because of the relative transparency and liquidity of traded equities. Finally, because of
their role in generating information and transparency, stock markets can be important com-
plements to the relationship-driven, custom-tailored, but often opaque banking and shadow
banking sectors.
     China’s financial system is dominated by its state-controlled banking sector and expand-
ing shadow banking sector. Total bank credit was 128% of GDP in 2012, according to Elliott
and Yan (2013), and total credit in the shadow banking sector is reckoned to be as much as
90% of GDP, while China’s stock market capitalization is only 44% of GDP. By contrast,
US bank credit and stock market capitalization were 48% and 118% of GDP in 2012. As in
other socialist countries, the dominance of China’s banking sector within its larger financial


                                               2
system is rooted in its political economy. This sector is the key instrument of centrally
planned investment policy.
    The post-crisis expansion of China’s shadow banking sector is also partly by design. This
sector has been crucial to implementing China’s massive post-crisis economic stimulus by
quickly channeling large amounts of capital to new real estate and infrastructure projects in
order to avert a recession, fuel real investment, and sustain economic growth. China’s shadow
banking sector represents an important extension of its traditional banking sector, which
leverages the reputation and relationship-based enforcement mechanisms that underlie some
of China’s most effective financing channels. As Allen, Qian, and Qian (2005) show, China is
a counterexample to the findings of the law, insititutions, growth, and finance literature such
as La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998, 2000), and its alternative
financing channels have been essential to its rapid growth. The shadow banking sector has
also been a laboratory for China’s interest rate liberalization. Despite increasing concerns
about the rapid growth of this sector and the bad loans and systemic risk it has created,
China’s government has tolerated this growing sector as an incubator for more market-driven
lending and expertise.
    However, the implicit guarantee of the China’s shadow banking sector may be undermin-
ing the development of an equally important financing channel–China’s stock market. This
paper argues that because of its unique ability to aggregate diffuse information, create trans-
parency, and channel capital accordingly, the stock market has a crucial and complementary
role to play alongside the state-controlled, relationship-based banking sector. We begin with
an analysis of the informativeness of China’s stock market over the period 1996 to 2012,
using data from the China Stock Market and Accounting Research (CSMAR) database.
Following Bai, Philippon, and Savov (2013), we define the informativeness of the market as
the cross-sectional variation in future earnings predicted by firm market value. Our results
suggest that the informativeness of prices has steadily improved since the establishment of
market reforms around the time of China’s entry into the WTO and compares favorably
with that in the US. We relate the trends in the price informativeness of China’s stock
market to China’s legal, market, and accounting regimes since 1996. We also analyze the
stock price synchronicity measure introduced by Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000) and show
that cross-country comparisons must account for differences in overall market volatility in
order to yield correct implications about stock price informativeness.
    Next, we examine the efficiency of corporate investment in China over the same period.
Adapting the approach of Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004) to the Chinese setting, we define
the efficiency of investment as the unexpected change in equity value associated with a unit
of unexpected investment, measured in a cross-sectional regression. We find that the trend


                                              3
of investment efficiency closely follows that of price informativeness over our sample period,
with an economically and statisically high correlation between the series. This strong positive
association between China’s stock price informativeness and corporate investment efficiency
emphasizes the real economic value of China’s stock market and merits the attention of
financial market reformers.
    Having established the link between stock prices and future corporate profits, the paper
turns to the study of stock returns in China. This analysis begins by characterizing the
cross-section of Chinese stock returns and their correlation with stock returns in other large
economies. In contrast to the high correlations in returns across open markets, returns
in China’s stock market exhibit low correlation with those in stock markets in other large
economies. Yet, despite China’s segmentation from other markets, the cross-sectional pattern
of its stock returns is remarkably similar to that in the US and in other global equity markets.
In this respect, China’s stock market seems to be as efficient as those of other large economies,
yet again challenging the casino theory.
    Finally, we analyze the overall performance of China’s stock market and uncover a number
of striking new results. The much-publicized Shanghai Stock Exchange index earned China’s
stock market a reputation for poor performance during the post-crisis period, particularly
in terms of its buy-and-hold return for undiversified domestic Chinese investors, and this
culminated in the closure of the market to IPOs in 2012. However, our analysis of the
broader market, including stocks on the Shenzhen, SME, and ChiNext boards, suggests that
China’s stock market has in fact done very well over our full sample period 1995-2012, and
offers attractive returns and opportunities for diversification to international equity investors
who can access it, such as those approved as QFIIs. In particular, we show that China’s stock
market has had a high average monthly USD return, and a high alpha with respect to the US
and global market, size, value, and momentum factors. However, this high alpha translates
to a high cost of capital for China’s firms, re-emphasizing the importance of opening China’s
stock market to the global investment community.
    China’s stock market is still young, but our results suggest that it is already serving
an important role. To sustain China’s continued contribution to global growth, further
reforms that increase its stock market informativeness, liberalize its capital flows, and attract
international capital will be important to reduce corporate China’s cost of equity capital,
increase its investment efficiency, and support economic growth worldwide.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 provides an overview of the history
and unique features of China’s stock market. Section 2 analyzes the informativeness of stock
prices in China and shows that it compares favorably with that in the US, particularly since
the reforms of the last decade. Section 3 examines the efficiency of corporate investment in


                                               4
China and documents its high positive correlation with China’s stock price informativeness.
Section 4 studies the cross-sectional pricing of China’s stocks and analyzes its overall market
performance, correlation with other markets, and opportunities for international investors.
Section 5 discusses recent financial developments and reforms in China and interprets the
corresponding stock market gyrations through the lens of this research.


1    Overview of China’s stock market
In contrast to the markets of developed countries, China’s stock market has a history of only
23 years. However, since its opening in 1991 in Shanghai and Shenzhen, it has become one
of the most important enterprise financing channels in China. As a country, China has the
second largest stock market by both trading volume and market capitalization, $6 trillion by
the end of 2014. Figure 1 shows that the number of stocks has risen from 53 in 1992 to 2538
in 2012. The main boards of the Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges list larger more
mature stocks, like the NYSE in the US. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange also includes two
other boards, the Small and Medium Enterprise Board and the ChiNext Board, also known as
the Growth Enterprise Board, which provide capital for smaller and high-technology stocks,
like the NASDAQ in the US.
    China’s stock market has a number of distinctive features. First, it is a pure order-driven
market, as opposed to a quote-driven market, whereas the US and several other countries
have hybrid equity market systems. Second, it is a centralized market, whereas the US
market is fragmented, with multiple exchanges, dark pools, and other off-exchange trading.
This may have important implications for market informativeness. There are no dark pools
with hidden orders in China, all orders are visible. Moreover, there is no extended trading
period for institutional investors. Institutional and retail investors have equal access to
information from a market microstructure point of view. In addition, China’s stock market
has a daily price change limit of 10%, which is intended to reduce excess volatility and deter
stock price manipulation.
    China’s stock market has a dual-share system in which domestic investors can invest
only in A shares, while foreign investors can invest only in B shares. In addition, many
firms have H shares, traded on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. A number of articles,
such as Chan, Menkveld, and Yang (2008) and Mei, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2009), study
the price discount of B shares and H shares relative to A shares, a phenomenon that they
attribute to information asymmetry between foreign and domestic investors and speculative
motives. With the introduction of programs such as the QFII program of 2002, which
relaxed the cross-trading restrictions, B share issuance and trading have mostly vanished.

                                              5
In addition, China’s equity market used to have a large nontradable component, held by
corporate founders, often central or local governments. With the share structure reform
starting in 2005, this phenomenon has mostly disappeared among mid and small-cap stocks,
though not entirely among large stocks.
    In 2001, a famous Chinese economist, Wu Jinglian, characterized China’s stock market
as a “casino” manipulated by speculators, misled by the central government’s visible hand to
unfairly support state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and without a strong link to fundamentals.
Moreover, much of the academic literature in finance on China has emphasized the market’s
imperfections. However, our results suggest that this view is no longer correct. On the
contrary, China’s stock market has become as effective as the US stock market at aggregating
and impounding information about future profits into prices, and exhibits a cross-sectional
return pattern surprisingly similar to those in developed markets, despite its segmented
nature.


2    The informativeness of stock prices in China
A long literature in economics, finance, and accounting going back to Hayek (1945) and Fama
(1970) links good legal and market institutions to stock price informativeness about future
profits and required returns, and further to the efficiency of capital allocation and corporate
investment. Elements of this nexus include the benefits of effective listing, disclosure, and
auditing policy (Amihud and Mendelson (1988), Diamond and Verrecchia (1991), Healy
and Palepu (2001), and Hail and Leuz (2009)), aggregation of diffuse information across
individuals, incentives to generate information, and its inference from prices (Grossman and
Stiglitz (1980), Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985)), and managerial use of price signals
in resource allocation and investment decisions (Wurgler (2000), Baker, Stein, and Wurgler
(2003), Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004), Chari and Henry (2004), Chen, Goldstein, and
Jiang (2007)). Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein (2012) provide a detailed review.
    A branch of the literature introduced by Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000) proposes stock
price asynchronicity and idiosyncratic firm risk as measures of firm-specific information in
prices. More recently, Bai, Philippon, and Savov (2013) define price informativeness as
the predicted variation in a cross-sectional regression of future corporate earnings on firm
market values and study its trend in the US stock market. Subsection 2.1 examines the price
informativeness of China’s stock market, shows that it is comparable to that in the US, and
relates its trends to the regulatory regimes that prevailed during its history. Subsection 2.2
shows that the average idiosyncratic risk of China’s stocks is greater than that in the US
and highlights the difficulties of comparing R2 ’s across countries.

                                              6
2.1     Price informativeness about future earnings
Bai, Philippon, and Savov (2013) develop a model in which stock price informativeness
promotes efficient allocation of corporate investment and economic growth. They define
price informativeness as the extent to which market valuations differentiate firms that will
have high profits from those that will not. Empirically, they define price informativeness in
a given year t as the predicted variation, at × σt (log(M/A)), in the following cross-sectional
regression of future earnings on current market equity value and lagged earnings, normalized
by book asset value,

                           Ei,t+k                Mi,t          Ei,t
                                  = ct + at log(      ) + bt (      ) + εi,t+k ,                      (1)
                            Ai,t                 Ai,t          Ai,t

with industry fixed effects to control for differences in discount rates. Their focus is on the
trend of stock price informativeness in the US, which they find has not increased since 1960.
We take this model to the data on earnings, equity market value, and asset book value from
the China Stock Market and Accounting Research (CSMAR) database from 1996 to 2012.
To filter out bad data, we eliminate observations with earnings greater than three times
book asset value. A number of papers in the accounting literature document the low quality
of auditing and reported earnings in China (DeFond, Wong, and Li (1999), Chen and Yuan
(2004), Wang, Wong, and Xia (2008)). Such errors should bias our results against finding
price informativeness.
    Figure 2 plots the coefficients at inside their 95% confidence bands, the predicted variation
at × σt (log(M/A)), and the marginal R2 of regression (1) for forecasting periods k = 1, 2,
and 3, for each year t = 1996 to 2012 − k.1 Marginal R2 is the increment in the R2 of
                                         Mi,t
regression (1) created by adding log( Ai,t    ) as a regressor. A comparison with evidence on US
stock price informativeness in Figure 2 of Bai, Philippon, and Savov (2013) shows that the
average level of stock price informativeness in China over the period is similar to that in the
US. However, four distinct periods are apparent, which we interpret in the context of the
regulatory regimes that prevailed over the life of China’s stock market in Figure 3.
    The first stage of the development of China’s stock market, a period of market opening
and construction from 1991 to 1997, is characterized by the establishment of the exchanges
in Shanghai and Shenzhen and the transition from a decentralized and disorganized stock
market to a centralized modern market. During the first five years, the number of stocks listed
on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges grew from eight to more than five hundred.
Many stocks moved from an OTC platform to Shanghai and Shenzhen’s electronic trading
   1
    The confidence bands use White heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. We also calculated stan-
dard errors clustered by industry, with qualitatively similar results.


                                                    7
platform. In 1992, a direct electronic trading system was implemented, which increased
liquidity in the equity market.
    By 1996, over five hundred companies had stocks listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen
exchanges and Dow Jones began to publish the China, Shanghai 30, and Shenzhen indices,
which attracted a significant following by equity analysts. In addition, these exchanges
unified limit-order books and greatly reduced trading commissions, which also increased liq-
uidity. Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2008) show theoretically that increasing liquid-
ity improves market efficiency and informativeness, which suggests that these developments
contributed to the rise of informativeness in China’s stock market over this period. The
adoption of a price change limit of 10% and a one-day minimum holding period in 1996
may also have deterred stock price manipulation, as suggested by Kim and Park (2010). In
1997, the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) become the official regulator of
China’s stock market. These policies shaped the market opening and construction period of
China’s stock market and the prototype of an efficient capital allocation platform for China’s
businesses and enterprises.
    The second stage, from 1998 to 2001, is a period of rampant speculation and accounting
fraud, flagrant stock price manipulation, and the birth of the casino theory. In 1998, prices
of firms in Special Treatment for financial distress began to soar and the CSRC reported
widespread market manipulation. Pump-and-dump schemes were also common during this
period. The average PE ratio of China’s stocks surged to 70 by the end of 2000, suggesting
that prices were deviating from fundamental value. This may be consistent with the theory
in Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2013) showing that undesirable coordination across
speculators makes the market less informative, decreases real investment, and increases stock
market volatility.
    Accounting fraud was a major problem during this period as well. In early 2000, the first
stock traded above 100 RMB, which was an important cognitive benchmark. This sparked
an investigation by the CSRC, which revealed serious accounting fraud. Later that year
several other major accounting scandals came to light. DeFond et al. (1999) argue that the
fraudulent accounting stemmed from an unregulated and poorly supervised audit market.
They suggest that the audit market in China was dominated by government-affiliated au-
ditors, who tended to audit in favor of government-affiliated companies. They also report
that auditors lost market share after they behaved more independently, implying that they
may have had incentives not to report frauds in order to retain clients. At the end of 2000,
Chinese financial economist Wu Jinglian proposed the famous casino theory, suggesting that
China’s equity market failed to fulfill its capital allocation function, and merely provided a
platform for insiders and speculators to profit illegally at the expense of retail investors and


                                               8
minority shareholders whose interests were unprotected.
    The third stage, from 2001 to 2007, is a period of market reform. This stage is milestoned
by China’s entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) and marked by improvements
in regulatory protection of minority shareholders, increases in accounting transparency and
audit quality, privatization of state-owned enterprises, and the increase of foreign investors’
direct investment in the A-share market. Gul, Kim, and Qiu (2010) show that stock price
synchronicity in China significantly declined with the increase in foreign shareholding, audit
quality, and the decrease of ownership concentration. At the end of year 2001, the CSRC
enforced new and stricter delisting regulations to protect retail investor interests. In 2002,
the CSRC ratified the QFII program, enabling qualified foreign institutional investors to
invest in A shares directly. The first two foreign institutional investors were the Nomura
and UBS open-end mutual funds. In 2004, the CSRC established the National Nine Rules to
protect minority shareholder interests, deter stock price manipulation, and deter accounting
and audit fraud.
    In 2005, the CSRC introduced the split share structure reform to unlock nontradeable
shares gradually and privatize them in a way that compensated the holders of tradeable
shares. Our results in Figure 3 suggest that this expansion and diversification of the base
of market participants was a key turning point in the informativeness of stock prices. Liao,
Liu, and Wang (2011) and Li, Wang, Cheung, and Jiang (2011) also study this share unlock
and the improvements in information discovery and risk sharing it enabled.
    In 2006, the Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges introduced margin trading and
short selling pilot programs, which expanded gradually in the subsequent years. In a study of
46 countries, Bris, Goetzmann, and Zhu (2007) find evidence that allowing short sales permits
prices to incorporate negative information more quickly. More recently, Ljungqvist and
Qian (2014) document a direct mechanism through which the possibility of short sales gives
arbitrageurs an incentive to incorporate negative information into prices. The combination of
regulatory reforms, capital market development, improving accounting and auditing quality,
and foreign investors’ direct participation in the market may all have helped to boost price
informativeness in China’s stock market during this period.
    The fourth and last stage, from 2008, is the financial crisis period, during which price
informativeness declined somewhat. The crisis could have depressed realized price infor-
mativeness for at least two reasons, one, because it precipitated extreme realizations from
the distribution of earnings, and two, because it lead to some dislocation and mistrust of
capital markets, which did in fact undermine the informativeness of prices. Nevertheless,
price informativeness has remained relatively high and comparable to price informativeness
in the US stock market.


                                              9
2.2    Idiosyncratic firm risk
This section examines stock price informativeness in China measured by average idiosyn-
cratic firm risk and market model R2 , as proposed by Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000), Durnev,
Morck, Yeung, and Zarowin (2003), and Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2013). Li, Rajgopal, and
Venkatachalam (2013) catalog a large literature that links these measures to stock price in-
formativeness, investment efficiency, disclosure and audit quality, and corporate governance.
For each stock i with a return time series of at least 36 months during the period 1995-2012,
we estimate the idiosyncratic variance σε2i from the monthly market model regression

                           ri,t − rf,t = αi + βi (rm,t − rf,t ) + εi,t ,                  (2)

and then calculate the cross-sectional average idiosyncratic variance. Table 1 shows that the
square root of the average annualized idiosyncratic variance in China is 58%, compared with
27% in the US during the period 1962-1997, as estimated in Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and
Xu (2001). By this metric, the firm-specific information content of stocks in China is more
than double that in the US.
    Table 1 also shows that the annualized volatility of the excess return on the market
portfolio in China is 32% over the period 1995-2012, double the US market volatility of 16%
over the same period. To reconcile these results with commonly recognized stock return
volatility figures and highlight China’s high return variance, note that representative firms
with these variance decompositions and market betas of one would have total return volatility
of 66% and 31% in China and the US, respectively.
    This high market return variance in China drives up its synchronicity measure

                                                 σε2m
                                       Ri2   = 2         .                                (3)
                                              σεm + σε2i

As the last column of Table 1 summarizes, based on Panel B of Figure 2 of Morck, Yeung, and
Yu (2013), the average firm R2 s is 36% in China versus 14% in the US. By this comparison,
stock prices in the US would appear to contain greater firm-specific information than those in
China. But by direct comparison of average idiosyncratic risk, stock prices in China contain
greater firm-specific information. This illustrates the problem with comparing R2 s across
countries with very different market return variances, as Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2013) point
out. Li, Rajgopal, and Venkatachalam (2013) and Hou, Peng, and Xiong (2013) elaborate
on additional limitations of the R2 measure.
    Another measure of stock price synchronicity used to quantify the lack of firm-specific
information in prices is co-movement, the fraction of stocks in the market that move together.


                                                10
It is easy to show under reasonable assumptions that, like R2 , co-movement is another
measure that increases with the variance of the return on the market, holding idiosyncratic
firm variance constant. Thus, a high degree of co-movement in China’s stock market may
be attributable to the high variance of the market rather than to a shortage of firm-specific
information in stock prices.

            Table 1: Average idiosyncratic firm risk and R2 in China and the US
Square root of cross-sectional average annualized idiosyncratic stock return variance, market return
variance, total return variance for a representative firm, and average market model R2 s from Morck,
Yeung, and Yu (2013), in percent.



                           Idiosyncratic   Market     Total      Average R2
                           volatility      volatility volatility
                  China    57.81           32.25      66.20      36.00
                  US       26.57           16.14      31.09      14.00



3     Efficiency of corporate investment in China
Summarizing economic arguments that go back to Hayek (1945) and Fama (1970), Durnev,
Morck, and Yeung (2004) state that “corporate capital investment should be more efficient
where stock prices are more informative.” They find a positive cross-sectional correlation
between their measure of corporate investment efficiency and firm-specific variation in stock
returns in US firms. More broadly, in a study of 65 countries, Wurgler (2000) finds a
positive correlation between the efficiency of capital allocation and the development of the
financial sector, and a positive correlation between efficiency and the amount of firm-specific
information in domestic stock returns. This section examines the link between stock price
informativeness and corporate investment efficiency in China and finds a strong positive
correlation.
    We define the efficiency of corporate investment as the unexpected change in equity value
associated with a unit of unexpected investment, measured for each year t by the coefficient
βt in the following version of the cross-sectional regression proposed by Durnev, Morck, and
Yeung (2004),
                            ∆Vi,t            ∆Ai,t       Vi,t−1
                                   = αt + βt        + γt        + εi,t ,                   (4)
                            Ai,t−1           Ai,t−1      Ai,t−1
where the second regressor above controls for the anticipated return on equity and in addition,
we include industry fixed effects to control for differences in expected growth and depreciation

                                                11
rates of capital stock. Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004) use market asset value instead of
equity value, they interpret the coefficient βt as the marginal Tobin’s q, and they measure
efficiency of investment as the difference between this coefficient and one, based on the
argument that the marginal q of firms that are investing optimally should be one. By
contrast, we interpret the coefficient β above as a direct measure of investment efficiency for
several reasons. First, unexpected investment may be “good news” about the productivity
of both past and future investment, and may optimally translate to changes in value greater
than one for one. Second, as the coefficient measures the relationship between investment
and changes in value over a year, it is average rather than marginal q. Third, in a setting
such as China, where most firms face potentially severe capital constraints, it may be difficult
for firms to reach the optimal investment level. Thus, we interpret a larger coefficient in the
cross-section as reflecting greater efficiency of investment.
     Figure 4 plots the time series of investment efficiency coefficients inside their 95% confi-
dence bands over the period 1996-2012. Figure 5 plots this time series of investment efficiency
coefficients using the right-hand scale, in combination with the time series of Bai-Philippon-
Savov price informativeness measures we calculated in Section 2.1, using the left-hand scale,
for three different earnings forecasting periods. The patterns of the two time series are strik-
ingly similar, and the correlation between them is high and statistically significant in the
cases of earnings forecasting periods of 2 and 3 years, despite the short sample period.
     This high correlation supports the idea that corporate investment is more efficient when
stock prices are more informative. It may be that a listing on the stock exchange in salutory
information environments improves the efficiency of corporate investment for other reasons
as well, for example, because disclosure and auditing standards in and of themselves lead
to better managerial decision-making. The positive correlation may also flow from broader
channels. For example, legal, regulatory, and accounting environments in which the stock
market is functioning well are also those in which managerial investment decisions are more
informed and better aligned with equity value maximization. In any case, this significant
positive association between stock price informativeness and investment efficiency is an im-
portant empirical result and merits attention and careful consideration by financial market
reformers in China. Finally, we note that the average level of investment efficiency over the
sample period is 1.00, compared with an average coefficent of 0.91 in the US, reported by
Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004).




                                               12
4     Equity pricing and investment opportunities in China
While the last section examines the informativeness of stock prices about future profits and
its relation to corporate investment, this section studies the pricing of those profits and im-
plications for financial investors and corporate cost of capital. We analyze the cross-sectional
structure of returns and equity premia paid to Chinese investors, the performance of China’s
stock market and correlation with stock markets in other countries, and investment opportu-
nities for foreign and domestic investors. Our results challenge two widely held perceptions
about China’s stock market. First, we find that despite the market’s segmentation from other
major markets and its early reputation as a casino, the cross-sectional pattern of returns is
quite similar to that in the US and other global stock markets. This is especially surpris-
ing given the low correlation between returns in China and those in other large economies.
Second, despite the perception of overall poor performance, China’s stock market offers at-
tractive returns and opportunities for diversification, i.e., high alpha, to international equity
investors who can access it. However, this high potential alpha for USD investors suggests
that capital controls are raising the cost of equity capital for China’s firms and that China
has much to gain from opening its market to foreign investors. Finally, we show how much
domestic Chinese investors’ lack of access to international diversification is costing them,
both in terms of the volatility cost of having to buy and hold the whole Chinese market, and
in terms of the potential US alpha they cannot currently access.


4.1    The cross-section of expected returns
This section presents new evidence on the cross-section of expected stock returns in China.
In earlier work, Chen, Kim, Yao, and Yu (2010) examine cross-sectional stock return pre-
dictability in China over the period July 1995 to June 2007 using data on A shares from the
PACAP-CCER China database. They consider 18 firm-specific variables found to predict
returns in the US and find all 18 have signs consistent with US evidence, and five are sig-
nificant in their sample, compared with eight variables that are significant in the US data
over the same period. Cakici, Chan, and Topyan (2011) analyze stock return predictability
in China from January 1994 to March 2011 using data on A shares traded on the Shanghai
and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges from Datastream and find strong predictive power for size,
book-to-market, cash-flow-to-price, and earnings-to-price, but not momentum. We update
and extend this evidence using data from March 1995 to December 2012 on A shares of firms
traded on the Shanghai and Shenzhen Exchanges from the CSMAR database.




                                               13
4.1.1   Firm-level cross-sectional regressions

We begin with Fama and MacBeth (1973) firm-level cross-sectional regressions of returns on
eight predictor variables: BETA, SIZE, BM, MOM, ILLIQ, MAX, REV, and SOE. Follow-
ing Scholes and Williams (1977) and Dimson (1979) to account for nonsychronous trading,
BETA is obtained from regressing daily firm returns on daily current, lead, and lagged mar-
ket returns over the previous month and summing the three coefficients. Following a long
literature going back to Banz (1981), SIZE is the natural logarithm of the total market
value of firm equity at the end of the previous month. As in Fama and French (1992), BM
is the ratio of book value of equity to market value of equity at the end of the previous
calendar year. Following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), momentum, MOM, is defined as
the cumulative stock return over the previous eleven-month period, lagged one month. We
measure illiquidity, ILLIQ, as the average over the previous month of the daily ratio of the
absolute value of the stock return to the total value of shares traded, as in Amihud (2002).
Following Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011), MAX is the maximum daily stock return over
the previous month and, following Jegadeesh (1990) and Lehmann (1990), short-term rever-
sal, REV, is the return on the stock over the previous month. Given the importance of the
level of state ownership in China in distinguishing firms’ political risk, governance structure,
objectives, opportunity set, and access to capital, we also introduce the variable SOE, which
is the percent of the firm’s shares held by the central or local government in the previous
month.
    Table 2 contains summary statistics for these predictor variables. Specifically, we report
the time series average across the months in the sample of the cross-sectional mean, standard
deviation, skewness, and various percentiles for the 8 predictors. In general, there is little
that is remarkable about these statistics, although they do reflect the specific nature of the
Chinese market. For example, the average book-to-market ratio is lower than in the US,
and the tails of the momentum (MOM) and reversal (REV) variables are more extreme
than in US data due to the high volatility of individual stock returns in China. Given this
volatility, the 95th percentile of the maximum daily return over the past month (MAX), at
just over 10%, seems surprisingly low. However, this statistic is a result of the fact that
the magnitude of daily prices moves is capped at 10% for much of the sample. Once this
limit is hit, trading on the stock is halted. Below, we address the issue of the effect of this
restriction on the ability of MAX to predict returns in the cross-section. Of greater interest,
SOE has a mean of 27%, a standard deviation of 23%, and 5th and 95th percentiles of 0%
and 65%, respectively, indicating that there is substantial cross-sectional variation in state
ownership, with significant fractions of firms that have no state ownership whatsoever and
that are majority controlled by the state.

                                              14
    Table 2: Summary statistics for firm-level cross-sectional return predictor variables
The table reports time-series averages of the cross-sectional summary statistics for each predictor
variable used in the cross-sectional regressions of firm returns on the predictor variables for each
month from July 1995 to December 2012. BETA is the Scholes-Williams-Dimson beta obtained
from regressing daily firm return on daily current, lead, and lagged market returns over the previous
month. SIZE is the log of total market value of equity at the end of the previous month. BM is
the Fama-French book-to-market ratio of book value of equity to market value of equity at the end
of the previous calendar year. MOM is Jegadeesh-Titman momentum defined as the cumulative
stock return over months t − 12 to t − 1. ILLIQ is Amihud illiquidity measured as the average over
the previous month of the daily ratio of the absolute value of the stock return to the total value
of shares traded, divided by one million. MAX is the Bali-Cakici-Whitelaw maximum daily stock
return over the previous month. REV is Jegadeesh-Lehmann short-term reversal defined as the
return on the stock over the previous month. SOE is the percent of shares held by the central or
local government measured at the previous month.


                  BETA       SIZE       BM     MOM       ILLIQ     MAX       REV       SOE
       Mean       1.0414   21.5997   0.3819    0.2058    0.0011   0.0591    0.0168   0.2678
       STD        0.5631    0.8422   0.2588    0.3809    0.0093   0.0448    0.1112   0.2265
       SKEW      -0.4811    1.1465   6.9253    3.4452   14.6285   6.1251    2.8922   0.5476
       5%         0.1863   20.5234   0.1191   -0.2614    0.0000   0.0292   -0.1156   0.0000
       25%        0.7406   21.0141   0.2342   -0.0211    0.0002   0.0419   -0.0459   0.0439
       50%        1.0586   21.4588   0.3427    0.1595    0.0005   0.0539    0.0026   0.2606
       75%        1.3532   22.0121   0.4798    0.3811    0.0011   0.0708    0.0634   0.4265
       95%        1.8592   23.1728   0.7593    0.7975    0.0027   0.1004    0.1911   0.6514




                                                 15
                      Table 3: Firm-level cross-sectional return regressions
The table reports time-series averages of slope coefficients and associated Newey-West adjusted t-
statistics from cross-sectional regressions of firm returns on the predictor variables for each month
from July 1995 to December 2012. The top panel contains ordinary time-series averages of coefficient
estimates. The bottom panel contains time-series average monthly coefficient estimates weighted by
the reciprocal of the square root of the number of firms in the monthly cross-section. BETA is the
Scholes-Williams-Dimson beta obtained from regressing daily firm return on daily current, lead, and
lagged market returns over the previous month. SIZE is the log of total market value of equity at
the end of the previous month. BM is the Fama-French book-to-market ratio of book value of equity
to market value of equity at the end of the previous calendar year. MOM is Jegadeesh-Titman
momentum defined as the cumulative stock return over months t − 12 to t − 1. ILLIQ is Amihud
illiquidity measured as the average over the previous month of the daily ratio of the absolute value
of the stock return to the total value of shares traded. MAX is the Bali-Cakici-Whitelaw maximum
daily stock return over the previous month. REV is Jegadeesh-Lehmann short-term reversal defined
as the return on the stock over the previous month. SOE is the percent of shares held by the central
or local government measured at the previous month.


             BETA       SIZE       BM     MOM      ILLIQ        MAX         REV        SOE
             0.0009
               0.36
                      -0.0060
                         -3.20
                                 0.0186
                                   2.87
                                          0.0020
                                            0.57
                                                        8.45
                                                        2.62
                                                               -0.0313
                                                                  -1.99
                                                                          -0.0248
                                                                             -2.34
                                                                                     -0.0005
                                                                                        -0.20
             0.0023   -0.0061    0.0176   0.0064
               1.35      -3.32     2.67     2.12
             0.0038   -0.0030    0.0179   0.0063    37.03
               1.99      -1.59     2.84     2.29     2.10
             0.0032   -0.0064    0.0154   0.0064               -0.1902
               1.76      -3.41     2.38     2.21                  -6.96
             0.0046   -0.0032    0.0158   0.0063    39.33      -0.1753
               2.31      -1.66     2.55     2.39     2.17         -6.40
             0.0039   -0.0034    0.0155   0.0050    43.07      -0.1333    -0.0293    0.0029
               2.11      -1.81     2.50     1.81     2.08         -3.55      -1.74     1.93
             0.0054   -0.0021    0.0113   0.0041    56.88      -0.0983    -0.0457    0.0045
               4.11      -1.21     3.08     1.42     2.24         -2.49      -2.62     2.71
                                                   16
     Table 3 presents the results of univariate regressions for each predictor, multiple re-
gressions with BETA, SIZE, BM, and MOM, and multiple regressions with the additional
predictor variables as well. The top panel contains ordinary time-series averages of coeffi-
cient estimates. The bottom panel contains time-series average monthly coefficient estimates
weighted by the reciprocal of the square root of the number of firms in the monthly cross-
section, which Figure 1 shows is steadily increasing over time. Below each coefficient estimate
is its associated Newey-West adjusted t-statistic.2
     Overall, the cross-sectional return patterns are surprisingly similar to those for US stocks
reported in, for example, Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011). The coefficient on SIZE is
generally strongly significantly negative, though it loses magnitude and significance in the
presence of ILLIQ. The coefficient on BM is consistently significantly positive, though smaller
in magnitude than in the US data. The coefficient on MOM by itself is insignificant, in
contrast to the US results, but it regains significance in the multiple regressions. Whether or
not the premiums attributable to size, book-to-market, and momentum should be interpreted
as evidence of market inefficiency, the predictive power of these variables for stock returns in
China is in line with the cross-sectional return patterns documented for developed economies,
such as in Fama and French (1998) and Fama and French (2012).
     The coefficient on ILLIQ is consistently significantly positive. As in the US, Chinese
investors charge a premium for bearing illiquidity, whether to compensate for direct trading
costs or the probability of trading against more informed market participants. Information
asymmetry between corporate insiders and outsiders, government insiders and outsiders, and
domestic and foreign investors is regarded as a major concern in China. These results suggest
that legal, accounting, and market reforms that increase transparency and level the playing
field could not only attract more market participants, but also lower firms’ cost of capital.
     The coefficient on MAX is highly significantly negative, as in the US data. This is
particularly striking given that this variable is effectively truncated at 10% due to the price
move limits discussed above, and that in the US this effect is heavily concentrated in firms
with the most extreme returns. We interpret this result as strong evidence that, like US
investors, Chinese investors pay up for lottery-like payoffs. Moreover, the fact that investors
in China know that future returns will also be subject to this cap apparently does not
diminish their appetite for high MAX stocks. This similarity in investor preferences is
especially noteworthy considering potentially strong cultural differences between the two
groups, and it raises the possibility that many of the behavioral biases documented for
   2
    In unreported results, we also tried weighting with the reciprocal of fourth root of the number of firms in
the cross-section, to incorporate the idea that cross-sectional correlation in returns means that the standard
deviation of the cross-sectional coefficient estimates shrinks more slowly than with the square root of the
number of firms. The results lie in between those with equal weights and those with square root weights.


                                                      17
US investors may also hold more universally. The coefficient on REV is also significantly
negative, as in the US.
     In contrast to most results using US data, with equal weighting across time, the average
coefficient on BETA is economically large and significantly positive in the multiple regres-
sions, although not when used by itself. Weighting with the square root of the number of
firms in the cross-section increases both the magnitude and significance of the BETA co-
efficient. This is intuitive for a couple of reasons. First, as more diverse firms are added
to the sample, the increased cross-sectional dispersion in the BETA covariate increases the
precision of the cross-sectional coefficient estimate. In addition, given likely measurement
error in the BETAs and associated attenuation bias in its coefficient estimate, an increase in
the ratio of the cross-sectional variance of the true betas to that of the measurement error
would reduce the attenuation bias and increase the coefficient estimate. Moreover, given
the high Morck R2 of stocks in China, it is reasonable to expect that this ratio of the true
cross-sectional variance of beta to that of the measurement error is higher than in the US.
Finally, the high measured equity premium in China, 54 basis points in the bottom panel,
compared with 25 basis points in the US as reported by Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011)
is well justified theoretically. As we document in Section 4.2.2 and Table 7, China’s equity
market portfolio has very high volatility, twice that of the US, and this market volatility is
almost undiversifiable across other financial risks for domestic Chinese investors, who lack
access to the benefits of international diversification that other global investors enjoy. Thus
it is natural that China’s stock market portfolio would command a high equity premium. As
we show in Table 8, this high risk premium also amounts to a high alpha for international
investors who can access it. However, it also adds up to an inflated cost of equity capital for
China’s firms, which would likely fall if China integrated its capital markets with the global
financial markets.
     Finally, the coefficient on SOE, the percentage of government-owned shares, is signif-
icantly positive in the multiple regression. This suggests that Chinese investors discount
state-controlled firms, perhaps for the political risk that government subsidies may be re-
moved in the future, or more general uncertainties about state-owned firms’ future objectives,
governance structure, access to capital, and investment opportunity sets. The SOE coeffi-
cient estimate, though not its standard error, gets considerably larger in the bottom panel
of Table 3, which weights more recent months more heavily. This likely reflects the changing
composition of China’s stock market, which was once dominated by large state-owned enter-
prises, but now includes more small and medium enterprises, and suggests that the relation
between percent of state ownership and required return may be concave, flattening out once
a critical level of state control is reached. The coefficient of 0.0045 implies that a firm with


                                              18
50% state ownership requires an annualized return approximately 3% higher than a similar
firm that has no state ownership.

4.1.2   Portfolio-level analysis

This section provides further evidence on the pricing of size, book-to-market, momentum,
illiquidity, and asymmetric returns through analysis of return differences across portfolios
sorted by the predictor variables. Following Fama and French (1993), Carhart (1997), and
the Ken French Data Library, we form the six 2×3 value-weighted SIZE-BM portfolios and
the six 2×3 value-weighted SIZE-MOM portfolios and construct the size, book-to-market,
and momentum zero-cost factor portfolios SMB, HML, and WML for China. Throughout
our analysis, we use tradeable rather than total market value in the weighting. Table 4
presents the returns and alphas for the twelve double-sorted portfolios as well as for the
factor portfolios. The CAPM alphas are from time-series regressions of portfolio excess
returns on the excess return of the market, RMRF. Table 5 confirms the robustness of the
illiquidity and maximum return effects by documenting the systematic pattern of CAPM
and four-factor alphas of portfolios sorted on these characteristics.
     Table 4 shows that small stocks consistently outperform large stocks and value stocks
consistently outperform growth stocks in China, in terms of both excess return and CAPM
alpha. Moreover, the SMB and HML factors returns are significantly positive. On the
other hand, consistent with Cakici, Chan, and Topyan (2011), the WML factor returns are
insignificant. Xu and Zhang (2013) provide a comprehensive analysis of the Fama-French
factor portfolios and their ability to explain size and book-to-market effects in stock returns
in China. We use these China factor portfolios to check the robustness of our previous
results and then examine correlations and investment opportunities across countries in the
next section.
     We form value-weighted portfolios of stocks sorted into quintiles by Amihud illiquidity
and by Bali-Cakici-Whitelaw maximum return. Table 5 shows the returns, CAPM alphas,
and four-factor alphas for the quintile portfolios and the difference in these quantities between
quintiles one and five. The four-factor alphas are from time-series regressions of the portfolio
excess returns on RMRF, SMB, HML, and WML. Panel A shows an almost monotonic
illiquidity effect across the quintiles, and the differences between top and bottom quintiles are
significant for all performance measures. Panel B shows performance across MAX quintiles.
Similar to the findings of Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011) for US stocks, the pattern is
slightly hump-shaped, rather than strictly monotonic, but the difference in alphas between
low and high max quintiles is significant. The magnitudes of the differences are also similar
to those for US stocks. Note that the 10% cap on price moves does not affect the composition

                                               19
      Table 4: Returns on portfolios sorted by size, book-to-market, and momentum
Average monthly returns and CAPM alphas (in %) on the six 2×3 value-weighted size/book-to-
market portfolios in Panel A, the six 2×3 value-weighted size/momentum portfolios in Panel B, and
the three corresponding size, book-to-market, and momentum factor portfolios, SMB, HML, and
WML, in Panel C for China over the period March 1995 to December 2012, and associated Newey-
West adjusted t-statistics for the factor portfolios. CAPM alphas are from time-series regressions
of portfolio excess returns on the excess return of the market, RMRF.


                                    Return          Alpha
                             Panel A. Size/book-to-market
                                         S       B      S      B
                             H        2.64    1.68 1.10     0.26
                             M        2.03    1.32 0.56 -0.17
                             L        1.22    1.14 -0.18 -0.23
                             Panel B. Size/momentum
                                         S       B      S      B
                             W        1.64    1.39 0.16 -0.01
                             M        2.28    1.43 0.77 -0.02
                             L        2.06    1.10 0.60 -0.34
                             Panel C. Factor portfolios
                                            t-stat        t-stat
                             SMB      0.59    1.82 0.54     1.67
                             HML      0.98    3.03 0.88     3.17
                             WML -0.06 -0.24 -0.05 -0.19




                                               20
          Table 5: Returns on portfolios sorted by illiquidity and maximum return
Average returns and alphas on value-weighted quintile portfolios over the period March 1995 to
December 2012, and Newey-West adjusted t-statistics for differences. The CAPM alphas are from
time-series regressions of portfolio excess returns on the excess return of the China market portfolio,
RMRF. The four-factor alphas are from time-series regressions of the portfolio excess returns on
the Fama-French-Carhart market, size, book-to-market, and momentum factor portfolios RMRF,
SMB, HML, and WML, constructed from stocks in China. In panel A, stocks are sorted into
portfolios based on Amihud illiquidity, measured as the average over the previous month of the
daily ratio of the absolute value of the stock return to the total value of shares traded. In panel B,
stocks are sorted into portfolios based on Bali-Cakici-Whitelaw maximum daily stock return over
the previous month.


                  Quintile    Returns CAPM alphas Four-factor alphas
                  Panel A. Portfolios sorted by illiquidity
                  Illiquid         2.37              0.98        0.64
                  2                2.12              0.68        0.32
                  3                1.75              0.32        0.02
                  4                1.54              0.09       -0.13
                  Liquid           1.30             -0.12        0.07
                  Difference       1.07            1.10                        0.58
                  t-stat           2.10            2.26                        2.62
                  Panel B. Portfolios sorted by maximum return
                  Low MAX          1.50            0.20                        0.05
                  2                1.67            0.24                        0.20
                  3                1.75            0.28                        0.25
                  4                1.30           -0.14                       -0.08
                  High MAX         1.12           -0.39                       -0.48
                  Difference         0.38               0.59                   0.52
                  t-stat             1.42               2.36                   1.85




                                                  21
of the portfolios sorted on MAX, since all stocks that hit this limit fall into the top quintile.


4.2     Market segmentation and investment opportunities
This section provides evidence on China’s stock market segmentation from other markets
and opportunities available to international investors who can access them. Section 4.2.1
examines the correlations of the market, size, value, and momentum factor portfolio returns
across four major markets, China, the US, Europe, and Japan. In contrast to the high corre-
lations in returns across open markets, returns in China’s stock market have low correlations
with those in other large economies. China has begun to open its doors to foreign investors
through its QFII program and the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect program, but it is
still a segmented market.
     Section 4.2.2 examines the overall performance of the different markets and the excess
returns that China offers to international investors who can access them. Counter to the per-
ception that China’s stock market has performed poorly, we show that China’s stock market
offers attractive returns and opportunities for diversification to international investors, i.e.,
high alpha. This high alpha for potential international investors amounts to an inflated cost
of capital for China’s firms and suggests that China has much to gain from liberalizing its
capital account.
     Section 4.2.3 distinguishes the perspective of a globally diversified USD investor, who
would measure China’s stock market performance by its average USD return, and ultimately
alpha, from that of an undiversified Chinese investor, who would consider the stock market’s
CNY buy-and-hold return. We show how China’s large stock market volatility drives a
wedge between these performance measures over our sample period, because what would
be idiosyncratic risk to a globally diversified investor is systematic risk to the undiversified
Chinese investor. This re-emphasizes the importance of opening capital markets, so as to
give Chinese investors access to international diversification as well as to reduce the cost
of capital for Chinese firms. Finally, Section 5.1 discusses the post-crisis shadow banking
boom in China and hypothesizes that competition from its high-yielding wealth-management
products partly explains the stock market decline over this subperiod.

4.2.1   Stock market correlations across large economies

This section gives preliminary evidence on the degree of integration between China’s stock
market and those of other large economies and discusses the implications and related liter-
ature. Table 6 presents correlations across monthly returns from China, the US, Europe,
and Japan for each of the four factor portfolios, RMRF, SMB, HML, and WML, from 1995


                                               22
to 2012. Table 6 documents the high degree of correlation across the developed markets
for RMRF, HML, and WML, ranging form 0.38 to 0.83. These results are consistent with
Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2013), who find average correlations of 0.68 and 0.65 for
value and momentum strategies, respectively, across the US, the UK, Europe, and Japan.
    However, in contrast to the developed markets, returns in China have low correlations
with returns elsewhere. China’s correlations range from 0.07 to 0.21 for the market, value,
and momentum factors, and China’s size factor actually correlates negatively with the size
factors of the other large markets. China looks like a segmented market, which is consistent
with the lack of overlap between investors in China and investors in other markets. How-
ever, one might expect there to be a common global cash flow factor in all markets. As
exporters, Chinese firms should be exposed to this factor. In other words, capital markets
are segregated, but the economy is not. That would explain the small but generally positive
correlations.
    This evidence of market segmentation has a number of implications. A large literature
provides both theory and evidence on the positive effects of liberalization and integration
on emerging markets’ cost of capital, investment, growth, and investment opportunities
for foreign investors through improvements in risk sharing across countries. For example,
in samples of up to 16 emerging markets, Stulz (1999), Bekaert and Harvey (2000), and
Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2003) find that opening a country to portfolio flows decreases
its cost of capital without increasing its volatility or creating excessive contagion effects,
although liberalizations do not generally lead to full market integration. In samples of up
to 25 countries, Henry (2000a), Henry (2000b), Henry (2003), and Chari, Henry, and Sasson
(2012) find that stock market liberalizations reduce cost of capital and boost investment,
growth, and wages. Chari and Henry (2004) and Chari and Henry (2008) study the effect of
market liberalization at the firm level and show how stock prices and corporate investment
respond to reductions in cost of capital that occur after liberalization. China’s QFII program
has awarded over $50 billion of investment quotas, and China and Hong Kong have just
launched a new Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect program last fall, which is slated to
allow an additional $50 billion of financial capital to flow from Hong Kong to the Shanghai
Stock Exchange and $40 billion from Shanghai to Hong Kong. However, this is still only a
beginning. Our evidence suggests that China still has much more to gain from opening its
stock market to the international investment community.

4.2.2   Investment performance and opportunities

This section examines the stock market performance in China over our sample period and
explores investment opportunities for international investors. Table 7 presents mean returns,

                                             23
          Table 6: Correlations of FFC factors across large economies 1995-2012
Correlations of monthly USD returns on FFC factors across large economies over the period March
1995 to December 2012.


                          US Europe Japan    US Europe Japan
                         RMRF              SMB
                  China  0.16  0.21   0.10 -0.15  -0.05 -0.13
                  US           0.83   0.49         0.27  0.00
                  Europe              0.51               0.35
                         HML               WML
                  China  0.07  0.12   0.13 0.10    0.10  0.09
                  US           0.77   0.46         0.51  0.38
                  Europe              0.42               0.45


volatilities, and cross-factor correlations for the market, size, value, and momentum factors
in the four different markets. Consistent with Fama and French (2012), we find a significant
value premium in all four markets. There is a momentum premium in the western markets.
The size premium is only apparent in China over this period.
    In terms of overall market performance, China’s stock market is striking for both its high
mean excess return and high volatility. Both its mean and volatility are double those of the
US stock market over the sample period, thus delivering the same Sharpe ratio. The mean
annualized return of 15.78% runs counter to the perception that China’s stock market has
performed poorly over its history. To illustrate the components of China’s market return,
Figure 6 shows the cumulative and average returns of the publicized Shanghai and Shenzhen
price indexes in CNY, the return on the CNY, and the average USD return on the CSMAR
market portfolio, which is weighted by tradeable market value and includes dividends. The
Shanghai Stock Exchange index has an average annualized monthly appreciation of only
12.44% in CNY over the period. The Shenzhen price index, which includes the smaller stocks
on the Shenzhen, SME, and ChiNext Boards, has done better, averaging 16.96%. The smaller
enterprises, outside the state-controlled sector have the been the growth drivers in China’s
corporate sector. China’s USD return is further augmented by an annualized average USD
return on the CNY of 1.71% over the period. Altogether, the average annualized monthly
tradeable-market-value-weighted USD return on China’s stock market is 18.68% over the
period.
    The evidence of high mean portfolio returns in China and low correlations with developed
markets suggests that China offers attractive investment opportunities for international in-
vestors. Following Fama and French (2012), Table 8 provides evidence on this question by


                                              24
       Table 7: Equity premiums and factor structures in large economies 1995-2012
Annualized means and volatilities in percent and Newey-West-adjusted t-statistics for monthly
USD returns on the market, size, value, and momentum factors and the cross-factor correlations in
decimal over the period March 1995 to December 2012 in China, the US, Europe and Japan.


                      RMRF SMB HML WML RMRF SMB HML WML
                      China                    US
    Mean (in %)        15.78 8.77 13.44   0.96    6.74 -1.36  5.65  5.64
    Volatility (in %)  32.25 16.03 15.63 14.59   16.14 12.47 11.73 19.25
    t-mean              1.53 2.23   3.43  0.30    1.53 -0.32  1.46  1.20
    RMRF                      0.09  0.18 -0.03          0.20 -0.21 -0.29
    SMB                             0.16 -0.33               -0.35 -0.21
    HML                                  -0.38                      0.04
                      Europe                   Japan
    Mean (in %)         6.69 -0.33  5.29 11.78   -1.91 -0.24  5.43  2.35
    Volatility (in %)  18.34 8.19   8.97 15.84   18.82 11.13 10.55 16.78
    t-mean              1.28 -0.20  1.62  2.69   -0.23 -0.11  1.76  0.55
    RMRF                     -0.16  0.16 -0.35          0.06 -0.20 -0.15
    SMB                            -0.12  0.11                0.06 -0.16
    HML                                  -0.28                     -0.27


examining alphas of the China portfolios with respect to the US and global factors. As the
table shows, China’s market portfolio earned an economically significant alpha with respect
to the US and global factors of over 1% per month. Its size and book-to-market factor
portfolios also earn large alphas, which are highly statistically significant.
   We rule out the possibility that these results are driven by a missing China factor in US
returns by examining the effect of adding the China market portfolio as a fifth factor, along
with the US RMRF, SMB, HML, and WML factors, in time series regressions of US test
portfolio returns on these factors. We use as test portfolios the 25 Fama-French size/book-
to-market portfolios and the 30 Fama-French industry portfolios from the Ken French Data
Library. We find that their alphas, factor loadings, and R2 s scarcely change and they do
not load significantly on the China factor, consistent with our earlier results on the low
correlation between US and China factors. This robustness check reconfirms our evidence of
the availability of high alphas in China for international investors who can access them.




                                               25
         Table 8: Alphas of China portfolios with respect to US and global factors
Monthly alphas (in %) of USD returns on the China market, size, value, and momentum factor
portfolios with respect to the US and global Fama-French-Carhart factors, and their Newey-West
adjusted t-statistics, over the period March 1995 to December 2012.


              China portfolio            US factors        Global factors
                                         1-factor 4-factor 1-factor 4-factor
              RMRF              Alpha        1.08     1.00     1.07      0.97
                                t-stat       1.33     1.20     1.36      1.17
              SMB               Alpha        0.75     0.77     0.74      0.81
                                t-stat       2.32     2.36     2.28      2.38
              HML               Alpha        1.14     1.12     1.14      1.16
                                t-stat       3.36     2.36     2.28      2.38
              WML               Alpha        0.09     0.05     0.08     -0.01
                                t-stat       0.31     0.19     0.30     -0.04


4.2.3   Average monthly vs. buy-and-hold returns and US alphas for Chinese
        investors

The analysis of monthly USD returns above applies to a USD investor who could access
China’s A-share market and hold it in a well-diversified dynamically rebalanced portfolio,
such as a QFII. Traditional portfolio theory shows that for a diversified investor, the relevant
risk of an asset is its contribution to total portfolio risk, as measured by its covariance with
the return on the rest of the investor’s portfolio, and the relevant performance measure is
the the asset’s mean per period return, or, ultimately, its alpha. By these metrics, China’s
stock market has high performance and low risk. However, for a domestic Chinese investor
who can invest only in China’s A-share market, China’s total risk would have to be borne, so
total stock market volatility would be the relevant risk measure, and the mean buy-and-hold
return over the holding period would the relevant performance measure.
    To see the effect of an asset’s volatility on its buy-and-hold return over multiple periods,
note that while the annualized average per period return is an arithmetic mean, the annu-
alized buy-and-hold return over the holding period involves a geometric mean. The mean
buy-and-hold return converges to the mean of the log of one plus the simple return. Thus,
the buy-and-hold return is less than the average simple return by approximately one-half
the variance of the simple return. If the return volatility were zero, the average per period
return would equal the buy-and-hold return. The larger the return volatility, the larger
the difference between these two performance measures. Put simply, all else equal, higher
volatility assets look less attractive for undiversified investors. China’s stock market vari-


                                              26
ance is extremely high, so the difference is large. This highlights the difference in perspective
on China’s stock market between an investor who can hold China in a globally diversified
portfolio, and an investor who can invest only in China’s stock market. It also emphasizes
the importance of opening capital markets in countries with high asset volatility so as to
allow domestic investors to diversify risk globally.
    An additional difference in perspective on performance arises when investors measure
returns in different currencies. The CNY appreciated against the USD over our sample
period, making the USD return on China’s stock market more attractive than its CNY
return, but this effect is small relative to the volatility effect over the full sample period.
Finally, inflation drives a wedge between nominal returns and real returns. Our analysis
above uses nominal returns, but the results for excess returns and alphas would be essentially
unchanged if we used real returns.
    Table 9 illustrates these volatility, currency, and inflation effects, and the differences they
create between average monthly nominal USD returns and real CNY buy-and hold returns
on China’s stock market, over our full sample period 1995-2012 and over two subperiods,
2001-2012 and 2010-2012. For comparison, the table also shows the corresponding perfor-
mance measures for the US stock market, where the volatility effect is much smaller. The
exchange rate data are from Datastream and the CNY inflation data are from the World
Bank. As the table shows, the real CNY buy-and-hold return is approximately equal to the
average monthly USD return minus half the variance of this return, minus the average CNY
appreciation against the USD, minus the average CNY inflation rate. All quantities in the
table are annualized, i.e., all calculations are done at the monthly level and then multiplied
by twelve.

                     Table 9: Average monthly vs. buy-and-hold returns
Average monthly nominal USD returns in the top row, real CNY buy-and-hold returns in the
bottom row, and the volatility, currency, and inflation effects that explain the difference, in the
middle rows, for the China and US stock markets over three sample periods. All quantities are
annualized and in percent.


                                       1995-2012  2001-2012    2010-2012
                                      China US China      US China     US
    Avg monthly nom USD return        18.68 9.40 10.89 4.66 -3.76 11.85
    0.5*Var of monthly nom USD return   5.24 1.31 4.76 1.32    2.27 1.26
    Avg monthly USD return on CNY       1.71 1.71 2.39 2.39    3.10 3.10
    Avg CNY inflation                   2.62 2.62 2.51 2.51    3.73 3.73
    Approx real CNY BHR return          9.12 3.76 1.23 -1.56 -12.86 3.76
    Actual real CNY BHR return          9.45 3.91 1.32 -1.52 -12.61 3.86

                                                27
    Table 9 shows that over the periods 1995-2012 and 2001-2012, the difference between
the average monthly and buy-and-hold returns is primarily due to the high volatility of
China’s stock market return, although this volatility diminishes over time. Nevertheless,
despite its high volatility, China’s stock market still outperforms the US stock market over
these subperiods, even in terms of buy-and-hold return. Using data from Datastream, Allen,
Qian, Shan, and Zhu (2014) find that over the period 2001-2012, the cumulative real CNY
buy-and-hold return is 0.62, for an annualized buy-and-hold return of -3.91%. The difference
between this result and our 1.32% shown in Table 9 is partly attributable to the difference in
weighting scheme. Allen, Qian, Shan, and Zhu (2014) weight stock returns by total market
capitalization, which relates to the market valuation of China’s macroeconomy, while we
weight by tradable market value, reflecting our focus on investment opportunities. Weighting
by total market capitalization gives more weight to the large state-owned enterprises, which
did less well than the smaller private firms over the period. Another difference is in the
sample of firms. The sample of Allen, Qian, Shan, and Zhu (2014) consists of stocks traded
on the main boards of Shanghai and Shenzhen. Our sample also includes the stocks on the
SME and Chinext Boards, which did better over the period, in addition to the stocks traded
on the Shanghai and Shenzhen main boards.
    Finally, to further highlight the benefits to granting domestic Chinese investors access to
international financial markets, Table 10 illustrates alphas potentially available to Chinese
investors who can invest in US equities or mutual funds, such as through the Qualified
Domestic Institutional Investor program. The table lists monthly alphas of CNY returns
on the Fama-French US market, size, value, and momentum factor portfolios with respect
to the China market, size, value, and momentum factor portfolio CNY returns. Although
the significance levels are not high, due in part to the short sample period, the alphas are
economically large. For example, the US market has a China four-factor alpha of 43 basis
points per month. Again, the presence of alpha to be earned in either direction reflects the
low correlation between US and China stock returns, which means that virtually all of the
return in excess of the risk-free rate is alpha. As a simple example of international finance,
investors in both countries stand to gain by integrating their financial markets because of
improved risk sharing. From the perspective of a US pension fund manager, the fall of the
Chinese financial wall and the chance to serve Chinese investors starved for long-term savings
vehicles could represent the opportunity of a lifetime.




                                              28
              Table 10: Alphas of US portfolios with respect to China factors
Monthly alphas (in %) of CNY returns on the US market, size, value, and momentum factor
portfolios with respect to the China market, size, value, and momentum factor portfolio CNY
returns, and their Newey-West adjusted t-statistics, over the period March 1995 to December 2012.


                          US portfolio          China factors
                                                1-factor 4-factor
                          RMRF           Alpha      0.31      0.43
                                         t-stat     0.83      1.26
                          SMB            Alpha     -0.22    -0.11
                                         t-stat    -0.75    -0.41
                          HML            Alpha      0.31      0.21
                                         t-stat     0.97      0.66
                          WML            Alpha      0.36      0.43
                                         t-stat     0.93      1.11


5     Recent financial developments and reforms in China
This section discusses the post-crisis reconstruction of China’s financial system and more
recent financial reforms, and interprets their impact on the stock market through the lens of
our foregoing analysis.


5.1    The post-crisis shadow banking boom and stock market bust
The years after the financial crisis of 2007-2008 and the ensuing economic recession have been
a period of major economic stimulus and reconstruction of financial markets by central banks
and regulators across the globe. In China, this has taken the form of a massive economic
stimulus that started in 2009 and the development of a shadow banking sector large enough
and flexible enough to channel large amounts of capital quickly to real estate, infrastructure,
and other projects across the country and thus fuel real investment and economic growth.
The development of this shadow banking sector has also been the first step in China’s
liberalization of interest rates. While the asset side of China’s shadow banking balance sheet
represents real investments in spaces previously unspanned by the traditional banking sector,
the liability side offers a rich new menu of wealth management products that give domestic
Chinese investors access to interest rates higher than the 3% cap on traditional bank deposit
rates. In particular, this period has seen an explosion in short-term money-market products
offering rates of 4-7% and higher. These products can be offered by traditional banks,
marketed through the banks by trusts, or offered directly by trusts and other shadow banks.


                                               29
Other shadow banks include internet companies such as Alibaba, which offers 7-day money
market products to its e-commerce customers online.
    Although these wealth management products carry warnings about risk, most of them
enjoy a halo effect created by their association with the traditional banking sector and an
implicit backing by the government through its deep network of guarantees to the state-
owned banks, state-owned enterprises, and local governments. In fact, because of its deep
pocket and its political, economic, and regulatory structure, China may have the biggest
implicit guarantee problem in the world. Until China institutes deposit insurance and other
reforms that draw more explicit boundaries around its guaranteed bank sector, it is highly
implausible that it will allow large-scale defaults on wealth-management products and risk a
run on the interconnected banking and shadow banking sector that is supporting its economic
growth. To the extent that investors therefore perceive these products to be virtually risk
free, the proliferation of these higher yielding wealth management products amounts to an
increase in China’s risk-free rate over what has been available on administered deposits.
Consistent with this idea, the 2014 China Financial Stability Report of the People’s Bank
of China asserts that “the rigid payment (implicit guarantee) in wealth management market
eroded market discipline, fueled moral hazard risks, elevated price of risk-free capital, and
caused misallocation of funding among different markets.”
    Indeed, at the same time that wealth management products issued by the shadow banking
sector proliferated, China’s post-crisis stock market recovery lagged well behind those of
other large economies. The last two columns of Table 9 show that China’s stock market
had negative returns over this period by both performance measures, in contrast to the high
returns earned by the US stock market. This period of poor performance precipitated a loss
of confidence in China’s stock market and reinforced the perception that it has not been
functioning properly. This period culminated in the closure of the stock market to IPOs at
the end of 2012.
    We argue that this period of poor stock market returns in China was not dysfunctional,
but rather a rational downward price adjustment in response to negative shocks to GDP
growth forecasts and positive shocks to discount rates associated with the liberalization of
interest rates and implicit subsidies to the shadow banking sector. The prices of stocks
of so-called dual-listed firms, those with A-share listings on the mainland exchanges and
H-share listings in Hong Kong, provide some evidence for this conjecture. In principle,
A and H shares on the same firm reflect the pricing of the same future cash flows, but
using different discount rates, with Chinese investors discounting the A shares, and global
investors discounting the H shares, which are traded in Hong Kong in HKD. An upward
shock to discount rates in mainland China would affect the A shares but not the H shares.


                                             30
In particular, if the risk-free rate in mainland China effectively rose from 3% to more like
5% over the period 2010-2012, then China’s A-share prices would have to adjust downward
so that they could offer competitive returns going forward. H-share prices, which reflect
discounting by global investors, would not have experienced this shock. Consistent with this
hypothesis, the Hang Seng China A-H Premium Index at the HKEX (2014) website, which
tracks the average price difference of A shares over H shares for the largest and most liquid
dual-listed Chinese companies, declined over this period. After this adjustment to mainland
China’s high liberalized interest rates is complete, we might expect to see higher returns on
A shares going forward.
    Higher required returns for China’s stocks translate to higher costs of capital for China’s
smaller private companies, which have relatively more difficulty getting bank loans. On one
hand, this could be an efficient market adjustment to high liberalized interest rates in a fast-
growing economy. On the other hand, if China’s implicit guarantee of the banking sector
is creating an excessive supply of high-yielding low-risk financial assets, and thereby pulling
capital away from the equity market to the banking sector where more politically-driven
lending takes place, then this implicit guarantee could be channeling capital to less efficient
investment and slowing economic growth. A recent article in The Economist (2014) cites
research from the People’s Bank of China that finds “a strongly negative correlation between
growth in lending and in total factor productivity” and interprets this as “an indication that
state-owned banks, which still dominate China’s financial sector, are still not disbursing
enough credit to the country’s most deserving companies.”
    As a component of its larger financial system, China’s state-controlled banking sector
is the key instrument of its centrally planned investment policy. Its shadow banking sec-
tor has also played an essential role in averting a post-crisis recession and fostering more
market-driven capital allocation. But our results suggest that China would do well to let
its stock market pick winners, too. As Figure 3 shows, A-share prices have remained highly
informative about future corporate earnings even during the post-crisis period. As impor-
tant steps in this direction, the CSRC re-opened the IPO window in early 2014 and the
Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect program also opened a small new channel for capital
flow between global and domestic Chinese stock markets in fall 2014. Additional reforms
that further open capital channels and allow prices to reflect available information, such as
reforms to listing procedures as suggested by Allen, Qian, Shan, and Zhu (2014), could help
China harness the potential of this market.




                                              31
5.2    China’s stock market loves deposit insurance
The Shanghai Stock Exchange was up 60% in 2014, more than any other stock market
in the world. Much of this appreciation came after the announcement of the launch of
deposit insurance for Chinese banks, due for roll out early this year. We argue that this
jump up in prices is not a bubble, but rather a rational response to the prospect of the
removal of the implicit guarantee of many of the banking and shadow banking liabilities
that have proliferated in the post-crisis period, and the reversal of the shadow banking
subsidy described above. As we explain in Carpenter and Whitelaw (2015), though it may
be counterintuitive to those who study other markets, the prospect of deposit insurance in
China is actually news that China is finally preparing to allow smaller and less politically
connected financial institutions and liabilities sink or swim on their own. This amounts
to a tighter boundary around the guaranteed sector and a reduction in the supply of risk-
free assets. This potentially reduces required returns on stocks and allows capital to flow
back to the stock market, as suggested by recent increases in A-share account registration. In
addition, the shrinkage of the bank safety net brings the prospect of more market-disciplined
bank lending and monitoring, and more efficient real investment, which should be favorable
to corporate profits more broadly.


5.3    The world’s new crystal ball
Since the Third Plenum of 2013, China is undertaking some of the most significant economic
and financial reforms in history. We believe the 2014 run-up of China’s stock market reflects
more general upward revisions to GDP growth forecasts associated with the anticipation and
initial roll out of the new reforms and the prospect of a healthier middle-income economy
going forward. Conversely, some of the stock market’s post-crisis lag likely reflected the
anticipation of downward revisions in GDP growth as the old growth model became outdated,
downward revisions that were announced much later. While the results of Section 2 show
that stock prices are informative about the cross-section of future profits, China’s aggregate
stock market may also predict GDP growth long before macroeconomic forecasts become
available. In addition, changes in the relative equity prices of different industries also likely
provide insight about the real effects of the ongoing reforms. Central planners and investors
everywhere may have much to learn about the success and unintended effects of China’s
reforms as they roll out over the next several years by watching the reactions of China’s
stock prices. Meanwhile, stock price volatility is likely to remain high, given how much both
China and the rest of the world have at stake in the success of these reforms. More than
ever, China’s stock market is a crucial counterpart to its extraordinary, relationship-driven,


                                               32
but opaque banking sector. China’s stock market may now be the world’s most important
crystal ball.


6     Conclusions and future research
China is the world’s largest investor and greatest contributor to global growth by wide
margins, and will remain so for many years. The success of China’s stock market in attracting
domestic and international capital and allocating it efficiently to corporate investment will
be an important determinant of global growth in the coming decades. China’s stock market
is young but, despite its early reputation as a casino, has functioned well since the reforms
of the last decade. Stock price informativeness has increased and compares favorably with
that in the US. The efficiency of corporate investment is highly correlated with stock price
informativeness and has followed a strikingly similar trend. Despite its segmented nature,
China’s equity market exhibits a cross-sectional pattern of returns that is surprisingly similar
to that found in other countries, with high premia for size, value, illiquidity, and right-skewed
payoffs. Moreover, counter to perception, China’s stock market has performed very well on
average, especially its small and medium enterprises. Furthermore, the market exhibits
low correlation with other equity markets, reflecting restrictions on international capital
flows. As a result, China’s factor portfolios offer high alphas for US and global investors
who can navigate capital controls through programs such as QFII. At the same time, this
high alpha amounts to an inflated cost of capital for China’s firms and suggests further
capital market liberalization will reduce equity cost of capital in China. In addition, the
pronounced difference between average monthly and buy-and-hold returns reflects the toll
that the stock market’s high volatility takes on domestic Chinese investors who are unable
to diversify internationally. Taken together, our results suggest that China’s stock market
is already playing a vital role in supporting economic growth, especially through its small
and medium enterprises. However, additional regulatory reforms to improve the information
environment and liberalize the flow of capital would further empower the market to attract
capital, allocate it efficiently, and support economic growth worldwide.
    China’s evolving financial system is a treasure trove of natural experiments, counterfac-
tuals, new financial institutions and markets, and new governance and enforcement mecha-
nisms. Moreover, the success of China’s financial reforms will be of significant global impor-
tance. It is not just China’s own contribution to global GDP growth that counts so much.
China’s economic growth and growing middle class are driving economic growth around the
world. Our ongoing research aims to bring new insights to finance and policy implications
to China. It currently includes the role of China’s economic reform risk in global financial

                                               33
markets; asset pricing and corporate listing choice across international exchanges; intermedi-
ary asset pricing and capital allocation in China; and ultimately, interest rate liberalization,
government bond pricing, and macroeconomic risks in China. A key ingredient will be the
construction of a China-reform factor-mimicking portfolio that can explain patterns in the
cross-section and predictability of returns on assets worldwide.


References
Allen, Franklin, Jun Qian, and Meijun Qian, 2005, Law, finance, and economic growth in
  China, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 57–116.

Allen, Franklin, Jun Qian, Chenyu Shan, and Lei Zhu, 2014, The best performing economy
  with the worst performing market: Explaining the poor performance of the Chinese stock
  market, Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance Working Paper.

Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects,
 Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.

Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1988, Liquidity and asset prices: Financial manage-
 ment implications, Financial Management 5–15.

Asness, Clifford S, Tobias J Moskowitz, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2013, Value and momentum
  everywhere, Journal of Finance 68, 929–985.

Bai, Jennie, Thomas Philippon, and Alexi Savov, 2013, Have financial markets become more
  informative?, New York University Working Paper.

Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C Stein, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, When does the market mat-
  ter? Stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent firms, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 118, 969–1005.

Bali, Turan G, Nusret Cakici, and Robert F Whitelaw, 2011, Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries
  and the cross-section of expected returns, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 427–446.

Banz, Rolf W, 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common stocks,
  Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3–18.

Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R Harvey, 2000, Foreign speculators and emerging equity
  markets, Journal of Finance 55, 565–613.



                                              34
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R Harvey, and Christian T Lundblad, 2003, Equity market liber-
  alization in emerging markets, Journal of Financial Research 26, 275–299.

Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein, 2012, The real effects of financial markets,
  Annual Review of Financial Economics 4, 339–60.

Bris, Arturo, William N Goetzmann, and Ning Zhu, 2007, Efficiency and the bear: Short
  sales and markets around the world, Journal of Finance 62, 1029–1079.

Cakici, Nusret, Kalok Chan, and Kudret Topyan, 2011, Cross-sectional stock return pre-
  dictability in China, Available at SSRN 2038497.

Campbell, John Y, Martin Lettau, Burton G Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu, 2001, Have individual
  stocks become more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk, Journal of
  Finance 56, 1–43.

Carhart, Mark M, 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
  57–82.

Carpenter, Jennifer N, and Robert F Whitelaw, 2015, China’s stock market is not in a bubble
  http://www.cnbc.com/id/102317814, CNBC.com.

Chan, Kalok, Albert J Menkveld, and Zhishu Yang, 2008, Information asymmetry and asset
  prices: Evidence from the China foreign share discount, Journal of Finance 63, 159–196.

Chari, Anusha, Peter Henry, and Diego Sasson, 2012, Capital market integration and wages,
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4, 102–132.

Chari, Anusha, and Peter Blair Henry, 2004, Risk-sharing and asset prices: Evidence from
  a natural experiment, Journal of Finance 59, 1295–1324.

Chari, Anusha, and Peter Blair Henry, 2008, Firm-specific information and the efficiency of
  investment, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 636–655.

Chen, Kevin C W, and Hongqi Yuan, 2004, Earnings management and capital resource
  allocation: Evidence from China’s accounting-based regulation of rights issues, Accounting
  Review 79, 645–665.

Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2007, Price informativeness and investment sensi-
  tivity to stock price, Review of Financial Studies 20, 619–650.

Chen, Xuanjuan, Kenneth A Kim, Tong Yao, and Tong Yu, 2010, On the predictability of
  Chinese stock returns, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 18, 403–425.

                                            35
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2008, Liquidity and market
  efficiency, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 249–268.

DeFond, Mark L, Tak-Jun Wong, and Shuhua Li, 1999, The impact of improved auditor inde-
  pendence on audit market concentration in China, Journal of Accounting and Economics
  28, 269–305.

Diamond, Douglas W, and Robert E Verrecchia, 1991, Disclosure, liquidity, and the cost of
  capital, Journal of Finance 46, 1325–1359.

Dimson, Elroy, 1979, Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading, Jour-
  nal of Financial Economics 7, 197–226.

Durnev, Art, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2004, Value-enhancing capital budgeting
 and firm-specific stock return variation, Journal of Finance 59, 65–105.

Durnev, Artyom, Randall Morck, Bernard Yeung, and Paul Zarowin, 2003, Does greater firm-
 specific return variation mean more or less informed stock pricing?, Journal of Accounting
 Research 41, 797–836.

Economist, The, 2014, Unproductive production, The Economist October 11, 84.

Elliott, Douglas, and Kai Yan, 2013, The Chinese financial system: An introduction and
  overview, John L. Thornton China Center Monograph Series.

Fama, Eugene F, 1970, Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work,
  Journal of Finance 25, 383–417.

Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
  Journal of Finance 47, 427–465.

Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
  and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1998, Value versus growth: The international
  evidence, Journal of Finance 53, 1975–1999.

Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 2012, Size, value, and momentum in international
  stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 457–472.

Fama, Eugene F, and James D MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical
  tests, Journal of Political Economy 607–636.

                                            36
Glosten, Lawrence R, and Paul R Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a
  specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics
  14, 71–100.

Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren, and Kathy Yuan, 2013, Trading frenzies and their impact
 on real investment, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 566–582.

Grossman, Sanford J, and Joseph E Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally
  efficient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393–408.

Gul, Ferdinand A, Jeong-Bon Kim, and Annie A Qiu, 2010, Ownership concentration, foreign
 shareholding, audit quality, and stock price synchronicity: Evidence from China, Journal
 of Financial Economics 95, 425–442.

Hail, Luzi, and Christian Leuz, 2009, Cost of capital effects and changes in growth expecta-
  tions around us cross-listings, Journal of Financial Economics 93, 428–454.

Hayek, Friedrich August, 1945, The use of knowledge in society, American Economic Review
  35, 519–530.

Healy, Paul M, and Krishna G Palepu, 2001, Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure,
  and the capital markets: A review of the empirical disclosure literature, Journal of Ac-
  counting and Economics 31, 405–440.

Henry, Peter Blair, 2000a, Do stock market liberalizations cause investment booms?, Journal
  of Financial Economics 58, 301–334.

Henry, Peter Blair, 2000b, Stock market liberalization, economic reform, and emerging mar-
  ket equity prices, Journal of Finance 55, 529–564.

Henry, Peter Blair, 2003, Capital account liberalization, the cost of capital, and economic
  growth, American Economic Review 93, 91–96.

HKEX, 2014, Hang Seng China AH premium index factsheet http://www.hsi.com.hk/hsi-
 net/hsi-net, Hang Seng Indexes.

Hou, Kewei, Lin Peng, and Wei Xiong, 2013, Is R-squared a measure of market inefficiency?,
  Princeton University Working Paper.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1990, Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns, Journal
  of Finance 45, 881–898.


                                            37
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling
  losers: Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.

Kim, Kenneth A, and Jungsoo Park, 2010, Why do price limits exist in stock markets? A
  manipulation-based explanation, European Financial Management 16, 296–318.

Kyle, Albert S, 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica: Journal of
 the Econometric Society 1315–1335.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, 1997,
  Legal determinants of external finance, Journal of Finance 52, 1131–1150.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, 1998,
  Law and finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113–1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, 2000,
  Investor protection and corporate governance, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3–27.

Lehmann, Bruce N, 1990, Fads, martingales, and market efficiency, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 105, 1–28.

Li, Bin, Shivaram Rajgopal, and Mohan Venkatachalam, 2013, R-squared and idiosyncratic
  risk are not interchangeable, Duke University Working Paper.

Li, Kai, Tan Wang, Yan-Leung Cheung, and Ping Jiang, 2011, Privatization and risk shar-
  ing: Evidence from the split share structure reform in china, Review of Financial Studies
  hhr025.

Liao, Li, Bibo Liu, and Hao Wang, 2011, Information discovery in share lockups: Evidence
  from the split-share structure reform in china, Financial Management 40, 1001–1027.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, and Wenlan Qian, 2014, How constraining are limits to arbitrage?
  evidence from a recent financial innovation, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mei, Jianping, Jose A Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, 2009, Speculative trading and stock
 prices: Evidence from Chinese AB share premia, Annals of Economics and Finance 10,
 225–255.

Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu, 2000, The information content of stock
 markets: Why do emerging markets have synchronous stock price movements?, Journal
 of Financial Economics 58, 215–260.


                                            38
Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu, 2013, R-squared and the economy, Working
 Paper.

PBOC, 2014, China financial stability report, China Financial Publishing House.

Scholes, Myron, and Joseph Williams, 1977, Estimating betas from nonsynchronous data,
  Journal of Financial Economics 5, 309–327.

Stulz, René M, 1999, Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital, Journal of
  Applied Corporate Finance 12, 8–25.

Wang, Qian, Tak-Jun Wong, and Lijun Xia, 2008, State ownership, the institutional envi-
 ronment, and auditor choice: Evidence from China, Journal of Accounting and Economics
 46, 112–134.

Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2000, Financial markets and the allocation of capital, Journal of Financial
 Economics 58, 187–214.

Xu, Jin, and Shaojun Zhang, 2013, The Fama-French three factors in the Chinese stock
 market, Hong Kong Polytechnic University Working Paper.




                                             39
        !"#$%&'()'*+",-./'01234'5-%4&1'(667879(7'
&!!!"                                                          &#"


%#!!"                                                          &!"

                                                               %#"
%!!!"
                                                               %!"
$#!!"
                                                               $#"
$!!!"
                                                               $!"

 #!!"                                                          #"

   !"                                                          !"




        '()*+,"-."/0-123"   4-056"75,2+0"859":4,;66;-<"=7>?"
          !"#$%&'()'*+,-.'/%"-&'"01,%2345&0&66'"0'78"039'!,%&-3640#'&3%0"0#6':"+8'&;$"+<'/%"-&6


               7,&=-"&0+'.>?'                     E%&D"-+&D'53%"34,0'.>?'             @3%#"03A'BC6;$3%&D'.>?'
  "#&$%                                  "#",%                              "#&$%
   "#&%                                  "#")%                               "#&%
  "#"*%                                                                     "#"*%
  "#"(%                                  "#"+%
                                                                            "#"(%
  "#")%                                  "#"$%
                                                                            "#")%
  "#"$%
                                         "#"&%                              "#"$%
!&'!&(%
 !"#"$%                                     "%                                 "%




               7,&=-"&0+'.>('                     E%&D"-+&D'53%"34,0'.>('             @3%#"03A'BC6;$3%&D'.>('
  "#&$%                                  "#",%                              "#&$%
   "#&%                                                                      "#&%
                                         "#")%
  "#"*%
                                         "#"+%                              "#"*%
  "#"(%
                                                                            "#"(%
  "#")%                                  "#"$%
                                                                            "#")%
  "#"$%
                                         "#"&%
!&'!&(%                                                                     "#"$%
 !"#"$%                                     "%                                 "%




               7,&=-"&0+'.>F'                     E%&D"-+&D'53%"34,0'.>F'            @3%#"03A'BC6;$3%&D'.>F'
  "#&$%                                  "#",%                              "#&$%
   "#&%                                                                      "#&%
                                         "#")%
  "#"*%                                                                     "#"*%
  "#"(%                                  "#"+%
                                                                            "#"(%
  "#")%                                  "#"$%
                                                                            "#")%
  "#"$%
                                         "#"&%                              "#"$%
!&'!&(%
                                            "%                                 "%
 !"#"$%
              !"#$"%$$&'                                 #"%!"#CCC'                                                     C#"C#"#CCR''
              ()*'+),-.'                                 F1?.A'.A)8E'                      %#"C!"#CC%'' %%"%J"#CC#' I2A1),2<',1,-'
              /01,23'                                    A?26-.'2;)G-'                     I-*'2,6'     K0-'/4L/'       ?:<-.'
              402,50213'      %#"%="%$$&' !!"#$%%9&:;;$# %CC'H:2,3'                        .A?18A-?'    ?2A1B1-.'MFNN' .A?-,5A0-,'
!"#$%%$&$%%'# 2,6'            (21<>'9?18-' </,87=)-150# 1,G-.A152A1),' !!!"#:;;$&          8)@92,>' 9?)5?2@'B)?' @1,)?1A>'              !D"#:;;9&
()*+,-#       40-,70-,'       802,5-'<1@1A' 3#           B1,6.'.-?1):.' :;;'#              6-<1.A1,5'   61?-8A'B)?-15,' .02?-0)<6-?' :;$;#
./,0102#3# 1,618-.'           )B'%CD'.-A' >88570-102# 288):,A1,5' ()*+,-#                  ?-5:<2A1),' 1,.AO'PQ.02?-' 9?)A-8A1),'2,6' ?10)081)=#
4506-*78-150 9:;<1817-6       B)?'2<<'.A)8E. ?*)7@       B?2:6          A,B5*C             -,B)?8-6     )*,-?.019       61G16-,6'9)<18> 4*1616

                                                  ?127*,#E"#<-58+#F*18,#!0B5*C)GH,0,66#10#4I10)#
                                                                       !"#$%&'()#
COC!'



COCR'



COC='



COC#'



COC%'



COCC'
        %$$&'      %$$U'       %$$J'     %$$$'       #CCC'     #CC%'     #CC#'     #CC='       #CCR'    #CC!'     #CC&'     #CCU'     #CCJ'     #CC$'   #C%C'

%$$&'         $"#R"%$$&'      J"%!"%$$U'      %$$J'V?18-.' !"%!"#CC%' CJ"#C"#CC%' %%"%%"#CC% C%"CU"#CC=' #CC!'49<1A'                   C%"%="#CC&'
I:@;-?')B'    T1@1AQ)?6-?'    K0-'/4L/'       )B'B1?@.'1,'4K' W8),)@1.A' 4-G-?2<'        /01,2'[)1,.' K0-'/4L/'       402?-'L-B)?@3' ]2?51,'
<1.A-6'       ;))E.'          ;-8)@-.'        .E>?)8E-A3' X:'+1,5<12,' @2[)?'            A0-'XK\      A150A-,.'       ,),A?262;<-' A?261,5'2,6'
8)@92,1-.'    :,1B1-63'       ?-5:<2A)?')B'   @2?E-A'         9?)9).-.'      288):,A1,5'              ?-9)?A1,5'      .02?-.';-51,'A)' .0)?A'.-<<1,5'
-S8--6.'!CC   A?261,5'B--.'   402,5021'       @2,19:<2A1),' Y/2.1,)Y'        .82,62<.'                ?:<-.'A)'6-A-?' 5)'9:;<183'      91<)A'
              ?-6:8-6'        2,6'            ?2@92,A         A0-)?>')B'     ?-G-2<-6                 288):,A1,5' A?262;<-'            9?)5?2@'
                              40-,70-,'                       /01,2Z.'.A)8E'                          B?2:6           .02?-0)<6-?.' 1,A?)6:8-6
                              -S802,5-.                       @2?E-A                                                  8)@9-,.2A-6
       !"#$%&'()'*+,"&-,.'/0',/%1/%23&'"-4&536&-3'"-'78"-2'9::;<=>99


'"$#

'"!#

&"$#

&"!#

%"$#

%"!#

!"$#

!"!#
       %(()# %((*# %((+# %(((# &!!!# &!!%# &!!&# &!!'# &!!,# &!!$# &!!)# &!!*# &!!+# &!!(# &!%!# &!%%#
!!!!"#$%&'!()!*+,-.!/&#-'!#01,&2345'0'66!307!#05'6+2'0+!'8-#'0-9!#0!:;#03!<==>?@A<@


                     C&#-'!#01,&2345'0'66!D.E<F!307!#05'6+2'0+!'8-#'0-9!?!-,&&!GHIJ!+?6+3+!<)KL!
                     !"!$#                                                                                                      '"!#

                                                                                                                                &"$#
                     !"!(#

   B01,&2345'0'66!                                                                                                              &"!# M8-#'0-9!
                  !"!'#
                                                                                                                                %"$#
                     !"!&#
                                                                                                                                %"!#

                     !"!%#
                                                                                                                                !"$#

                        !#                                                                                                      !"!#
                             %))*# %))+# %)),# %)))# &!!!# &!!%# &!!&# &!!'# &!!(# &!!$# &!!*# &!!+# &!!,# &!!)# &!%!# &!%%#



                 C&#-'!#01,&2345'0'66!D.E@F!307!#05'6+2'0+!'8-#'0-9!?!-,&&!(LIJ!+?6+3+!@)(>!

                 !"!$#                                                                                                         '"!#

                                                                                                                               &"$#
                 !"!(#
   B01,&2345'0'66!                                                                                                             &"!#    M8-#'0-9!
                 !"!'#
                                                                                                                               %"$#
                 !"!&#
                                                                                                                               %"!#

                 !"!%#
                                                                                                                               !"$#

                       !#                                                                                                      !"!#
                             %))*# %))+# %)),# %)))# &!!!# &!!%# &!!&# &!!'# &!!(# &!!$# &!!*# &!!+# &!!,# &!!)# &!%!#




                C&#-'!#01,&2345'0'66!D.EGF!307!#05'6+2'0+!'8-#'0-9!?!-,&&!(AIJ!+!6+3+!@)AA!
                    !"!$#                                                                                                  '"!#

                                                                                                                           &"$#
                    !"!(#

  B01,&2345'0'66!                                                                                                          &"!#        M8-#'0-9!
                    !"!'#
                                                                                                                           %"$#
                    !"!&#
                                                                                                                           %"!#

                    !"!%#
                                                                                                                           !"$#

                       !#                                                                                                  !"!#
                             %))*# %))+# %)),# %)))# &!!!# &!!%# &!!&# &!!'# &!!(# &!!$# &!!*# &!!+# &!!,# &!!)#
        !"#$%&'()'*$+$,-./&'-01'2/&%-#&'3&4$%05'67789:;6:

'&!!"
'%!!"
'$!!"
'#!!"
                                                   ()*+,"'&-%&."
'!!!"
                                                   )/012/01"'%-3%."
 &!!"
 %!!"                                              )/415/46"'#-$$."

 $!!"                                              7)"3-$!."
 #!!"                                              8941"'-:;."
   !"
