                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            UNSHROUDING EFFECTS ON DEMAND FOR A COSTLY ADD-ON:
                 EVIDENCE FROM BANK OVERDRAFTS IN TURKEY

                                             Sule Alan
                                         Mehmet Cemalclar
                                            Dean Karlan
                                          Jonathan Zinman

                                        Working Paper 20956
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20956


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2015




We thank Yapi Kredi staff for their cooperation; Michael Grubb, Ben Keys, David Laibson, Eva Nagypal,
Josh Schwartzstein, Andrei Shleifer, and audiences at Boston College, Harvard/MIT, Kellogg (Finance),
LSE, UCL, University of Maryland, University of Virginia, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
the CFPB Research Conference, and the NBER Law & Economics group for comments; and Benni
Savonitto, Glynis Startz, and Zachary Groff for research management and analysis support. The findings,
interpretations and conclusions presented should not be attributed in any manner to Yapi ve Kredi
Bankasi A.S. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sule Alan, Mehmet Cemalclar, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unshrouding Effects on Demand for a Costly Add-on: Evidence from Bank Overdrafts in
Turkey
Sule Alan, Mehmet Cemalclar, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 20956
February 2015, Revised January 2016
JEL No. D12,D14,G02

                                              ABSTRACT

The pricing and advertising of tied add-ons and overages have come under increasing scrutiny. Working
with a large Turkish bank to test SMS direct marketing promotions to 108,000 existing holders of
“free” checking accounts, we find that promoting a large discount on the 60% APR charged for overdrafts
reduces overdraft usage. In contrast, messages mentioning overdraft availability without mentioning
price increase usage. Neither change persists long after messages stop, suggesting that induced overdrafting
is not habit-forming. We discuss implications for interventions to promote transparency in pricing
and advertising, and for models of shrouded equilibria, limited attention, and salience.


Sule Alan                                            Dean Karlan
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Essex, Wivenhoe, Colchester            Yale University
CO79AX, UK.                                          P.O. Box 208269
salancrossley@gmail.com                              New Haven, CT 06520-8629
                                                     and CEPR
Mehmet Cemalclar                                     and also NBER
Yapi Kredi Bank A.S.                                 dean.karlan@yale.edu
Istanbul, Turkey
mehmet.cemalcilar@yapikredi.com.tr                   Jonathan Zinman
                                                     Department of Economics
                                                     Dartmouth College
                                                     314 Rockefeller Hall
                                                     Hanover, NH 03755
                                                     and NBER
                                                     jzinman@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction

    Many inexpensive base goods have expensive add-ons tied to them. Examples include
expensive overdraft credit tied to “free” checking accounts, printer cartridges and printers,
luggage fees and airline tickets, and dealer-supplied maintenance and automobiles. A closely
related practice is multi-part tariffs with overages—penalty pricing—which is again common
in disparate industries; e.g., financial services, telecommunications, health care, and
electricity.

    Theorists, empiricists and policymakers are scrutinizing the pricing and advertising of
tied add-ons and overages as potentially deceptive and inefficient. Yet empirical evidence is
lacking on key questions posed by the theoretical literature, such as whether consumers
underestimate add-on costs, 2 whether firms have incentives to shroud add-on prices (Gabaix
and Laibson 2006; Heidhues, Koszegi, and Murooka 2014), how consumers allocate attention
to add-ons (Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer 2015; Grubb 2015), and how quickly consumer
learning about add-ons breaks a shrouded equilibrium (Gabaix and Laibson 2006; Heidhues,
Koszegi, and Murooka 2014).

    We provide empirical evidence on these questions from a direct marketing randomized
experiment on checking account overdrafts, a prevalent and economically important example
of a tied add-on and overage that has helped motivate much of the recent theoretical work.
An overdraft occurs if the checking account holder initiates a transaction that makes her
balance negative, or more negative. Checking accounts in much of the world moved to a
“free if nonnegative balance, very expensive if in overdraft” equilibrium during the 1990s,
with overdraft revenue from fees and interest charges replacing monthly subscription fees as
the major source of explicit income from checking accounts. In the US, banks collect more
than $10 billion in overdraft revenue annually (sources: CFPB, Moebs, SNL Financial). In
the UK, banks derive almost as much income from overdrafts as from re-investing checking
account deposits (Competition and Markets Authority 2014). Overdraft practices have also
triggered several recent regulatory actions in the US and the EU. In Turkey, the site of our
2
  Behavioral industrial organization models make a variety of different assumptions about the cause of
incorrect expectations about future consumption; see Spiegler (2011) for a review. In terms of the
models most closely related to our setup, Gabaix and Laibson (2006), Heidhues, Koszegi, and
Murooka (2014), and Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2015) assume that some consumers
underestimate a reduced-form add-on cost that, in our setting, is the product of the price of overdrafts
and the likelihood that one enters the overdrafting state: checking account balance < 0. Grubb (2015)
assumes that consumers know the price but underestimate the likelihood of overdrafting, because they
underestimate their cost of attention to balances. See also Grubb (2009).

                                                                                                      1
experiment, the post-experiment announcement of a binding price ceiling on overdrafts was
immediately followed by a 1.4% reduction in bank share prices, with a 2.1% drop for the
most overdraft-reliant bank, highlighting the importance of overdrafts as a profit center for
banks.

    Descriptive evidence suggests that the bank overdraft market is a prime example of a
shrouded equilibrium where firms lack incentives to draw attention to, or compete on, add-on
prices. Despite the economic importance of overdrafts, banks rarely market these services, at
least at the customer acquisition stage (General Accounting Office 2008; Competition and
Markets Authority 2014). 3 Post-acquisition, banks in some markets, including the site of our
experiment, have blurred the line between positive and negative balances for consumers by
reporting an available-to-withdraw figure that adds the available credit amount to the
checking account balance, and by making information on disaggregated balances and finance
charges more difficult to find than the aggregate available balance. On the consumer side,
overdrafts happen passively in the sense that they are triggered in the course of checking
account usage rather than by separate transactions where a consumer explicitly draws from a
line of credit: they are plausibly low “exposure” and likely to be ignored or forgotten
(Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer 2015). Some descriptive data are consistent with consumers
overdrafting when they could have used much cheaper available credit on credit cards
(Stango and Zinman 2009), underestimating overdraft likelihood and prices (Armstrong and
Vickers 2012; Stango and Zinman 2014), and experiencing “bill shock” (Grubb 2015).

    Nevertheless there are reasons to doubt the descriptive power of shrouding models.
Stango and Zinman (2014) finds that low balances (<$100) are common but not typically
followed by overdrafts in a US sample, and that many checking account holders report a
willingness to pay a market price (e.g., a $25-$30 fee) to settle even a small-dollar overdraft.
The bulk of overdraft costs are paid by a small number of checking account holders who
overdraft repeatedly (Bakker et al. 2014; Financial Conduct Authority 2014), raising the
broader question of whether experience unshrouds or at least bounds the distortions or
duration of a shrouded equilibrium. 4 Indeed, Heidhues, Koszegi, and Murooka (2014) notes
that the profitability of high add-on prices is “limited by consumers’ ex-post demand


3
  Casual empiricism suggests that some banks are now starting to market low-cost or no-overdraft
products in the U.S., perhaps in response to recent regulations and ongoing regulatory pressure.
4
  Gabaix and Laibson (2006, Section III.A) speculates that learning causes shrouding to disappear,
eventually, despite potential countervailing dynamic forces.

                                                                                                2
response to add-on prices” (p. 11), raising the possibility that, at the customer level, the firm
wants to shroud at the acquisition stage but then unshroud while cutting the price of the add-
on. Practices in our setting seem consistent with some degree of unshrouding, as we discuss
below.

    In short, empirical evidence on what drives overdraft pricing, advertising, and usage is
mixed and largely descriptive. More broadly, empirical work on tied add-ons and overage
pricing is still in its early stages.

    Yapi Kredi (YK), one of the largest banks in Turkey, sought to learn more about the
overdraft market and its optimal strategy for pricing and marketing the product (which is
branded as the “Flexible Account”). In particular, YK was interested in understanding
whether its past pricing and advertising content tactics are effective in increasing demand,
and if not why not. YK’s interest rate (60% APR) and product design was in line with
standard practices and regulations. As is common in overdraft markets, the product was
priced expensively relative to seemingly close substitutes (like credit cards in Turkey), and
disproportionally to credit risk (as found recently by Turkish regulators and courts).

    We worked with YK to design randomized experiments to distinguish between
neoclassical and behavioral models of add-on pricing and advertising. YK implemented the
experiments by randomly varying the messaging and pricing (promotional offers) it sent, via
SMS, to 108,000 existing checking account clients, from September-December 2012. These
clients are likely representative of a substantial population of marginal overdrafters in
Turkey, and they share key characteristics with “banked” populations in both more- and less-
developed countries.

    The design (summarized in Figure 1) produces random variation, across clients and over
time, in prices and in messaging content, frequency, and duration. Our tests rely on
comparisons across different treatment groups, since banks in this market are typically doing
some sort of SMS-based promotions at any point in time: the equilibrium is frequent direct
marketing. 5




5
 The bank also created a no-message comparison group of 39,367 existing checking accounts, and we
use these data to confirm that a sharp increase in overdrafting among the messaging groups that was
contemporaneous with our experiment was likely indicative of market-wide forces rather than
anything particular to our study (Figures 2a and 2b and Section 2.3).

                                                                                                 3
    A question of ethics, raised frequently in seminars, is whether researchers should partner
with a lender that is seeking to sell more high-interest rate loans. We think yes, in this
circumstance as in many related experiments on microcredit where take-up is an outcome of
interest, for four key reasons. First, the ethical concern here presumes that high-cost
consumer credit harms consumers. We emphasize the presumption; extensive research on this
question suggests that a different assumption is warranted-- (weakly) beneficial impacts for
consumers (Zinman 2014; Banerjee, Karlan, and Zinman 2015). Second, YK’s advertising
was truthful and its terms were competitive. Thus, combining the first and second points, the
experiment was not trying to convince consumers to accept a bad deal in either absolute
terms or compared to market alternatives. Third, YK was going to test advertising and
messaging in its upcoming campaign anyhow; we helped convince bank management to
include price discounts and unshrouding, and hence our participation made prices lower and
more prominent on average. Fourth, YK agreed that the results would be disseminated
publicly to benefit regulators and further scientific knowledge (and likewise in this spirit, the
academic coauthors had unrestricted intellectual freedom to report the results regardless of
what they were).

    Our first key test offers a 50% discount on the overdraft interest rate: “… we will give you
back half of your Flexible Account’s accrued interest…” This message reduces overdraft
usage by about 5% relative to overdraft messages that do not mention price, and by about 2%
relative to all messages that do not offer the discount. Additional results suggest that more-
intense messaging about the overdraft discount—higher-frequency and/or longer duration
messaging—at least weakly intensifies this perverse effect. These are striking findings:
offering a price reduction on a commodity reduces demand for that commodity. 6 This is all
the more striking given our sample of existing customers; as noted above, firms probably
have lesser incentives to shroud at this post-acquisition stage than at the customer acquisition
stage.

    Our second key test promotes overdraft availability without mentioning price: “We
remind you that,… you have a Flexible Account at Yapi Kredi with [customfill] TL limit…”.
This message increases overdraft usage relative to messages that do not mention overdraft at

6
  Our finding is reminiscent of the Hsee (1998) finding explained in Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer
(2015). In isolation, people have higher hypothetical willingness to pay for a dinner set with 24 plates
than for one with >24 intact plates but a few broken ones. But in a pairwise choice people prefer the
set with >24 intact plates. Having said that, we do not actually offer consumers in our sample a
pairwise choice between more-expensive and less-expensive overdrafts.

                                                                                                      4
all, by about 4%, and by about 5% relative to messages offering the overdraft interest
discount. Sending more overdraft availability messages further increases demand.

    Our third key test finds that all treatment effects dissipate over time; e.g., five months
after all treatments ended we no longer reject null hypotheses of no effects. This runs counter
to the assertion by some policymakers that overdrafts are habit-forming (Financial Conduct
Authority 2014).

    Our three key results are consistent with models of shrouded equilibrium a la Gabaix and
Laibson (2006), and also suggest a role for salience a la Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer
(2015), as we discuss in detail in Section 5.7 In summary, our results support: (1) the key
modeling assumption that consumers tend to underestimate add-on costs; (2) the key
prediction that firms lack incentives to unshroud; (3) a key prediction of Bordalo, Gennaioli,
and Shleifer (2015) that consumers respond differently when advertising highlights different
add-on attributes. Our results reject habit formation in induced overdrafting, suggesting that
consumer learning about overdrafts is slow (due to rapid depreciation of knowledge and/or
attention), unshrouding is costly, and hence that transitions from shrouded to unshrouded
equilibria may be slower than conjectured by Gabaix and Laibson (2006) and Heidhues,
Koszegi, and Murooka (2014). We also discuss competing interpretations (rational
inattention, and a mistrust story), and why they do not provide as complete an explanation of
our setting and results.

    Our paper informs several other literatures on limited attention, salience, and advertising.
Our results provide insight into what comes to mind and what does not (Bordalo, Gennaioli,
and Shleifer 2013; Eliaz and Spiegler 2011; Gabaix 2014; Hanna, Mullainathan, and
Schwartzstein 2014; Karlan et al. Forthcoming). They suggest that price promotions have
attention effects that can be perverse from the promoter’s perspective, thereby adding
evidence to literatures on the psychology of incentives (Gneezy and Rustichini 2000;
Kamenica 2012) and price changes (Hastings and Shapiro 2013) that have not yet focused
much on shrouded prices. Our results are consistent with results from other domains
suggesting that consumers respond differently to base prices versus add-on prices (Anagol



7
 Note however that our study does not map directly to most shrouding models, as most shrouding
models focus on competition at the customer acquisition stage rather than the post-acquisition setting
we have here.


                                                                                                    5
and Kim 2012; Brown, Hossain, and Morgan 2010; Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 2009). 8
Relatedly, our findings contrast with those in Ferman (Forthcoming) and Elizondo and Seira
(2014), both of which find little impact of messaging that makes the base price of high-
interest credit cards more prominent in Brazil and Mexico. Our results are broadly consistent
with prior work finding that advertising content can have important and surprising effects on
decisions about expensive debt (Bertrand et al. 2010), and that messaging from banks can
change the behavior of existing customers (Cadena and Schoar 2011; Kast, Meier, and
Pomeranz 2014; Karlan, Morten, and Zinman Forthcoming). Our results on the long-run
effects of short-run messaging complement the literature on the dynamics of learning and/or
attention regarding add-on charges (Agarwal et al. 2013; Ater and Landsman 2013;
Haselhuhn et al. 2012; Stango and Zinman 2014), 9 may help explain why advertising is so
prevalent (repeated exposure matters), and suggest that short-run behavior changes do not
necessarily induce learning or greater sophistication about attention among marginal
consumers (Schwartzstein 2014). 10

2. Setting: The Overdraft Market in Turkey

    Our discussion here focuses on our partner bank, Yapi Kredi (YK), and the Turkish
overdraft market. As noted in the Introduction, our setting has many similarities to overdraft
markets in other countries like the US and UK, with a key difference being substantially
lower prices in Turkey (60% APR vs. $25-$40 per transaction fees for very small and short-
term loans). For details on overdraft markets in the US and Europe see, e.g., government




8
  We do not actually observe price sensitivity to the base price in our setting. But given our result that
cutting overdraft prices depresses overdraft demand, we can infer differential sensitivity to base and
add-on prices simply by assuming that cutting the base price would not decrease demand for checking
accounts.
9
   Stango and Zinman (2014) is probably the most closely related empirical paper to ours. SZ uses
quasi-experimental variation in survey content, in a market research panel in the U.S., to identify
effects and dynamics of attention to overdraft fees. Similar to here, SZ finds that an attention shock
mentioning overdraft costs reduces overdraft usage, and that repeated attention shocks cumulate to
some extent, although they depreciate more quickly in our setting. Aside from the obvious differences
between the two study designs— market research surveys versus bank advertising as attention shocks,
quasi-random versus random variation, US versus Turkey—there are at least two other key
differences. First, we have randomly assigned price variation. Second, our treatments include some
messages that mention the overdraft service but not its cost. These differences lead to the surprising
new inferences that bringing overdrafts to mind increases demand, but bringing the price of overdrafts
to mind, even if accompanied by a discount, lowers demand.
10
   See also Manoli and Turner (2015) on the rapid depreciation of information effects regarding the
Earned Income Tax Credit.

                                                                                                        6
reports (Bakker et al. 2014; Competition and Markets Authority 2014; Financial Conduct
Authority 2014; General Accounting Office 2008), and Stango and Zinman (2014). 11

2.1 Retail Banking and the Economic Importance of Overdrafts

     Turkey’s retail/consumer banking industry is concentrated. Only about 30 banks are
licensed to take deposits, and the largest five banks have greater than 50% market share. 12
Yapi Kredi (YK) is in the top five based on both total assets and number of branches. In
recent years the Turkish market has become known for innovation in retail banking, with one
large bank rolling out the largest biometric ATM network in the region, and another large
bank becoming the first bank in the world to make money transfers possible on Facebook.
Turks have the highest rate of mobile banking in Europe among internet users, at around
50%, according to a 2013 ING survey.

     As in many other countries, overdraft services are an important profit source for banks.
After the Turkish Central Bank halved the interest rate allowed on overdrafts at the end of
May 2013, bank share prices fell 1.4%, with that of the most overdraft-reliant bank falling by
2.1%. 13

2.2 Overdraft Practices

     The focus of our experiment is a checking account overdraft product with features that
were standard in Turkey (and throughout the world) during our study period. The product is
an unsecured line of credit that allows qualifying customers to overdraw their account (i.e., to
hold a negative balance), at a cost of 60% APR on outstanding credit (about 50% real after
adjusting for inflation). Credit card APRs tend to be substantially lower. The bank approves
about 55% of checking account customers for overdraft privileges, with credit limits that vary
based on underwriting but are typically lower than other unsecured credit products. Approved
credit lines were opened on an opt-out basis during our study. Customers then tap the line by
initiating a debit transaction that exceeds the available balance in the checking account. The
line is automatically tapped by such debits—there is no opt-in on a per-transaction basis-- and
11
   For recent policy developments in the US and EU, see, e.g., FDIC Supervisory Guidance warning
banks about about risks of “excessive use” of overdrafts by customers and “maximizing fees” by
banks, Dougherty (2014), and the European Parliament’s Directive on Payment Accounts (issued
April 2014).
12
   As of September 2012 top branch bank had 1,510 branches, and the fifth largest bank had 949, out
of 10,241 total. Of this total the top five owned 5,663 branches (source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_banks_in_Turkey , accessed 10/22/2014).
13
   http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/05/27/markets-turkey-idUSL5N0E81DG20130527 .
                                                                                                 7
negative balances begin accruing interest immediately. By law, any inflow to the checking
account is automatically allocated first toward paying off overdraft credit. If inflows are not
sufficient to clear the balance by the end of the statement date (four weeks), the bank sends a
notice and gives the customer about two weeks to pay at least the accrued interest. If the
customer fails to make the required payment after 60 days, the bank freezes the overdraft
line.

    Overdrafts have attracted regulator and researcher scrutiny because they—and their
prices—are rarely featured at the customer acquisition stage, and often not fully disclosed
post-acquisition. Pre-acquisition, indeed, we are not aware of any mass marketing campaigns
promoting overdraft usage during our sample period in Turkey. Regulators found that when
banks do communicate with consumers, they often fail to provide mandated disclosures or
shroud them. Given that communication from banks is common in Turkey, regulators are
interested in issues of transparency for these communications. YK is a case in point in the
sense that it sought guidance to measure and improve the effectiveness of direct-messaging
and price promotion strategies that it had tried previously. This sort of price advertising and
competition is consistent with at least partial unshrouding, although this did not keep the
Competition Authority from finding that banks were benefiting from substantial markups
over risk-based prices (Section 2.4).

        Indeed in many respects post-acquisition communications seemed quite consistent with a
shrouded equilibrium during our sample period. Customers lacked easy access to information
on their own overdraft usage and charges. Banks did not issue monthly statements as a matter
of course, due to the unreliable snail-mail system, and electronic notifications of overdraft
usage did not mention the interest rate. Electronic banking was and is the dominant channel
for customers getting information on their accounts, and information on overdraft usage was
folded into the customer’s main transaction record rather than disaggregated. The transaction
record would specify the amount charged, but not the interest rate. Landing pages—the first
screen the customer sees after logging in-- would even obscure whether overdraft was being
used, in the sense of presenting the customer’s balance based on “available-to-withdraw”
(including credit line) instead of just the checking account balance. A customer seeking
interest rate information would need to navigate through several different screens to find
interest rate information —“multiple clicks”, in user-interface parlance—or contact a
customer service representative.


                                                                                             8
2.3 Overdraft Users and Usage in Turkey

     Who overdrafts? In Turkey there is not much data on the characteristics of overdrafters
(e.g., our data lack information on education or income), but there are some clues. Over half
of Turkey’s population is unbanked, according to a 2012 World Bank report. Beyond that
many checking account holders are not approved for overdraft lines of credit due to credit
risk that banks cannot price. These facts suggest that overdrafters are drawn from the upper
half or third of the income distribution in Turkey, although not from the uppermost
percentiles, who presumably have the wealth and access to cheaper credit that would tend to
render overdrafting unlikely and/or relatively unattractive.

     Our sample overdrafts frequently in the ten months after our experiment started, despite
having been selected for the experiment based on infrequent overdraft activity prior to the
experiment (Section 3.2; Table 1). 45.8% of our sample overdrafts at least once between
September 1, 2012-June 30, 2013, and in any given month 15-24% of our sample overdrafts.
The sharp increase in overdrafting from baseline to (post-) experiment is probably not due to
mean reversion, as overdrafting tends to be strongly serially correlated month-to-month.
Rather, discussions with YK and its regulators point to a marketwide increase driven by
monetary policy and widespread seasonal credit promotions around the end of Ramadan. This
pattern is evident both in aggregate data and in YK’s customer base. YK held back a no-
message group of 39,000 from our experiment, and Figures 2a and 2b show similar trends in
overdraft usage for this group compared to our experimental group of 108,000. 14

     The mean amount of finance charges paid over the ten months is 30.82 TL (1 TL = $0.56
USD during our sample period), with a 95th percentile of 228.08 TL.

2.4 Policy Postscript

     As noted above, overdraft practices have been attracting legal scrutiny around the globe.
In July 2013, seven months after our experiment ended, the Turkish Competition Authority
fined 12 banks for price-fixing on loans, including overdrafts. On May 27, 2013, the Turkish
Central Bank imposed a binding price ceiling on overdraft APR. Turkish regulators have also


14
  YK applied somewhat different and not entirely reproducible filters in selecting the no-message
comparison group, so we do not use this group as a pure control group. Creating a pure control group
was not a point of emphasis at the design and implementation stages of the experiment, since the
equilibrium was clearly one of extensive direct-messaging and hence the mapping of message vs. no-
message comparisons to theory is less clear than comparisons across different promotions.

                                                                                                  9
focused on marketing and communications since our experiment ended, pressuring and
working with banks to make overdraft usage, pricing, and costs more transparent.




3. Experimental Design, Sample and Data

3.1 Experimental Design and Implementation

     Figure 1 summarizes the experimental design and details the script of each message
variant. The field experiment randomly assigns message content, frequency, and duration, as
well as promotional offers on overdraft, debit card, and automated debit (for bill payment), to
a sample of 108,000 checking account holders (we describe the sample in Section 3.2). YK
did not send this sample any other promotional communications during this campaign. The
only other communications YK sent to this sample were monthly account statements.

     YK sent the messages by SMS, which is the most common way banks communicate with
their clients in Turkey (91% of Turkish adults have a cell phone, for one of the highest
penetration rates in the world). As noted above, it is also common for clients to use their
phone to access banking services; e.g., Turkey has the highest ratio of mobile banking users
to Internet users in Europe.

     YK began the experiment by sending half of the sample an “overdraft availability
reminder” message on August 30, 2012 that mentions the overdraft service and credit line but
nothing about its cost. 15 This first randomization is not crucial for testing our main
hypotheses; it served primarily as a pilot for the subsequent randomizations and also allows
us to test for a heterogeneous treatment effect suggested by some of the motivating
theoretical models (Section 4.3).

     YK continued the experiment on September 15, 2012 by sending each person in the
sample one of six randomly assigned messages: (1) 50% (n=53,953) received an “overdraft




15
   “We remind you that, for your immediate cash needs, you have a Flexible Account at Yapi Kredi
with [custom fill]TL limit. Have a nice day.” One might think of this message as a “reminder”
because the bank’s policy and Turkish law require upfront disclosure of the overdraft features and
pricing. However, given that the service is offered on an opt-out basis, and that our motivating
questions concern shrouding, we allow for the possibility that this message provides new information
rather than being a simple reminder. We explore this in Section 4.3.

                                                                                                 10
interest discount” message; 16 (2) Among the 53,953 clients sent the overdraft interest
discount, one third (n=17,981) also received information about an auto-debit discount 17 in the
message, one-third (n=17,995) also received information about a debit card discount 18 in the
message, and one-third (n=17,997) received no further information beyond the overdraft
interest discount; (3) among the 54,047 clients not sent one of the above overdraft interest
discount messages, one-third (n=18,021) received information about the auto-debit discount
only, 19 one-third (n=17,983) received information about the debit card discount only, 20 and
one-third (n=18,043) received the overdraft availability reminder message described above. 21

     A frequency randomization determined whether YK repeated the September 15 message
frequently (every 10 days), less-frequently (every 20 days), or not at all during the campaign
period. A duration randomization determined whether the price promotion(s) or overdraft
availability reminder, and any related messaging subsequent to September 15, lasted until
November 15 or December 15.

     Note that YK sent at least one message to everyone in our sample during the experiment.
YK preferred this design choice because, like other banks, it often sends promotional and
reminder messages to its customers and thought it would be counterproductive to scale back
directed advertising to zero. The research team preferred this design— placebo
communications rather than pure control—because any contact from YK could trigger the
customer’s attention and affect her usage of YK products. 22


16
   “Use your Yapi Kredi Flexible Account and we will give you back half of your Flexible Account’s
accrued interest between now and [November/December] 15…”
17
   “Authorize automatic bill payments from your account before [November/December] 15, receive
up to a maximum of 30TL WP. Use your Flexible Account between now and [November/December]
15, and we will give you back half of your accrued interest as WP.” Note that “WP” refers to reward
points, which are easily redeemable at point-of-sale using the account’s debit card; anecdotally, most
of the bank’s customers view them as equivalent to cash. To sign-up for auto-debit, most people either
go on-line or use telephone banking, and do not go into a branch to enroll a payment.
18
   “Use your Yapi Kredi debit card and earn 5% of your shopping, up to 25TL WP, between now and
[November/December] 15. Use your Flexible Account between now and [November/December] 15,
and we will give you back half of your accrued interest as WP.”
19
   “Authorize automatic bill payments from your account before [November/December] 15, receive
up to a maximum of 30TL WP.”
20
   “Use your Yapi Kredi debit card and earn 5% of your shopping, up to 25TL WP, between now and
[November/December] 15 as WP.”
21
   “We remind you that, for your immediate cash needs, you have a Flexible Account at Yapi Kredi
with [customfill] TL limit…”
22
   A closely related way of framing our interest in placebo communications is that frequent direct-
messaging is the equilibrium, and we thought that the experiment would link more tightly to theory if
the only deviations from equilibrium were around unshrouding.

                                                                                                   11
3.2 Baseline Data on Sample Characteristics, and Balance Checks

     The bank sought to promote overdraft usage among existing clients who it deemed most
likely to be close to the margin of overdrafting. To this end it selected customers for the
experiment based on the following criteria: had the overdraft service feature in place already,
had an active cell phone, maintained an average total deposit account balances<5,000TL over
the three months prior to the start of the experiment (May-July 2012), had not used the
overdraft service (to a first approximation) during the prior three months. 23 Many of these
customers did have some prior experience with the product however. Our pre-treatment data
go back as far as September 2011, and from September 2011-April 2012 18.4% of our
sample overdrafted at least once, with an average daily balance of 4.42TL (SD 23.51, Max
940.47) among these accountholders. For comparison, 31% of our sample overdrafted at least
once during the experiment (September 15-December 31), with an average of 2.77 overdrafts
during that period (SD 6.05, Max 27) and an average daily balance of 26.85TL (SD 77.97,
Max 2696.58).

     Table 1 summarizes the baseline data available to us (Column 1) and checks balance
across treatment assignments (Columns 2 -10). In terms of demographics, we only have
information on gender (29% female), the city of residence (28% Istanbul, 23% outside the
four largest cities), and marital status (57% married). This information is collected by the
bank at the account opening stage and can be updated later by the client. Besides pre-
treatment data on overdraft usage (described above and in Table 1), we also have data on the
other behaviors targeted by the experiment: debit card usage and automatic debits for bill
payments. We stratified on all of these baseline variables and the last column confirms that
none of them is correlated with treatment assignment, by regressing each row variable on the
treatment assignments indicated Columns 2-10.

3.3 Follow-up data

     YK provided us with data on overdraft usage, debit card usage, direct debit
authorizations, and deposit account balances, at the account-month level, from September 1,
2012 through the end of June 2013 (although we do not use the June 2013 due to the binding
price cap imposed at the end of May 2013). In addition to the monthly data, YK provided us

23
   Other sample frame criteria were: owned a YK checking account for at least a year and were in
good standing; had a debit card linked to the YK checking account, had no more than three auto-pays
already set up.

                                                                                                12
with daily data on overdraft usage for the experimental period: September 15-December 15,
2012. We use this data to construct outcome variables for estimating the short-run and
longer-run treatment effects detailed in the next section.


4. Specifications and Results
   We estimate OLS regressions at the level of YK’s randomizations—the checking account,
indexed by i— and a time block that corresponds to either during- or post-experimental
advertising (indexed by t):
   (1) Yit = a + BTi + CXi + eit,

where Y is some measure of a behavior targeted by the marketing campaign: overdraft usage,
debit card usage, or an automatic debit for bill payment. In Tables 2 and 3 we measure
outcomes over a time period designed to capture immediate/short-run treatment effects: t
covers September 15-December 31, since the bank sent everyone at least one promotional
message starting September 15 and sent the last promotional messages on December 15.
Table 4 measures outcomes over the post-experiment time period: January 2013-May 2013.

   T is a vector of treatment assignments (see Figure 1), with B the vector of estimated
coefficients on those treatment variables. X is a vector of the stratification variables used to
block the randomization (see Table 1).

   Our main tables define the treatment vector to test key predictions and features of models
of shrouding and limited attention with the simplest possible presentation; in particular, we
make use of additive specifications that enable us to keep the omitted treatment category
consistent across columns within each table, and to facilitate inference about comparisons of
theoretical interest: overdraft promotions that mention price vs. those that do not (rows 4-7 in
Tables 2 and 4), and price promotions on other banking services that are bundled with
overdraft discounts vs. those that are not (rows 2 and 4 in Table 3). The Appendix Tables
present a more comprehensive set of results.

4.1 Main Effects of Overdraft Promotions on Overdrafting, During Experiment

   Table 2 estimates the effects of the different overdraft promotions, on three different
measures of overdraft usage, during the experimental time period (September 15-December
31, 2012).




                                                                                             13
     Row 4 shows our estimates of the effect of getting an overdraft interest promotion relative
to getting the other overdraft-mentioning message—the availability message that does not
mention price. Reading across columns one can see that this effect is negative—offering a
lower price leads to lower demand— with estimates for two of the three demand measures
having p-values < 0.01. The extensive margin falls by 1.2 percentage points, and days with a
balance falls by 0.16, for declines of 4 and 6% relative to the sample means. Of course our
additive specification is not the only way to scale or identify these effects; e.g., it is also
interesting to compare the effect of getting an overdraft discount offer to all other messages,
since this is another way to frame the bank’s decision. These effect sizes (standard errors) are
-0.0065 (0.0028) for 1/0 overdraft usage, -0.0728 (0.0365) for days with overdraft balance,
and -0.1057 (0.4688) for average overdraft balance. We discuss magnitudes in detail below
but for now note that these and our other effect sizes are likely to be substantial in economic
terms.

     Rows 5, 6, and 7 decompose the perverse price effect into the overdraft discount only
(row 5), and the overdraft discount bundled with discounts for auto-pay (row 6) or debit card
use (row 7). These results suggest that the overdraft discount by itself does not depress
demand; rather it is the bundled discounts that drive the perverse effect (see also Table 3,
Columns 3-5, Rows 2 and 4). We examine whether this is a somewhat mechanical result:
whether the auto-pay or debit card message motivated individuals to maintain larger bank
account balances, which thus led to lower frequency of overdrafting. Appendix Table 1 Panel
B shows that the auto-pay and debit card promotions do not lead to higher bank account
balances. Lacking evidence for this sort of mechanical mechanism, we posit a salience
mechanism: by bundling overdraft promotion with another account feature that can produce
overdrafts, the consumer not only becomes increasingly aware of the price of overdraft, but is
also reminded to monitor particular transactions more closely. 24 This is consistent with
Stango and Zinman (2014), which finds that survey questions about spending control,
monitoring account balances, or other bank fees lead to overdraft reductions.

     In all, Table 2 Rows 4-7 support a key prediction of shrouding models: drawing attention
to the cost of a shrouded attribute reduces the demand for it (even, in our case, when offering


24
  These bundled messages are also longer than the single-discount messages, but if longer messages
tax limited attention we would expect them to push treatment effects on overdrafting toward zero
instead of further depressing demand. The idea is that getting a too-long message is akin to getting no
message at all, since the recipient ignores the too-long message.

                                                                                                    14
a 50% discount!). We confirm that this lower demand likely maps into lower profitability for
the bank in Appendix Table 1, which shows that deposit account balances (checking +
saving) do not increase to offset promotion costs and lost overdraft revenue with increased
implicit interest. 25

     Table 2 rows 1 and 3 identify our second key result: the effect of the overdraft availability
message that does not mention costs or offer a discount. This message increases demand for
overdraft relative to messages that do not mention overdraft, on the order of 1 percentage
point in 1/0 usage, 0.1 days with an overdraft balance, and 1TL in average overdraft balance.
These effects are consistent with the overdraft feature—and not just its cost-- being far from
top of mind: reminding someone of its availability and quantity (the size of the credit limit)
increases usage. (We discuss implications for theory and practice in Section 5.)

The magnitudes of the treatment effects in Table 2 are likely economically significant, for
several reasons. First, they suggest that drawing attention to overdraft costs induces upward-
sloping demand. Framed differently, it suggests that messaging about costs without offering a
discount—as one might contemplate as part of a pure debiasing strategy—would depress
demand even more. Second, the messaging here does not mention the level of costs— again
as one might contemplate as part of a pure debiasing strategy like “Beware of overdrafts at
60% APR!” Instead YK offers to give back “half of the interest”. It seems plausible to think
that messaging around the cost level might depress demand even more, particularly if
consumers tend to underestimate add-on costs as assumed by shrouding models. Third,
messaging costs are low, and hence bank strategy is sensitive to small changes in demand.
Fourth, our estimates are in intention-to-treat (ITT) units, and we should keep in mind that
some recipients may have ignored the messages and hence not actually been “treated”.
Treatment-on-the-treated effects might be more informative for mapping the steady-state
implications of our results, and they would be larger than the ITTs, but we have no good way
of estimating how much larger in the context of this study.

4.2 Do All Promotional Discounts Backfire? No.

     Table 3 checks whether other promotional discounts backfire as well, by estimating
treatment effects of the debit card and auto-debit discount offers on their targeted behaviors
during the experiment. The key results here are presented in Row 1-Column 1 and Row 3-

25
  Stango and Zinman (2014) also find that consumers do not engineer overdraft reductions by holding
larger/buffer balances in their deposit accounts.

                                                                                                15
Column 2, which, due to our additive specification, identify the effects of offering the debit
discount alone on debit card usage, and of offering the auto-pay discount alone on auto-
payment signup. Debit card usage weakly increases, and auto-pay increases significantly.
These effects are each scaled relative to the Overdraft Interest Discount Only message. They
are similar for alternative comparisons; if, e.g., we instead estimate effects relative to not
getting a debit card discount, the Debit Card Discount Only coefficient for 1/0 debit card
usage is 0.0067 (SE=0.0039), and the Debit Card Discount + Overdraft Interest Discount
coefficient is 0.0059 (SE=0.0039). Rows 2 and 4 test whether bundling a discount with the
Overdraft Interest Discount performs differently, with respect to demand for debit cards and
auto-pay, than offering a discount on debit or auto-pay alone. We do not find evidence of
differential effects.

    In sum, we find no evidence that offering discounts on other bank services backfires with
respect to demand for those services, and some evidence that they increase demand as
intended.

4.3 Heterogeneous Effects of Overdraft Messaging?

    Shrouding models, and models of limited attention and salience like Bordalo, Gennaioli,
and Shleifer (2015), predict that responses to the advertising of add-ons will vary with how
well-informed and/or attentive the consumer is. For example, a well-informed and attentive
consumer should respond normally to the overdraft interest discount, and weakly if at all to
the overdraft availability reminder.

    We construct two proxies for baseline exposure to the overdraft product and then test for
whether each proxy mediates our main treatment effects. The first proxy is recent overdraft
use prior to the experiment. 18% of our sample overdrafted at some point during September
2011-August 2012. Appendix Table 2 interacts a prior use indicator with our main treatment
variables and shows little evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects (p-values at the bottom
of the table). The second proxy is generated by the August 30th message YK sent to half of
the sample. This initial overdraft availability reminder may have provided some consumers
with information and/or drawn their attention to the add-on. But Appendix Table 3 shows that
while the point estimate for the interest discount is more negative for those who first received
the August 30th overdraft availability message, the difference is not statistically significant (p-
values at bottom of the table). We caution however that the confidence intervals for the
heterogeneity results include both null and economically important point estimates.

                                                                                                16
     We also estimate quantile treatment effects for the price and availability effects (Figures
4a and 4b). These regressions do not sharply test for the heterogeneity of interest—they are
underpowered, and only identify the heterogeneity of interest with the additional assumption
that ordinal position in the overdraft distribution is unaffected by treatment—but the idea is
that heavier users should be better informed about overdraft costs, and more attuned to
overdraft availability, and consequently that both treatment effects should attenuate and even
flip sign at high usage. We see hints of this pattern in both Figures 4a and 4b.

4.4 Do Treatment Effects Persist? Post-Experiment Effects of Overdraft Messaging

     Table 4 re-estimates our main specifications from Table 2 over the post-promotional
campaign period, for the two overdraft usage measures for which we have data from January-
May 2013. 26 (Recall that the most-intensively treated accountholders in our experiment
received their last message on December 15, 2012.) We find no statistically significant
evidence that treatment effects persist over the five month post-experiment period: the
overdraft discount effect is no longer demand-depressing, and the overdraft availability effect
is no longer demand-increasing. Figures 3a and 3b plot the two treatment effects and their
confidence intervals month-by-month, for our 1/0 measure of overdraft usage, and we see
that both treatment effects trend toward zero over the post-campaign period and lose
statistical significance about two months post-campaign (between February and March).

     All told these results suggest that the behavior changes induced by bank promotions are
not “sticky”: the changes do not persist long after the promotions stop. This suggests that
habit-formation models may not be appropriate for describing overdraft usage. We discuss
other implications for theory in Section 5.

4.5 Other Treatment Variations: Messaging Frequency and Duration

     Appendix Table 4 examines our messaging frequency treatments. The treatments of
interest here vary only the frequency of messaging, not message content (Tables 2 and 3) or
the amount of time promotional incentives are in place (Appendix Table 5). The results here
suggest that more-frequent messaging amplifies the demand-depressing effect of the
Overdraft Interest Discount and the demand-increasing effect of the Overdraft Availability
message (Table 2).


26
  We lack daily data for the post-experiment period and hence cannot calculate our days-with-a-
balance variable.

                                                                                             17
     The odd columns in Appendix Table 4 estimate the effect of one-shot versus repeated
messaging for the September 15th message. In each treatment, the results are null for the one-
shot, and strong when the messages are repeated—i.e., more negative for the discount, more
positive for availability. Thus the Table 2 results are driven by the repeated messaging, not
the one-shot message. Four of the six comparisons between one-shot and repeated messaging
coefficients are statistically different from each other, and none of the six p-values is greater
than 0.17. The even columns further break out repeated messaging into more- versus less-
frequent (every 10 days versus every 20 days), and although the point estimates on more-
frequent are indeed larger in absolute value in 5 of the 6 comparisons, no difference is
statistically significant. The key takeaways from Appendix Table 4 are that one message is
not enough to generate an effect, but there are diminishing marginal effects from messaging
every 10 vs. 20 days.

     Appendix Table 5 examines our other margin of messaging and promotional intensity—
the “duration”, or length of time over which the bank continued to send messages and offer
discounts. Recall that short-duration campaigns lasted until November 15th, while long-
duration campaigns continued until December 15th. We find little evidence that duration
alone affects demand, either for the overdraft interest discount (row 5 versus row 6), or for
the overdraft availability message (row 2 versus row 3), with the lone exception being the
availability messaging effect on overdraft average balance (column 6).

     Promotional intensity depends on duration and frequency, and the even-numbered
columns in Appendix Table 5 shed light on these interactions for the overdraft discount (rows
7-10) and the overdraft availability message (rows 2-4). Comparing, e.g., the most-intense
price promotion (row 7: long duration + messages after Sept. 15) to the least-intense
promotion (row 10: short duration, no messages after Sept. 15), we find lower demand for the
most-intense promotion in all three cases, with p-values on the difference of 0.07, 0.08, and
0.002. 27 We see a similar pattern of results for overdraft availability marketing, with the point
estimate on the most-intense promotion (row 2: long duration + messages after Sept. 15)
substantially larger than that on the least-intense promotion (row 4: Sept. 15 message and no
subsequent ones), with p-values of 0.07, 0.25, and 0.02.



27
   Also somewhat noteworthy is that the point estimates on one-shot messaging about the overdraft
discount suggest weakly normal effects on demand (rows 9 and 10 here in Appendix Table 5, rows 1
and 5 in Appendix Table 4).

                                                                                               18
   All told, we infer that more-intense promotions amplify both the demand-increasing
effect of the overdraft availability message and the demand-depressing effect of the overdraft
interest discount. This also implies that demand responds more normally—in relative terms at
least—to less-intense price promotion.

5. Mapping from Empirics to Theory

5.1 Behavioral Models of Shrouding, Limited Memory, and Limited Attention

   Here we discuss whether and how different theories can make sense of our results. We
start with the motivating behavioral models, discussing how they can explain each of our
three key results in turn, and then how they can explain the full picture of the results. Because
Bordalo et al (2015) (BGS) nests Gabaix and Laibson (2006) (GL) as a special case, at each
step of the discussion we start with GL and then highlight where BGS can offer a different
interpretation. We conclude by considering alternative explanations: rational inattention,
crowd-out of intrinsic motivation, and consumer mistrust of YK.

   It will be helpful to keep in mind that a consumer i’s expected overdraft costs f are the
product of two components (Grubb 2015):

       f = Ei(po | b<0)Ei(b<0),

   where po is the price (30% or 60% APR) conditional on the checking account balance b
falling below zero. We take expectations of both terms because of uncertainty in checking
account balances and the potential for misperception of p0. Note that all of the behavioral
interpretations below are consistent with f < f* = true overdraft costs, which is why we infer
that our results are broadly consistent with an assumption shared by all of our motivating
models: consumers tend to systemically underestimate add-on costs.

   A GL model neatly explains our first key finding, that overdraft price discounts depress
demand. Under GL the overdraft discount messages reduce demand by informing or
reminding consumers about one or both overdraft components, thereby getting them to
increase their expected overdraft costs. E.g., someone who had been ignoring overdraft
prices—assuming that overdrafts are free-- increases Ei(po | b<0), and/or someone who had




                                                                                              19
been ignoring the possibility of overdrafts and hence not closely monitoring their balances
increases Ei(b<0). 28

       The finding that bundled discounts are especially demand-depressing is outside the GL
model but potentially explicable by BGS, which can explicitly model reactions to different
types of advertising, through its formalizations of selective memory and salience. Crucially,
our overdraft discount results also support the key prediction of equilibrium shrouding
models, that firms lack incentives to unshroud. YK unshrouded po to an extent—an arguably
modest extent-- and demand and profits fell.

       A GL model can also explain our second key finding, that the overdraft availability
message increases demand. The advertising here would operate on those who assumed
overdrafting was impossible (and therefore had f = 0) by generating a standard price effect: it
makes these clients realize that po is strictly less than infinite. This price effect in turn must be
larger than any effect of drawing attention to nonzero overdraft likelihood. 29 BGS offers an
alternative psychology: consumers tend to neglect available credit as well as cost at baseline,
the message makes availability salient, and consumers react to that attribute while continuing
to ignore/underweight cost.

       Our third key finding, the lack of habit formation, will materialize from a GL model if
consumers quickly forget what they inferred from the messages during the advertising
campaign. BGS offer another possibility: consumers need not forget per se; rather, it can be
the case overdraft attributes are only salient when something—like YK’s messages—draws
attention to them. In the absence of advertising, consumers do not attend to cost or
availability, and behavior quickly reverts to normal: to inattention to the add-on’s attributes.
Yet another possibility, for the overdraft discount effect dynamics at least, is that consumers
underestimate the non-pecuniary costs of overdraft usage, a la Grubb (2015), as well as the
pecuniary costs. So the discount messaging induces more vigilant account management to
avoid overdrafts in the short-run, but consumers quickly learn that such vigilance is not worth
it and revert to their counterfactual usage post-campaign.




28
  An effect that works by increasing Ei(b<0) is also consistent with Grubb (2015).
2929
    The requirement that the price effect swamp the likelihood effect—which would presumably
increase E(b<0) if anything, driving overdraft demand down instead of up-- makes it hard to square
the availability message result with Grubb (2015), where consumers accurately perceive po at
baseline.

                                                                                                  20
   Putting the three key results together-the perverse effect of overdraft discount ads, the
stimulating effect of the overdraft availability ads, and the lack of habit formation-- we
suspect that a GL model fits our data so long as there is at least one of two types of
heterogeneity among the “myopes” who underestimate overdraft costs at baseline. One type
is heterogeneity across myopes in baseline perceptions of overdraft pricing, with myopes
underestimating po in some cases (price result) and overestimating po in other cases
(availability result). The second type does not require heterogeneity across myopes but rather
across the mechanism by which messaging changes perceptions of the two overdraft cost
components, in the sense that the discount message would have to operate (primarily) by
increasing E(b<0), while the availability message would have to operate by decreasing E(po |
b<0). BGS requires no such heterogeneity, but does require salience to operate such that
consumers focus on costs when price is advertised, and on availability when availability is
advertised.

5.2 Alternative Explanations

   A natural explanation for the overdraft price discount backfiring, particularly in light of
Johnson et al (2015), is that consumers view the offer as “too good to be true”: they mistrust
YK. We agree that it is important to understand the role of (mis)trust in markets for financial
services and other products but speculate that mistrust is at most a partial explanation of our
results. First, it would not readily explain our other key results on availability and lack of
persistence; e.g., it is silent on why availability increases demand, and begs the question of
why discount-driven mistrust would dissipate almost immediately after the campaign ends.
Second, we wonder why consumers would mistrust this particular offer, but not other deep
discounts that prevail in equilibrium, like “free” checking and teaser rates on credit cards.
Third, a mistrust channel need not be distinct from the behavioral mechanisms described
above; indeed, Johnson et al find that some of their “households expect there to be hidden
fees and cumbersome processes that are not compensated by the attractiveness of the offer.”
Fourth, it is not clear why our consumers would respond by decreasing demand for
overdrafts rather than simply ignoring the offer: do consumers assume that hidden costs
exceed the value of the discount? Why? Fifth, if YK’s clients did think that YK was trying to
trick them, we might expect them to reduce their demand for other YK services. Yet we find
no evidence of this (Appendix Table 6), and the point estimates of the effect of the overdraft
discount on the number of active YK accounts actually go the other way (positive rather than
negative). Sixth, there are several institutional differences between our experiment and

                                                                                            21
Johnson et al’s that make mistrust more important in their context. The offer in Johnson et al
was too good to be true in the sense of being government-subsidized. That offer was also
made by a mortgage servicer at a time in which the servicing industry was known to be
mistreating and scamming customers. 30

     Rational inattention could explain our results, under particular assumptions that strike us
as antithetical to these models; e.g., instead of mean-zero but noisy perceptions of costs and
credit lines, checking account holders would need to systematically underestimate them. This
begs the question of how consumers could rationally underestimate contract terms in
equilibrium.

     Having said all that, we emphasize that we are not dismissing rational or near-rational
explanations for our results. We are merely speculating that behavioral models of limited
attention, memory, and shrouding have great potential to explain the full picture.

6. Conclusion

     Working with a large Turkish bank to test SMS direct marketing promotions to 108,000
existing checking account holders, we find that messages promoting a 50% discount on the
overdraft interest rate reduce overdraft usage. In contrast, messages that merely mention
overdraft availability without mentioning price increase usage. Neither change persists long
after messages stop, suggesting that induced change in overdrafting is not habit-forming. We
also find some evidence that messaging intensity reinforces the main effects of overdraft
discount and availability advertising—messaging more about the overdraft discount further
reduces demand, while messaging more about overdraft availability further increases
demand—and that messages offering discounts on debit card or auto-pay use along with
overdraft backfire more than simply offering a discount on overdrafts. But not all discounts
backfire; in fact, we find some evidence that debit card and auto-pay discounts increase usage
of those features.

     Practically speaking, our results suggest that competing on overdraft prices will not
capture market share or increase usage, and thus will lower revenue. Although cutting
overdraft prices could in principle generate more customer loyalty or reciprocity, the fact that


30
  See, e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2013) and
http://searchenginewatch.com/sew/news/2127978/google-regulators-shut-bing-yahoo-mortgage-scam-
ads .
                                                                                             22
induced overdraft behavior does not persist suggests these sorts of long-term benefits will not
materialize for banks.

   More subtly, our results should give pause to third parties seeking to improve overdraft
markets with messages (like social marketing campaigns) that draw attention to overdraft
costs. To fix ideas, imagine messaging around the theme of “Beware of big overdraft fees!”,
delivered by an entity that might actually benefit from unshrouding; e.g., a regulator, a firm
with social objectives or a product-differentiation strategy, or a personal financial
management service. Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2015) formalize the possibility that
consumer responses to unshrouding are overreactions rather than optimal responses to new
information, and as noted above our results seem consistent with this model. Our results also
suggest that unshrouding could be quite costly to sustain, since its effects do not persist.
Moreover our results suggest that incumbent suppliers could effectively counter unshrouding
campaigns by advertising non-price attributes (like availability/credit lines in our case).
Hence we are sympathetic to Heidhues, Koszegi, and Murooka’s conjecture that third-parties,
or deviating firms, will be outgunned in a messaging arms race with incumbent add-on
suppliers.

   Although our results support policymakers’ increasing scrutiny of add-on features,
pricing, and practices, we once again emphasize that we do not conduct the sort of welfare
analysis that ought to motivate and guide policy interventions. One reason we stop short of
welfare analysis is that we do not actually have the ability to sharply test existing models of
shrouded equilibria, since our experiment considers the existing client base of a single firm
rather than competition for customers across firms (Armstrong and Vickers 2012; Gabaix and
Laibson 2006; Grubb 2015; Heidhues, Koszegi, and Murooka 2014).

   Future work would do well to focus on welfare, although doing so may require far more
household-level consumption and expenditure data than is typically available in studies that
rely on administrative data alone. Refining our design could also help test across models, for
instance by testing promotions that mention price without cutting it, and by mentioning
information on price levels as well as or instead of discounts. It would also be useful to
examine consumer perceptions of add-on prices and expectations of usage more directly,
given their centrality to theoretical assumptions and predictions.




                                                                                            23
                                       References

Agarwal, Sumit, John Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. 2013. “Learning in the
        Credit Card Market.”
Anagol, Santosh, and Hugh Hoikwang Kim. 2012. “The Impact of Shrouded Fees: Evidence
        from a Natural Experiment in the Indian Mutual Funds Market.” American Economic
        Review 102 (1): 576–93.
Armstrong, Mark, and John Vickers. 2012. “Consumer Protection and Contingent Charges.”
        Journal of Economic Literature 50 (2): 477–93.
Ater, Itai, and Vardit Landsman. 2013. “Do Customers Learn from Experience? Evidence
        from Retail Banking.” Management Science 59 (9): 2019–35.
Bakker, Trevor, Nicole Kelly, Jesse Leary, and Eva Nagypal. 2014. “Data Point: Checking
        Account Overdraft.” Data Point. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. “Six Randomized Evaluations
        of Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps.” American Economic Journal:
        Applied Economics 7 (1): 1–21.
Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jonathan Zinman.
        2010. “What’s Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit
        Marketing Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1): 263–305.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. “Salience and Consumer
        Choice.” Journal of Political Economy 121 (5): 803–43.
———. 2015. “Memory, Attention, and Choice.”
Brown, Jennifer, Tanjim Hossain, and John Morgan. 2010. “Shrouded Attributes and
        Information Suppression: Evidence from the Field.” The Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 125 (2): 859–76.
Cadena, Ximena, and Antoinette Schoar. 2011. “Remembering to Pay? Reminders vs.
        Financial Incentives for Loan Payments.” NBER Working Paper 17020, May.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
        Evidence.” The American Economic Review 99 (4): 1145–77.
Competition and Markets Authority. 2014. “Personal Current Accounts: Market Study
        Update.”
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. 2013. “Supervisory Highlights: Winter 2013.”
Dougherty, Carter. 2014. “Banks Face Hit from CFPB on $30 Billion in Overdraft Fees.”
        Bloomberg, July 31.
Eliaz, Kfir, and Ran Spiegler. 2011. “Consideration Sets and Competitive Marketing.”
        Review of Economic Studies 78 (1): 235–62.
Elizondo, Alan, and Enrique Seira. 2014. “Are Information Disclosure Mandates Effective?
        Evidence from the Credit Card Market.”
Ferman, Bruno. Forthcoming. “Reading the Fine Print: Credit Demand and Information
        Disclosure in Brazil.” Management Science
Financial Conduct Authority. 2014. “Consumer Credit Insights: Overdrafts.”
Gabaix, Xavier. 2014. “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality.” The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 129 (4): 1661–1710.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and
        Information Suppression in Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
        121 (2): 505–40.
General Accounting Office. 2008. “Bank Fees: Federal Banking Regulators Could Better
        Ensure That Consumers Have Required Disclosure Documents prior to Opening
        Checking or Savings Accounts.” GAO-08-281.


                                                                                       24
Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. 2000. “A Fine Is a Price.” Journal of Legal Studies 29 (1):
       1–18.
Grubb, Michael D. 2009. “Selling to Overconfident Consumers.” The American Economic
       Review, 1770–1807.
Grubb, Michael D. 2015. “Consumer Inattention and Bill-Shock Regulation.” The Review of
       Economic Studies 82 (1): 219–57.
Hanna, Rema, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2014. “Learning Through
       Noticing: Theory and Experimental Evidence in Farming.” The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 129 (3): 1311–53.
Haselhuhn, Michael, Devin Pope, Maurice Schweitzer, and Peter Fishman. 2012. “The
       Impact of Personal Experience on Behavior: Evidence from Video-Rental Fines.”
       Management Science 58 (1): 35–51.
Hastings, Justine S., and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2013. “Fungibility and Consumer Choice:
       Evidence from Commodity Price Shocks.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128
       (4): 1449–98.
Heidhues, Paul, Botond Koszegi, and Takeshi Murooka. 2014. “Inferior Products and
       Profitable Deception.”
Hsee, Christopher K. 1998. “Less Is Better: When Low-Value Options Are Valued More
       Highly than High-Value Options.” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 11 (2):
       107–21.
Johnson, Eric, Stephan Meier, and Olivier Toubia. 2015. “Money Left on the Kitchen Table:
       Exploring Sluggish Mortgage Refinancing Using Administrative Data, Surveys, and
       Field Experiments.”
Kamenica, Emir. 2012. “Behavioral Economics and Psychology of Incentives.” Annual
       Review Economics 4 (1): 427–52.
Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman.
       Forthcoming. “Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving.”
       Management Science
Karlan, Dean, Melanie Morten, and Jonathan Zinman. Forthcoming. “A Personal Touch: Text
       Messaging for Loan Repayment.” Behavioral Science & Policy
Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz. 2014. “Under-Savers Anonymous:
       Evidence on Self-Help Groups and Peer Pressure as a Savings Commitment Device.”
Manoli, Dayanand S., and Nicholas Turner. 2015. “Nudges and Learning: Evidence from
       Informational Interventions for Low-Income Taxpayers.”
Schwartzstein, Joshua. 2014. “Selective Attention and Learning.” Journal of the European
       Economic Association 12 (6): 1423–52.
Spiegler, Ran. 2011. Bounded Rationality and Industrial Organization. Oxford University
       Press.
Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman. 2009. “What Do Consumers Really Pay on Their
       Checking and Credit Card Accounts? Explicit, Implicit, and Avoidable Costs.”
       American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99 (2): 424–29.
———. 2014. “Limited and Varying Consumer Attention: Evidence from Shocks to the
       Salience of Bank Overdraft Fees.” Review of Financial Studies 27 (4): 990–1030.
Zinman, Jonathan. 2014. “Consumer Credit: Too Much or Too Little (or Just Right)?”
       Journal of Legal Studies 43 (S2 Special Issue on Benefit-Cost Analysis of Financial
       Regulation): S209–37.




                                                                                          25
Table 1. Baseline variables for sample description and orthogonality checks
                                                                                                    September 15 and Subsequent Messages                                           p-value
                                                                              Overdraft Interest Discount               Auto-Pay Discount Only      Debit Card Discount Only    from regress
                                         Full       Got Aug30        Any       Subsequent w/Auto-Pay w/Debit                        Subsequent                   Subsequent        row on
                                        Sample         Msg                        Msgs        Discount    Discount                     Msgs                          Msgs         columns
                                          (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)             (9)           (10)           (11)
Female                                   0.289        0.288         0.288         0.288         0.289       0.288         0.288        0.288           0.288         0.288          1.000
                                        (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)         (0.003)       (0.004)
Lives in Istanbul                        0.275        0.275         0.275         0.275         0.275       0.274         0.275        0.274           0.276         0.276         1.000
                                        (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)         (0.003)       (0.004)
Lives in Ankara                          0.090        0.090         0.090         0.091         0.090       0.090         0.091        0.090           0.089         0.089         1.000
                                        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)         (0.002)       (0.003)
Lives in Izmir                           0.050        0.050         0.050         0.050         0.050       0.050         0.050        0.050           0.050         0.051         1.000
                                        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)
Lives in Bursa                           0.057        0.057         0.057         0.057         0.057       0.058         0.057        0.058           0.057         0.057         0.998
                                        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)
Married                                  0.572        0.572         0.572         0.572         0.572       0.571         0.571        0.571           0.573         0.573         1.000
                                        (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.005)         (0.004)       (0.005)
Overdraft Limit Between                  0.284        0.284         0.284         0.284         0.282       0.285         0.284        0.283           0.284         0.284         1.000
1/2 and 1 monthly min wage              (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)         (0.003)       (0.004)

Overdraft Limit > monthly min wage        0.081        0.081        0.081         0.081        0.081        0.080          0.082        0.082          0.082        0.082          0.999
                                         (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.003)        (0.002)      (0.002)
Main Acct Bal: Balance below med          0.428        0.428        0.428         0.428        0.428        0.427          0.427        0.427          0.428        0.428          1.000
                                         (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.005)        (0.004)      (0.005)
Main Acct Bal: Balance above med          0.427        0.427        0.427         0.427        0.427        0.427          0.428        0.427          0.426        0.426          1.000
                                         (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.005)        (0.004)      (0.005)
Used Overdraft Sept 2011-Apr 2012         0.184        0.185        0.184         0.184        0.184        0.183          0.179        0.180          0.189        0.188          0.502
                                         (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.004)        (0.003)      (0.004)
Auto Bill Pay Registered                  0.028        0.028        0.027         0.026        0.026        0.026          0.029        0.028          0.030        0.031          0.193
any time Sept 2011-July 2012             (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.002)        (0.001)      (0.002)

Any Debit Card POS Transactions            0.334         0.333        0.335        0.336        0.331        0.340         0.328         0.327          0.339         0.339         0.309
Sept 2011-July 2012 > 0                   (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)
Observations                              108000         53974        53953        35989        17981        17995         18021         12026          17983         11985
Columns 1-10 report proportions, with standard errors in parentheses. Column 11 reports the p-value from the joint test of the hypothesis that the coefficients on the treatment indicators
are different than zero, from an OLS regression of the the variable described in the row heading on the treatment indicators in columns 2-10. Variables measured in July 2012 unless noted
otherwise. Figure 1 provides details on the treatment arms.
Table 2: Effects of Overdraft Marketing on Overdraft Usage During Experiment (September - December 2012)
                                            LHS variable:         Overdraft              Days with                  Mean(Overdraft
                                                                Account Used         Overdraft Balance             Account Balance)
August 30th Message:                                            (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)               (5)        (6)
(1) Overdraft Availability                                    0.0007     0.0007     0.0869** 0.0869**             1.0555** 1.0554**
                                                             (0.0028)   (0.0028)    (0.0365)    (0.0365)          (0.4701)   (0.4701)
(2) No Message                                               Omitted Omitted        Omitted Omitted               Omitted Omitted

September 15 Message:
(3) Overdraft Mention: identifies effect of                   0.0089**    0.0089**      0.1321**    0.1321**        0.9562     0.9562
Overdraft Availability message                                (0.0042)    (0.0042)      (0.0553)    (0.0553)       (0.7029)   (0.7029)

(4) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount                -0.0124***                -0.1607***                   -0.7427
                                                              (0.0040)                  (0.0522)                   (0.6718)
(5) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount only                      -0.0069                   -0.0854                      -0.3382
                                                                       (0.0049)                  (0.0640)                     (0.8108)
(6) Overdraft Mention, w/Interest + Auto-Pay Discounts                -0.0137***                -0.1884***                     -1.0909
                                                                       (0.0049)                  (0.0635)                     (0.8195)
(7) Overdraft Mention, w/Interest + Debit Card Discounts              -0.0167***                -0.2083***                     -0.7989
                                                                       (0.0049)                  (0.0632)                     (0.8397)
(8) No Overdraft Mention =                                    Omitted Omitted           Omitted Omitted              Omitted  Omitted
Auto-Pay Discount Only or Debit Card Discount Only
Mean(LHS)                                                        0.3077      0.3077        2.7676       2.7676        26.8511   26.8511
SD(LHS)                                                           (0.46)     (0.46)         (6.05)      (6.05)        (77.97)    (77.97)
Observations                                                     108000      108000        108000       108000        108000     108000
*** p<=0.01, ** p<=0.05, * p<=0.10. Each column presents treatment effect estimates from a single OLS regression, with Huber-White
standard errors, of the usage measure in the column heading on the experimental variables in the rows. Variables in rows 4-7
identify the additive effect of one or more of the interest discount arms; i.e., they identify the difference in treatment effects
between the Overdraft Availability message and the Overdraft Interest Discount. Usage measures cover September 15-December 31,
2012. Account balances are in Turkish Lira, 1TL=$0.56 at the start of the experiment. Figure 1 summarizes the experimental design and
shows message scripts. Regressions also include controls for randomization strata. Unit of observation is the unit of randomization: a
checking account.
Table 3. Effects of Auto-Pay and Debit Card Marketing During Experiment (September-December 2012)
                                                     LHS variable: Any Debit Card POS            Any Auto-Pay           Overdraft Account      Days with Overdraft       Avg Overdraft
                                                                          Transactions            Registered                    Used                 Balance          Account Balance (TL)
September 15 Message:                                                           (1)                     (2)                       (3)                    (4)                    (5)
(1) Debit Card Discount: includes both Debit Card Discount Only,              0.0053                                           0.0029                 -0.0049                -0.3401
and Overdraft Interest Discount + Debit Discount                            (0.0040)                                          (0.0049)               (0.0635)               (0.7896)
(2) Debit Card Discount + Overdraft Interest Discount                        -0.0008                                        -0.0127***               -0.1180*                -0.1206
                                                                            (0.0049)                                          (0.0048)               (0.0627)               (0.8204)
(3) Auto-Pay Discount (includes both Auto-Pay Discount Only,                                       0.0042***                  -0.0070                 -0.0883                -0.8953
and Overdraft Interest Discount + Auto-Pay Discount)                                                (0.0011)                  (0.0048)               (0.0634)               (0.7969)
(4) Auto-Pay Discount + Overdraft Interest Discount                                                 -0.0018                    0.0001                 -0.0147                 0.1426
                                                                                                    (0.0013)                  (0.0048)               (0.0629)               (0.8060)
(5) Sep15 Message: Overdraft Interest Discount only                         Omitted                 Omitted                  Omitted                 Omitted                Omitted
Controls for Aug30 & Sep15 Overdraft Availability Only Msgs                     yes                    yes                       yes                     yes                    yes
Mean(LHS)                                                                     0.3367                 0.0134                    0.3077                  2.7676                26.8511
SD(LHS)                                                                       (0.47)                  (0.11)                    (0.46)                 (6.05)                (77.97)
Observations                                                                 108000                  108000                    108000                 108000                 108000
Each column presents treatment effect estimates from a single OLS regression, with Huber-White standard errors, of the usage measure in the column heading on the experimental
variables in the rows. Variables in rows 2 and 4 identify the additive effect of the overdraft interest discount; i.e., they identify the difference in treatment effects between the
discount on some other service in row 1 or 3 and that discount bundled with the overdraft interest discount. Usage measures cover September 15-December 31, 2012. "POS" = point-
of-sale. Account balances are in Turkish Lira, 1TL=$0.56 at the start of the experiment. Figure 1 summarizes the experimental design and shows message scripts. Regressions also
include controls for randomization strata. Unit of observation is the unit of randomization: a checking account.
Table 4: Effects of Overdraft Marketing on Overdraft Usage After Experiment (January - May 2013)
                                            LHS variable:        Overdraft         Mean(Overdraft
                                                               Account Used        Account Balance)
August 30th Message:                                           (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)
(1) Overdraft Availability                                   -0.0004 -0.0004       0.7385    0.7383
                                                            (0.0029) (0.0029)     (0.6262) (0.6262)
(2) No Message                                              Omitted Omitted       Omitted Omitted

September 15 Message:
(3) Overdraft Mention: identifies effect of                    0.0055     0.0055      0.0320     0.0320
Overdraft Availability message                                (0.0044)   (0.0044)    (0.9344)   (0.9344)

(4) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount                  -0.0050                0.1192
                                                              (0.0042)               (0.8916)
(5) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount only                    -0.0024                0.8686
                                                                     (0.0051)               (1.1030)
(6) Overdraft Mention, w/Interest + Auto-Pay Discounts                -0.0067                -0.7063
                                                                     (0.0051)               (1.0724)
(7) Overdraft Mention, w/Interest + Debit Card Discounts              -0.0059                0.1954
                                                                     (0.0051)               (1.1058)
(8) No Overdraft Mention =                                   Omitted Omitted        Omitted Omitted
Auto-Pay Discount Only or Debit Card Discount Only
Mean(LHS)                                                        0.3713    0.3713      34.0032 34.0032
SD(LHS)                                                          (0.48)     (0.48)     (103.98) (103.98)
Observations                                                     108000 108000          108000 108000
*** p<=0.01, ** p<=0.05, * p<=0.10. Each column presents treatment effect estimates from a single OLS
regression, with Huber-White standard errors, of the usage measure in the column heading on the
experimental variables in the rows. Variables in rows 4-7 identify the additive effect of one or more of
the interest discount arms; i.e., they identify the difference in treatment effects between the
Overdraft Availability message and the Overdraft Interest Discount. Usage measures cover January 1-
May 31, 2012. Account balances are in Turkish Lira, 1TL=$0.56 at the start of the experiment. Figure 1
summarizes the experimental design and shows message scripts. Regressions also include controls for
randomization strata. Unit of observation is the unit of randomization: a checking account.
Appendix Table 1. Effects of Marketing on Average Monthly Checking + Savings Balances During Experiment (September-December 2012)
                                                  LHS variable:  Average Balances      Top 1% Winsorized      Top 1% Dropped            Log
Panel A. Overdraft Marketing                                        (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)
August 30th Message:
(1) Overdraft Availability                                        -8.8782 -8.8742      -8.5687* -8.5665*     -7.3419* -7.3425*   -0.0118 -0.0118
                                                                 (9.7697) (9.7695)     (4.9102) (4.9100)     (3.7965) (3.7965)  (0.0115) (0.0115)
(2) No Message                                                   Omitted Omitted       Omitted Omitted       Omitted Omitted    Omitted Omitted

September 15 Message:
(3) Overdraft Mention: identifies effect of                         -3.5914 -3.5934        2.5982     2.5969      3.9231     3.9228      -0.0082    -0.0082
Overdraft Availability message                                     (13.9764) (13.9766)    (7.3735)   (7.3736)    (5.7159)   (5.7159)    (0.0171)   (0.0171)

(4) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount                       11.4448                3.0329                 1.9943                 0.0108
                                                                   (12.2665)              (6.9651)               (5.4186)               (0.0162)
(5) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount only                          24.3365                12.3639                8.0409                 0.0237
                                                                           (15.6249)              (8.6572)               (6.7305)               (0.0199)
(6) Overdraft Mention, w/Interest + Auto-Pay Discounts                      19.7938                7.1275                 0.7018                 0.0047
                                                                           (15.7186)              (8.5911)               (6.5985)               (0.0199)
(7) Overdraft Mention, w/Interest + Debit Card Discounts                    -9.7688               -10.3752                -2.7430                0.0042
                                                                           (14.9912)              (8.3311)               (6.5513)               (0.0197)
(8) No Overdraft Mention =                                         Omitted Omitted        Omitted Omitted        Omitted Omitted        Omitted Omitted
Auto-Pay Discount Only or Debit Card Discount Only
Mean(LHS)                                                          415.3350 415.3350      359.4495 359.4495      305.0098 305.0098       4.2853    4.2853
SD(LHS)                                                            (1631.25) (1631.25)    (847.06) (847.06)      (654.51) (654.51)       (2.11)    (2.11)
Observations                                                        108000 108000          108000 108000          106920 106920          106020    106020
Panel B. Auto-Pay and Debit Card Marketing
September 15 Message:
(1) Debit Card Discount (includes both Debit Card Discount Only,       -13.0974                -10.2527             -12.8017**                 -0.0213
and Overdraft Interest Discount + Debit Discount)                     (13.5978)                (7.4184)              (5.6403)                 (0.0172)
(2) Debit Card Discount + Overdraft Interest Discount                   -8.8192                 -6.2956               6.0471                   0.0137
                                                                      (15.5592)                (8.3217)              (6.4248)                 (0.0198)
(3) Auto-Pay Discount (includes both Auto-Pay Discount Only,            -4.0234                 -7.2920               -3.0861                  0.0140
and Overdraft Interest Discount + Auto-Pay Discount)                  (17.0081)                (7.3615)              (5.7486)                 (0.0172)
(4) Auto-Pay Discount + Overdraft Interest Discount                     11.6737                 8.2507                -0.2214                  -0.0211
                                                                      (19.2085)                (8.5362)              (6.5709)                 (0.0199)
(5) Overdraft Interest Discount only                                   Omitted                 Omitted               Omitted                  Omitted
Controls for Aug30 & Sep15 Overdraft Availability Only Messages           yes                     yes                   yes                      yes
Mean(LHS)                                                             415.3350                359.4495               305.0098                  4.2853
SD(LHS)                                                               (1631.25)                (847.06)              (654.51)                   (2.11)
Observations                                                            108000                  108000                106920                   106020
*** p<=0.01, ** p<=0.05, * p<=0.10. Each column-panel presents treatment effect estimates from a single OLS regression, with Huber-White standard errors,
of the average balances measure in the column heading on the experimental variables in the rows. Variables in Panel A rows 4-7 identify the additive
effect of one or more of the interest discount arms; i.e., they identify the difference in treatment effects between the Overdraft Availability message and
the Overdraft Interest Discount. Variables in Panel B rows 2 and 4 identify the additive effect of the overdraft interest discount; i.e., they identify the
difference in treatment effects between the discount on some other service in row 1 or 3 and that discount bundled with the overdraft interest discount.
Balance measures cover September 15-December 31, 2012. Account balances are in Turkish Lira, 1TL=$0.56 at the start of the experiment. Figure 1
summarizes the experimental design and shows message scripts. Regressions also include controls for randomization strata. Unit of observation is the unit
of randomization: a checking account.
Appendix Table 2. Heterogenous Treatment Effects by Prior Use?
                                                               LHS variable:           Overdraft                 Days with             Mean(Overdraft
            Measured during experiment: over September 15-December 31, 2012          Account Used            Overdraft Balance        Account Balance)
                                                                                     (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)
(1) Prior Overdraft Use                                                          0.3201*** 0.3201***       4.0976*** 4.0976***      41.6837*** 41.6835***
                                                                                  (0.0067)   (0.0067)       (0.1093)    (0.1093)     (1.5148)   (1.5148)
No Overdraft Use September 2011-April 2012                                        Omitted Omitted           Omitted Omitted          Omitted Omitted

September 15th Message:
(2) Overdraft Mention * Prior Overdraft Use                                        0.0193*    0.0193*        0.2546      0.2546       0.5915      0.5920
                                                                                   (0.0107)   (0.0107)      (0.1807)    (0.1807)     (2.5326)    (2.5326)
(3) Overdraft Mention * No Prior Overdraft Use                                      0.0055     0.0055       0.0912*     0.0912*       0.8841      0.8843
                                                                                   (0.0044)   (0.0044)      (0.0521)    (0.0521)     (0.6385)    (0.6385)
(4) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount * Prior Overdraft Use               -0.0205**                  -0.2640                  0.4073
                                                                                   (0.0101)                 (0.1703)                 (2.3965)
(5) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount * No Prior Overdraft Use            -0.0094**                -0.1223**                  -0.8171
                                                                                   (0.0041)                 (0.0492)                 (0.6130)
(6) Overdraft Interest Discount, No Other Discount * Prior Overdraft Use                          -0.0176                  -0.1611                 1.1800
                                                                                                 (0.0124)                 (0.2097)                (2.9235)
(7) Overdraft Interest Discount, No Other Discount * No Prior Overdraft Use                       -0.0036                  -0.0559                 -0.5237
                                                                                                 (0.0051)                 (0.0603)                (0.7335)
(8) Overdraft Interest Discount + Auto-Pay Discount * Prior Overdraft Use                         -0.0204                 -0.3532*                 -1.6837
                                                                                                 (0.0124)                 (0.2093)                (2.9142)
(9) Overdraft Interest Discount + Auto-Pay Discount * No Prior Overdraft Use                    -0.0109**                -0.1362**                 -0.7935
                                                                                                 (0.0050)                 (0.0598)                (0.7550)
(10) Overdraft Interest Discount + Debit Card Discount * Prior Overdraft Use                     -0.0236*                  -0.2784                 1.7192
                                                                                                 (0.0124)                 (0.2093)                (3.0806)
(11) Overdraft Interest Discount + Debit Card Discount * No Prior Overdraft Use                -0.0137***               -0.1745***                 -1.1335
                                                                                                 (0.0050)                 (0.0592)                (0.7528)
No Overdraft Mention = Auto-Pay Discount Only or Debit Card Discount Only            Omitted Omitted         Omitted Omitted          Omitted Omitted
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (2) and (3)                                0.2348      0.2348      0.3852       0.3851      0.9108      0.9109
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (4) and (5)                                0.3068                  0.4239                   0.6203
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (6) and (7)                                            0.2952                   0.6297                  0.5716
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (8) and (9)                                            0.4793                   0.3190                  0.7675
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (10) and (11)                                          0.4578                   0.6330                  0.3678
Mean(LHS)                                                                             0.3077      0.3077      2.7676       2.7676     26.8511     26.8511
SD(LHS)                                                                               (0.46)       (0.46)     (6.05)        (6.05)     (77.97)     (77.97)
Observations                                                                          108000      108000      108000       108000      108000      108000
*** p<=0.01, ** p<=0.05, * p<=0.10. Each column presents treatment effect estimates from a single OLS regression, with Huber-White standard errors, of
the usage measure in the column heading on the experimental variables in the rows. Variables in rows 4-11 identify the additive effect of one or more of
the interest discount arms; i.e., they identify the difference in treatment effects between the Overdraft Availability message and the Overdraft Interest
Discount. Overdraft usage measures cover September 15-December 31, 2012, except for prior use, which is measured 1/0 pre-experiment, over
September 2011-April 2012. Account balances are in Turkish Lira, 1TL=$0.56 at the start of the experiment. Figure 1 summarizes the experimental design
and shows message scripts. Regressions also include controls for randomization strata. Unit of observation is the unit of randomization: a checking
account.
Appendix Table 3. Does the August 30 Message Mediate Treatment Effects of Later Messages?
                                                                  LHS variable:          Overdraft                    Days with             Mean(Overdraft
               Measured during experiment: over September 15-December 31, 2012         Account Used               Overdraft Balance        Account Balance)
August 30th Message:                                                                  (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)
(1) Overdraft Availability                                                          -0.0001     -0.0001           0.0477      0.0476       1.1445     1.1444
                                                                                   (0.0049)    (0.0049)          (0.0631)    (0.0631)     (0.7875)   (0.7875)
No message                                                                         Omitted Omitted               Omitted Omitted          Omitted Omitted

September 15 Message:
(2) Overdraft Mention with Aug 30 Msg                                                     0.0114*    0.0114*       0.2021** 0.2021**       0.7911       0.7912
                                                                                         (0.0060)   (0.0060)       (0.0797)    (0.0797)   (1.0046)     (1.0046)
(3) Overdraft Mention without Aug 30 Msg                                                  0.0063     0.0063         0.0622      0.0622     1.1209       1.1212
                                                                                         (0.0060)   (0.0060)       (0.0767)    (0.0767)   (0.9814)     (0.9815)
(4) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount, with Aug 30 Msg                         -0.0151***                 -0.2149***               -0.6116
                                                                                         (0.0056)                  (0.0755)               (0.9576)
(5) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount, w/o Aug 30 Msg                            -0.0098*                   -0.1067                -0.8735
                                                                                         (0.0056)                  (0.0722)               (0.9420)
(6) Overdraft Interest Discount, No Other Discount, with Aug 30 Msg                                  -0.0082                  -0.1819**                 -0.9928
                                                                                                    (0.0069)                   (0.0916)                (1.1290)
(7) Overdraft Interest Discount, No Other Discount, w/o Aug 30 Msg                                   -0.0056                    0.0109                  0.3160
                                                                                                    (0.0069)                   (0.0895)                (1.1630)
(8) Overdraft Interest Discount + Auto-Pay Discount, w/Aug 30 Msg                                   -0.0135*                  -0.1894**                 0.0209
                                                                                                    (0.0069)                   (0.0922)                (1.1848)
(9) Overdraft Interest Discount + Auto-Pay Discount, w/o Aug 30 Msg                                -0.0139**                  -0.1875**                -2.2005*
                                                                                                    (0.0069)                   (0.0875)                (1.1330)
(10) Overdraft Interest Discount + Debit Card Discount, with Aug 30 Msg                           -0.0236***                 -0.2734***                 -0.8622
                                                                                                    (0.0069)                   (0.0911)                (1.2162)
(11) Overdraft Interest Discount + Debit Card Discount, w/o Aug 30 Msg                               -0.0098                    -0.1434                 -0.7351
                                                                                                    (0.0069)                   (0.0877)                (1.1541)
No Overdraft Mention = Auto-Pay Discount Only or Debit Card Discount Only                Omitted Omitted           Omitted Omitted        Omitted Omitted
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (2) and (3)                                    0.5475     0.5477         0.2058      0.2058     0.8142       0.8140
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (4) and (5)                                    0.5031                    0.2999                 0.8454
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (6) and (7)                                               0.7870                     0.1323                  0.4192
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (8) and (9)                                               0.9644                     0.9875                  0.1755
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (10) and (11)                                             0.1556                     0.3038                  0.9395
Mean(LHS)                                                                                 0.3077     0.3077         2.7676      2.7676     26.8511      26.8511
SD(LHS)                                                                                    (0.46)     (0.46)         (6.05)      (6.05)    (77.97)      (77.97)
Observations                                                                              108000     108000         108000      108000     108000       108000
*** p<=0.01, ** p<=0.05, * p<=0.10. Each column presents treatment effect estimates from a single OLS regression, with Huber-White standard errors, of the
usage measure in the column heading on the experimental variables in the rows. Variables in rows 4-11 identify the additive effect of one or more of the
interest discount arms; i.e., they identify the difference in treatment effects between the Overdraft Availability message and the Overdraft Interest Discount.
Overdraft usage measures cover September 15-December 31, 2012. Account balances are in Turkish Lira, 1TL=$0.56 at the start of the experiment. Figure 1
summarizes the experimental design and shows message scripts. Regressions also include controls for randomization strata. Unit of observation is the unit of
randomization: a checking account.
Appendix Table 4. Effects of Overdraft Marketing Frequency on Overdraft Usage During Experiment (September - December 2012)
                                                                      LHS variable:         Overdraft               Days with            Mean(Overdraft
                                                                                          Account Used          Overdraft Balance        Account Balance)
September 15 Message:                                                                     (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
(1) Overdraft Mention No Subsequent Messages                                           0.0003       0.0003      0.0429      0.0429      -0.3108     -0.3108
                                                                                      (0.0064)     (0.0064)    (0.0835)    (0.0835)    (1.0420)    (1.0420)
(2) Overdraft Mention + Subsequent Messages                                          0.0132***                0.1765***                1.5872*
                                                                                      (0.0049)                 (0.0644)                (0.8283)
(3) Overdraft Mention + Frequent Messages                                                         0.0136**                0.2119**                  1.4980
                                                                                                   (0.0065)                (0.0854)                (1.0996)
(4) Overdraft Mention + Infrequent Messages                                                       0.0127**                 0.1411*                  1.6763
                                                                                                   (0.0065)                (0.0855)                (1.1017)
(5) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount, No Subsequent Messages                  -0.0017      -0.0017     0.0386      0.0385      1.8416      1.8416
                                                                                      (0.0069)     (0.0069)    (0.0898)    (0.0898)    (1.1400)    (1.1400)
(6) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount + Subsequent Messages                 -0.0178***               -0.2602***               -2.0319**
                                                                                      (0.0049)                 (0.0642)                (0.8315)
(7) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount + Frequent Messages                                -0.0207***              -0.3368***                -2.0617*
                                                                                                   (0.0069)                (0.0906)                (1.1763)
(8) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount + Infrequent Messages                               -0.0149**               -0.1836**                -2.0021*
                                                                                                   (0.0069)                (0.0909)                (1.1706)
(9) No Overdraft Mention = Auto-Pay Discount Only or Debit Card Discount Only         Omitted Omitted          Omitted Omitted         Omitted Omitted
Mean(LHS)                                                                              0.3077       0.3077      2.7676      2.7676     26.8511      26.8511
SD(LHS)                                                                                 (0.46)       (0.46)     (6.05)      (6.05)      (77.97)     (77.97)
Observations                                                                           108000       108000      108000      108000      108000      108000
*** p<=0.01, ** p<=0.05, * p<=0.10. Each column presents treatment effect estimates from a single OLS regression, with Huber-White standard errors, of the
usage measure in the column heading on the experimental variables in the rows. Variables in rows 5-8 identify the additive effect of one or more of the
interest discount arms; i.e., they identify the difference in treatment effects between the Overdraft Availability message and the Overdraft Interest
Discount. Usage measures cover September 15-December 31, 2012. Account balances are in Turkish Lira, 1TL=$0.56 at the start of the experiment. Figure 1
summarizes the experimental design and shows message scripts. Regressions also include controls for randomization strata. Unit of observation is the unit
of randomization: a checking account.
Appendix Table 5. Effects of Overdraft Message and Discount Duration on Overdraft Usage During Experiment (September -December 2012)
                                                                              LHS variable:          Overdraft                 Days with            Mean(Overdraft
                                                                                                   Account Used            Overdraft Balance        Account Balance)
September 15 Message:                                                                              (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
(1) Overdraft Mention: identifies effect of Overdraft Availability Message                     0.0089**                  0.1320**                  0.9556
                                                                                                (0.0042)                  (0.0553)                (0.7029)
(2) Overdraft Mention, long duration, with Subsequent Messages                                             0.0154**                  0.1718**                 3.1076***
                                                                                                           (0.0065)                   (0.0857)                 (1.1831)
(3) Overdraft Mention, short duration, with Subsequent Messages                                             0.0109*                  0.1811**                   0.0711
                                                                                                           (0.0065)                   (0.0853)                 (1.0163)
(4) Overdraft Mention No Subsequent Messages                                                                0.0003                     0.0429                   -0.3108
                                                                                                           (0.0064)                   (0.0835)                 (1.0420)
(5) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount, long duration                                  -0.0134***                 -0.1467**                 -1.0662
                                                                                                (0.0044)                  (0.0583)                (0.7510)
(6) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount, short duration                                  -0.0114**                -0.1747***                 -0.4189
                                                                                                (0.0044)                  (0.0580)                (0.7516)
(7) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount, long duration, with Subsequent Messages                    -0.0227***                -0.2671***               -4.2866***
                                                                                                           (0.0069)                   (0.0910)                 (1.2475)
(8) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount, short duration, with Subsequent Messages                    -0.0129*                 -0.2533***                  0.2155
                                                                                                           (0.0069)                   (0.0905)                 (1.0995)
(9) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount, long duration, w/o Subsequent Messages                       0.0006                     0.1033                  2.3327*
                                                                                                           (0.0077)                   (0.1014)                 (1.3053)
(10) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount, short duration, w/o Subsequent Messages                     -0.0040                    -0.0263                  1.3480
                                                                                                           (0.0077)                   (0.1001)                 (1.2777)
(11) No Overdraft Mention = Auto-Pay Discount Only or Debit Card Discount Only                  Omitted Omitted           Omitted Omitted         Omitted Omitted
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (2) and (3)                                                      0.5931                     0.9344                   0.0371
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (2) and (4)                                                      0.0738                     0.2454                   0.0206
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (3) and (4)                                                      0.2094                     0.2118                   0.7764
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (5) and (6)                                           0.6183                    0.5858                  0.3359
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (7) and (8)                                                      0.3159                     0.9141                   0.0068
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (7) and (9)                                                      0.0244                     0.0065                   0.0002
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (7) and (10)                                                     0.0711                     0.0750                   0.0016
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (8) and (9)                                                      0.1919                     0.0087                   0.2145
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (8) and (10)                                                     0.3910                     0.0926                   0.5018
p-value on F-test of equality between rows (9) and (10)                                                     0.5010                     0.1555                   0.4174
Observations                                                                                     108000     108000         108000      108000      108000       108000
*** p<=0.01, ** p<=0.05, * p<=0.10. Each column presents treatment effect estimates from a single OLS regression, with Huber-White standard errors, of the usage
measure in the column heading on the experimental variables in the rows. Variables in rows 5-10 identify the additive effect of one or more of the interest discount
arms; i.e., they identify the difference in treatment effects between the Overdraft Availability message and the Overdraft Interest Discount. Usage measures cover
September 15-December 31, 2012. Account balances are in Turkish Lira, 1TL=$0.56 at the start of the experiment. Figure 1 summarizes the experimental design and
shows message scripts. Regressions also include controls for randomization strata. Unit of observation is the unit of randomization: a checking account.
Appendix Table 6: Effects of Overdraft Marketing on Number of Active Products During Experiment
                                           LHS variable:         Count                  Log
August 30th Message:                                         (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)
(1) Overdraft Availability                                 0.0131     0.0131      0.0028    0.0028
                                                          (0.0136) (0.0136)      (0.0047) (0.0047)
(2) No Message                                            Omitted Omitted        Omitted Omitted

September 15 Message:
(3) Overdraft Mention: identifies effect of                    -0.0002    -0.0002     -0.0005    -0.0005
Overdraft Availability message                                (0.0204)   (0.0204)    (0.0070)   (0.0070)

(4) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount                  0.0155                 0.0093
                                                              (0.0192)               (0.0066)
(5) Overdraft Mention, with Interest Discount only                    0.0145                  0.0074
                                                                     (0.0235)                (0.0081)
(6) Overdraft Mention, w/Interest + Auto-Pay Discounts                -0.0073                 0.0027
                                                                     (0.0234)                (0.0081)
(7) Overdraft Mention, w/Interest + Debit Card Discounts             0.0393*                 0.0177**
                                                                     (0.0236)                (0.0081)
(8) No Overdraft Mention =                                   Omitted Omitted         Omitted Omitted
Auto-Pay Discount Only or Debit Card Discount Only
Mean(LHS)                                                        2.6238    2.6238       0.6348    0.6348
SD(LHS)                                                          (2.27)     (2.27)      (0.78)    (0.78)
Observations                                                     108000 108000          108000 108000
*** p<=0.01, ** p<=0.05, * p<=0.10. Each column presents treatment effect estimates from a single OLS
regression, with Huber-White standard errors, of the measure of the account holder's active products
at the experimenting bank (including the checking account that is our unit of observation) in the
column heading on the experimental variables in the rows. Variables in rows 4-7 identify the additive
effect of one or more of the interest discount arms; i.e., they identify the difference in treatment
effects between the Overdraft Availability message and the Overdraft Interest Discount. Figure 1
summarizes the experimental design and shows message scripts. Regressions also include controls for
randomization strata. Unit of observation is the unit of randomization: a checking account.
