NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION OF CENTRAL BANK POLICY
Charles Engel
Working Paper 20952
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20952

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2015

These remarks were prepared for the joint European Central Bank – International Monetary Fund conference
on “International Dimensions of Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy,” held at the European
Central Bank, April 28-29, 2014. I thank Jeffrey Frankel for helpful discussions, and Livio Stracca
for many useful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

International Coordination of Central Bank Policy
Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 20952
February 2015
JEL No. F41,F42
ABSTRACT
This paper surveys the current state of the literature on international monetary policy coordination.
It relates recent policy discussions to the lessons from the literature. It proposes several avenues for
future research.

Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu

In recent years, there has been increasing interest in international monetary policy
cooperation, and, in general, coordination of central bank policies. In September 2010, Guido
Mantega, the Brazilian finance minister, commented that “we are in the middle of a currency
war” 1, referring to the depreciation of the major currencies against those of Brazil and other
emerging markets. As Figure 1 shows, the trade-weighted dollar depreciated more than 15%
from early 2009 until September 2010. Subsequently, the dollar began to appreciate, which
brought further protests from policymakers in emerging markets. In April 2014, Raghuram
Rajan, the governor of the Reserve Bank of India, complained about the “initiation of
unconventional policy as well as an exit whose pace is driven solely by conditions in the source
country,” specifically aiming his remarks at monetary policy in the U.S. and other industrial
countries that “hold interest rates near zero for long, as well as balance sheet policies such as
quantitative easing or exchange intervention, that involve altering central bank balance sheets in
order to affect certain market prices.” 2 Olivier Blanchard, Jonathan Ostry and Atish Ghosh of the
International Monetary Fund comment “if large players in the global economy are responsible
for significant adverse spillovers across a swath of smaller countries, this needs to be
acknowledged as well, and feasible remedies considered.” 3
Even with this increasing concern about the spillovers from monetary policy, little new
research has emerged on this topic. This essay’s primary goal is to provide suggestions for
directions for future research on this important topic. A secondary goal is to point out the
disconnect between the recent policy discussion and what the existing academic literature tells
us.
Clearly much of the recent concern about the need for monetary policy coordination
stems from the recent behavior of the dollar. Figure 1 plots the dollar exchange rate relative to
the euro and a trade-weighted basket. Much of the initial concern about the external effects of
U.S. monetary policy stem from the large depreciation of the dollar index from early 2009 until
late 2010. Much of the commentary has attributed this depreciation to the aggressively
expansionary policy of the Federal Reserve.
However, it is informative to consider this depreciation in light of the dollar fluctuations
before and during the global financial crisis. The depreciation of the dollar in 2009-2010 in effect
1

See Financial Times, 2010.
See Rajan, 2014.
3
Blanchard, Ostry and Ghosh, 2013.
2

1

exactly reversed the dollar appreciation that began in August 2008. By September 2010, the
effective dollar exchange rate was at approximately the same point as in August 2008. On the
other hand, the 2009-2010 dollar depreciation mirrors the sustained dollar depreciation from late
2005 to early 2008. The relevant question is whether the fluctuations of the dollar can be laid
entirely at the doorstep of monetary policy in 2005-2008 and 2009-2010, or whether other forces
were at work.
The dollar/euro exchange rate has not followed exactly the pattern of the dollar index.
Like the dollar index, there was a depreciation of the dollar relative to the euro from 2005-2008,
an appreciation during the height of the global financial crisis, and then a subsequent
depreciation. However, the depreciation of the dollar relative to the euro came to a halt in late
2009, and the dollar appreciated from 2009 until the end of 2010, before beginning to depreciate
again. The subsequent dollar appreciation beginning in 2011 is usually attributed to the European
debt crisis.
While monetary policy in the U.S. clearly has a very important role in driving the
exchange rate (and euro area monetary policy is an important determinant of the dollar/euro rate
as well), there are circumstances that drive monetary policy. The 2005-2008 and 2009-2010
periods are often described as times when investors “search for yield” drove them to move their
capital overseas, much of it to emerging markets, in order to generate a higher return. The period
of dollar appreciation during the global financial crisis as well as during the European debt crisis
is often called a flight to safety, where the dollar is considered a “safe haven.”
What does it mean for the dollar to be a safe haven, and why does this lead to a dollar
appreciation? It is not plausible that the phrase refers to a case in which U.S. real assets –
equities, property, etc. – are perceived to be less volatile than similar foreign assets. Most likely
such a change in risk would lead to an increase in the value of those assets, but not necessarily an
increase in the value of the dollar. That is, the price of U.S. stocks would rise, but that would not
require a dollar appreciation – their price would rise in dollar terms if there is a flight to safety by
both U.S. and foreign investors. There is no reason for the dollar to appreciate unless the U.S.
stocks provide more of a safe haven to foreign investors than to U.S. investors. If the exchange
rate stays constant, the increase in the price is the same for U.S. investors that value returns in
dollars and foreign investors that value return in foreign currency.

2

The term does not seem applicable to foreign exchange risk, either. If foreign exchange
risk increased, the incentive increases for U.S. investors to reduce their foreign exposure, but at
the same time, foreign investors would want to reduce their U.S. exposure. That is, for a foreign
investor concerned about foreign exchange risk, the U.S. dollar is not a safe haven – the
investor’s own currency is devoid of foreign exchange risk.
During the height of the global financial crisis in late 2008, banks in the U.S. and
throughout the world found themselves in need of dollars. The traditional source of very short
term funding for banks, the repo market, dried up as banks no longer accepted assets as collateral
that had previously been considered admissible. Banks and other financial institutions clamored
for dollar assets to balance their short-term funding that came in the form of dollar loans. It was
most likely this need for dollar liquidity that led to the “safe haven” appreciation of the dollar.
During times of illiquidity, investors are willing to accept a lower yield on dollar assets because
they provide a liquidity return. When interest rates are set by central banks, or are at the zero
lower bound, this lower yield is reflected in an expectation of a dollar depreciation. That is, the
demand for liquid dollar assets leads to an immediate dollar appreciation. Investors that hold
these dollar assets are willing to accept the inevitable dollar depreciation that will occur as the
liquidity crisis passes because they value the dollar for its liquidity services. 4
The flip side of times of safe haven are times where there is search for yield. The term
“search for yield” at first glance seems silly. Are there times when investors do not want yield?
Or does this mean that there are times when investors would like to take on more risk so they can
achieve higher yield? I believe the answer is that when there is no great need for low-yielding
dollar assets that can be used as collateral, investors do not value liquidity services as highly.
They would like instead to get higher yield. They forego short-term dollar assets and Treasury
bills, which has the opposite effect on the value of dollar that the safe haven effect has.
My point is that much of the fluctuation of the dollar between 2005 and the present is not
directly attributable to monetary policy, but instead to the market’s demand for dollars as an
asset that provides a liquidity yield. It is surely true that the expansionary policy pursued by the
Fed during and after the crisis helped to ease the liquidity crunch, and made it safe for investors
to search for yield. This does not absolve the Fed from any responsibility for the international
spillovers from its policies, but it does suggest that the spillover effects be considered in light of
4

See Bianchi and Engel (2015) for a model and exposition.

3

the shocks that led to their policy actions. We need to consider the source of the shocks to
understand how another course of action by the Fed may have influenced the global economy,
and to understand better the consequences of policy cooperation. The aim of this piece is not to
answer these questions, rather merely to pose them.
These safe haven and search for yield effects bear directly on the recent policy concerns
of Mantega, Rajan and the IMF. During times of search for yield, emerging markets must deal
with surges of capital flows into their markets. Those flows are quickly reversed during safe
haven times. It is not the monetary policy itself that leads to these flows, nor are they directly the
result of U.S. monetary policy. If Federal Reserve policy could be designed in order to eliminate
these effects, that might stem these capital flows in both directions, but it is not clear that such
policies would be optimal from either the standpoint of the U.S. or the emerging markets. These
are concerns that research needs to address.
My remaining remarks are divided into two sections. Most of my focus is on directions
for research: What shocks should we be looking at? What are the distortions in the markets and
how can policy relieve those distortions? What are the incentives of policymakers? What exactly
does “coordination” mean? Does it mean monetary policy determined by a global policymaker,
for instance? What is the potential scope of central bank policy cooperation?
The second section of my remarks focuses on how the current state of knowledge may
inform the policy debate. One aspect of this discussion focuses on the implicit desire of
policymakers to minimize or eliminate spillovers. Rajan (2014) states, “In its strong form, I
propose that large country central banks, both in advanced countries and emerging markets,
internalize more of the spillovers from their policies in their mandates, and are forced by new
conventions on the ‘rules of the game’ to avoid unconventional policies with large adverse
spillovers and questionable domestic benefits.” Is it in fact a goal of optimal policy cooperation
to internalize more of spillovers?

1. Research on Monetary Policy Coordination
I believe that the New Keynesian approach to monetary policymaking has been
successful and influential in how we think about optimal monetary policy. The key contribution
of this approach has been to clarify the aims of policy. The approach tries to pinpoint the
distortions in markets that lead to a need for monetary policy intervention, and assess the relative
4

importance of different distortions. Ultimately the goal of policy, according to this approach, is
to maximize welfare of households. I believe such an approach is likely to be beneficial in
thinking about the potential gains from policy cooperation. There is an older literature that
postulates ad hoc objectives for policymakers, and assesses the potential gains in that framework.
These descriptive objective functions may actually be reasonable descriptions of the goals of
actual monetary policymakers. But we can get a deeper understanding of what policy can
achieve if we can characterize what the objective function for policymakers should look like if
their aim is to maximize welfare. In particular, we are interested here in how optimal
policymaking differs when the monetary authority aims only to promote the interests of
households in its own country versus policy that is set to optimize global welfare.
While some progress has been made on these questions in the open-economy monetary
policy literature, there is much work left to be done. The analysis is undoubtedly difficult, but the
reward is a better-informed policy debate.
Sources of shocks
With a few exceptions, the recent literature has examined economies in which the
underlying shocks that drive business cycles are productivity shocks and “cost-push” shocks.
This reflects the focus (pre-crisis) of the closed-economy literature, which in turn has reacted to
the real business cycle literature in which productivity shocks are given a primary role.
Financial sector shocks have been partly or perhaps primarily responsible for most of the
recent (past 30 years) major global macroeconomic events. Here I include the Latin American
debt crises and “sudden stops”, the Japanese depression, the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998,
the dot.com bubble, the global financial crisis and the European debt crisis. Only recently have
open economy macroeconomic models of optimal monetary policy begun to include these
shocks, and the role of cooperation versus non-cooperation in response to these shocks has been
little explored.
Productivity shocks do not have the feel of the type of shock that monetary authorities
need to deal with. Optimal policy in these cases is procyclical. The economy does not respond
enough to a positive productivity shock, so it needs a boost with expansionary monetary policy.
Real world policy situations are ones where monetary policy is countercyclical.
Moreover, when Mantega refers to a currency war, he is alluding to the problem of
competitive devaluations. When a country falls into a recession, one way to boost demand is to
5

devalue the currency to encourage foreign demand. This type of policy is “beggar-thy-neighbor”
because it switches demand from foreign goods to domestic goods, thus transmitting the
recession abroad. However, when shocks are to productivity, non-cooperative monetary policy
produces a somewhat different problem. When monetary policy is expansionary, it is
insufficiently expansionary under non-cooperation (that is, with standard parameterizations of
technology and preferences.) Monetary expansion increases the supply of the good to the world,
which lowers its price, worsening the country’s terms of trade. When there is insufficient
cooperation, the country acts like a monopolist to limit the deterioration in the terms of trade. So,
monetary policy is procyclical, but insufficiently procyclical when the policymaker has a
strategic interest in the effect of policy on the terms of trade.
Cost-push shocks seem more like a real world shock. They lead to a supply-side
recession, and a tradeoff for monetary policymakers concerned with inflation and full
employment.
Neither type of shock is exactly analogous to the type of shock that actual policy needs to
respond to. In the first place, many recessions seem to be caused by a lack of aggregate demand.
It is the policymaker’s desire to boost aggregate demand that leads to competitive depreciations.
Second, the shocks themselves are distortionary, unlike a productivity shock. Even if prices were
flexible, the outcome would be worse than in the absence of the shock. So a simple New
Keynesian model in which the only distortions are price stickiness and monopoly distortions is
insufficient. Financial shocks may directly distort the economy, but perhaps monetary policy can
mitigate the effects of temporary shocks. Real world recessions, with some exceptions, are ones
in which output is below potential and inflation is below target, and the required monetary policy
is an expansion. Our models should accord an important role to shocks with these characteristics.
The New Keynesian literature has explored other types of shocks – investment shocks,
preference shocks, monetary policy shocks – but these have not been incorporated to a great
extent in the literature on policy coordination. A recent exception is Coenen et. al. (2010), which
compares economic performance under cooperation and under a Nash policy game for several of
these sources of economic shocks.
But perhaps we need to consider more unconventional shocks. News can have an effect
that looks like an aggregate demand shock. Bad news about future productivity, for example,
may depress current demand. Corsetti et. al. (2011a) consider how news affects global monetary
6

policy in a framework of optimal cooperation, but do not compare those policies to optimal noncooperative policies. Pure news “shocks” themselves may not be distortionary, but when there is
private information, news can exacerbate the information distortion, as in the models of
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006, 2013). It may be enlightening to consider monetary policy in
such a framework. One particular source of private information is the information that the
policymaker itself has about its own intentions. Policymakers may find it difficult to signal their
intentions, even with direct announcements, in a non-cooperative world, but that may be a
problem that is relieved under cooperation. At least under cooperation, the goals and intentions
of each policymaker should be revealed to other policymakers.
Another type of shock that has received recent prominence is the uncertainty shock.
Uncertainty shocks can have effects that are very much like aggregate demand shocks. That
point has been made in the closed economy by Basu and Bundick (2012) and Leduc and Liu
(2012). The effects of uncertainty shocks in emerging economies has been examined by CarriereSwallow and Cespedes (2013), but to my knowledge, no study has considered optimal monetary
policy under cooperation or not in the presence of uncertainty shocks. Indeed, it is possible that
monetary policy itself is a source of uncertainty, and perhaps cooperation can reduce that
uncertainty.
Some recent literature has examined financial market shocks and international
propagation, as well as the role of optimal monetary policy. See, for example, Dedola and
Lombardo (2012) and Kolasa and Lombardo (2014). But the literature has not addressed the
gains from cooperation when there are financial shocks.
Distortions
The most basic New Keynesian models have two main sources of distortions – price
stickiness and monopolistic distortions. Staggered price setting offers the rationale for stabilizing
inflation. When price setting is not synchronized, inflation leads to undesirable misalignment of
relative prices. Time-varying monopoly power in goods markets and labor markets can lead to a
role for monetary policy to stabilize output. But there may be other distortions that need to be
considered for monetary policy.
Some of my own research has focused on the pricing to market distortion. When firms set
different prices for the same (or very similar) goods in different locations, the allocation of goods
to consumers is inefficient. When prices are sticky in local currencies, monetary policy may want
7

to stabilize exchange rates in response to this distortion. Devereux and Engel (2003), Corsetti
and Pesenti (2005), Engel (2011) and Rodriguez-Lopez (2011) all consider the role of pricing to
market in monetary models of the open economy.
During the global financial crisis when the dollar appreciated from 2008 to 2009,
European firms found that selling in the U.S. became much more profitable. In the analysis of
Rodriguez-Lopez, this would lead also to entry of firms into the U.S. market that previously
found exporting unprofitable. Why should European firms expand at the expense of U.S. firms
when the underlying shock is not related to firm productivity or taste for the firms’ products?
Such a reallocation of resources is inefficient from a global standpoint, because the European
firms gained a cost advantage not because of more efficient production but simply because the
dollar strengthened. When the dollar appreciates but the dollar prices of their goods sold in the
U.S. adjust slowly and the firms’ costs (such as wages) remained fixed in euros, the profit
margins of the European firms expand. The academic work on optimal monetary policy
cooperation under pricing to market points to this inefficiency as a target of monetary policy. But
how does optimal cooperative policy differ from non-cooperative policy? Do individual
policymakers have an incentive to target these distortions? In the model of Devereux and Engel,
optimal policy under coordination and under a Nash non-cooperative game are identical. But that
result clearly owes to special assumptions in the Devereux-Engel model such that there is no
strategic element in monetary policy decisions.
Much of the literature on optimal policy in open economies has assumed perfect financial
markets, in which agents can trade in a complete market of state-contingent claims. Recent
literature has examined some aspects of monetary policy under incomplete markets, but usually
either by examining monetary policy from a positive rather than normative standpoint or from
the standpoint of finding the optimal cooperative policy. This literature includes Benigno (2009),
Corsetti, et. al. (2011a, 2011b), Bhattarai et. al. (2013) and Benigno and Romei (2014).
The literature, particularly Corsetti et. al. (2011b), makes clear that one goal of monetary
policy under cooperation is to mitigate the effects of incomplete asset markets on risk sharing.
There are other goals of monetary policy as well, and they may conflict with the risk sharing
goal. For example, when one country enjoys productivity growth, monetary policy should aim to
expand output in that country relative to the rest of the world. But in the presence of incomplete

8

financial markets, that expansion may also raise consumption relative to other countries, in
conflict with the risk-sharing objective.
To what extent does policy differ when there is not cooperation? Benigno (2006)
examines the gains from cooperation relative to self-oriented inflation targeting. But the
literature has not characterized the goals of a policymaker whose only interest is the welfare of
its own households. Do they care about risk sharing? We know from the work of Benigno and
Benigno (2003), for example, that there is an incentive to influence the terms of trade in the
country’s favor, but how is that traded off against other objectives? Does market completeness,
or more generally richer asset markets that enhance the opportunity for risk sharing, reduce the
benefits of cooperation?
The literature on monetary policy cooperation versus non-cooperation has not yet
addressed how various financial market distortions affect policy rules. The literature has
certainly explored how financial market policies such as asset requirements or capital controls
might respond in the face of credit constraints, balance sheet constraints, banking distortions or
the inability to commit to repayment of debt (that is, the possibility of default). The currency
denomination of debt may also play a role in exacerbating or mitigating financial market
distortions. But how do these distortions influence the incentive for cooperation in monetary
policy? For example, would a mutual monetary expansion that lowers interest rates help ease
credit constraints?
An important source of distortion that is highlighted in policy discussions but which has
achieved little attention in the academic literature on monetary policy is the role of current
account imbalances. In particular, there may be an externality from acquiring too much external
debt, as in Bianchi (2011). The externality is a pecuniary one that arises primarily in times of
crisis. During those times, each domestic holder of foreign debt may try to reduce their foreign
exposure in order to solidify their own balance sheet. But the collective effect of that action is a
real depreciation that undercuts the value of collateral for all domestic borrowers. Should
monetary policy target current account imbalances? If so, are the incentives of the self-oriented
policymaker in conflict with the goal of globally efficient allocation of resources? Each country
may try competitively to devalue their currency in order to achieve a stronger net external debt
position, which may be counterproductive.

9

Some recent literature (Fujiwara et. al., 2009, Devereux and Cook, 2013) has examined
optimal cooperative monetary policy when interest rates are at the zero lower bound. Again we
can ask whether there are gains from cooperation, and how non-cooperative policy would differ.
It seems like some of the concern among policymakers in emerging markets about the
depreciation of the currencies of the industrialized world stems from an infant industry or Dutch
disease type of distortion. Currencies of these countries may appreciate either from monetary
expansion in the industrialized world, or because of a run-up in commodity prices generated by a
boom in demand for natural resources. The currency appreciation harms the nascent
manufacturing and industrial sector in these economies. If there is genuinely an infant industry
distortion, then the emerging market countries may want to use policy to offset the appreciation.
Whether this calls for monetary policy cooperation is an open question.
Finally, an issue that has not been addressed at all in the literature but is of great practical
importance are distortions that arise from poor policymaking. I have noted that one goal of
cooperative policymaking is to share risk. But should households in one country be made to
share the negative consequences of poor policy decisions in another country? This issue has been
raised prominently regarding the extent to which the European Central Bank should act as lender
of last resort to stabilize the banking system or government finances of some Eurozone member
countries. On the one hand, no policymaker is perfect, so policy mistakes seem like an
appropriate subject of insurance, just as drivers are insured against accidents even when they are
at fault. On the other hand, as with any insurance, incentives can be distorted, and policymakers
may be tempted not to invest as much effort into optimal policymaking if the risks of bad
policies are shared. In any case, it may be politically very difficult to get the citizens of one
country to bear any of the burden of bad policy choices in another country.
Modeling policymaking
This last point raises the question of how we model policymaking. The New Keynesian
literature assumes policymakers have the ability to commit to policy, and their objective is to
maximize the welfare of households.
One consideration is that this approach may credit policymakers with too much
omniscience. How is policy affected when there are limits to the monetary authority’s
knowledge? In particular, what are the implications of this for coordination? Will coordination
improve the decision process? If policymakers disagree on the appropriate model, will they
10

converge under cooperation, and if they converge, will it be to a better model than either used
previously?
In the international trade literature, policymakers are often characterized as having
competing objectives. To some extent they may target welfare of households, but political
considerations may come into play. In order to win a majority of votes, or to increase campaign
contributions, the policymaker may consider objectives that are not in line with maximizing
overall welfare. These considerations have not been picked up in the optimal monetary policy
literature. It is unclear, moreover, how international monetary policy cooperation would
influence the tradeoffs. For example, if cooperation helps to make the economy more efficient,
the policymaker may have an incentive to free ride on foreign policymakers’ credibility so that
he can pay more attention to political considerations.
Why can policymakers credibly commit to a set of monetary policy rules? Is the ability to
commit enhanced by cooperation? Chari et. al. (2013) suggest that it might be. In their scenario,
each country’s central bank does not have the ability to commit to a monetary policy rule, and so
suffer from the well-known inflation bias that arises under lack of commitment. However, when
a group of countries come together and can set a monetary policy mutually – especially in a
currency union – they achieve some level of commitment because the group as a whole does not
have the incentive to respond ex post to country-specific shocks that might have led to overly
expansionary if each country set policy on its own.
A related familiar argument is that a country that lacks the ability to credibly commit to a
monetary policy rule can gain commitment by attaching itself to a country with monetary policy
credibility. This may come in the form of fixing the exchange rate to the credible country, but
perhaps some other form of cooperative arrangement could achieve the same effect.
On the other hand, cooperation could reduce the ability to commit. There could be many
competing objectives for monetary policy, but one way that a central bank may establish
credibility is to announce a clear objective and then visibly use policy to target that objective. It
is better, in this case, to announce a simple inflation target instead of multiple objectives, because
it is easier to monitor whether the central bank is using policy to achieve its stated objective.
When many countries get together to cooperate on monetary policy, it may be more difficult to
announce a clear objective that can be easily verified. Credibility of all may be undermined.

11

There is a certain degree of disconnect between the meaning of monetary policy
cooperation in the academic literature and what it means in practice. In academic research,
monetary policy cooperation means that a single policymaker chooses monetary policy for all
countries to maximize some weighted average of welfare in all countries. Cooperation means
finding the globally optimal set of monetary policy rules. In practice, however, cooperation
means that policymakers come to the table and, in effect, make the case for the set of global
policies that would most benefit their own constituents. A better description of policy
cooperation in practice is that of a bargaining game. The bargaining power of each country in
this game then becomes important. One way to interpret the recent policy discussion is that
international policy really is implicitly set by such a game. However, the emerging markets may
believe they have too little say in this implicit agreement, which is to say they may perceive
themselves as having too little weight in the bargaining game.
The scope for cooperation
So far, all of my discussion has centered on monetary policy cooperation. There is a
reason why it makes sense to focus on central bank cooperation as opposed other types of
economic policy cooperation. Central banks in many countries have been able to achieve a large
degree of independence from direct political pressures. It is at least thinkable that monetary
policy decision makers could cooperate, because they have the ability to follow through on a
policy commitment.
Finance ministers may meet in an international forum and make pronouncements about
the goals of fiscal policy, but they have little power to commit to follow through on these plans.
Fiscal policymaking in all countries is the outcome of complex and cumbersome political
processes. While it may be useful for academic research to characterize optimal fiscal policies,
under cooperation or without cooperation, this line of research seems purely academic. At the
very least, a useful approach would need to take into account political economy considerations.
However, even monetary policy may need to take into account political consequences
when it comes to international cooperation. The legal mandate of the Federal Reserve, for
example, is to stabilize domestic inflation and employment. If Congress perceived that
international cooperation interferes with that legal mandate, they could interfere with Federal
Reserve independence.

12

In fact, this may not be purely a matter of perception, or misperception. We know that
policy coordination will lead to an improvement in world welfare, but this does not guarantee
there will be a Pareto improvement. That is, a global policymaker that maximizes some weighted
average of country’s utilities may not follow a plan that delivers greater welfare for every
country than would occur under non-cooperation. An interesting line of research would be the
optimal design of a cooperative agreement. Is there some way to compensate potential losers, or
even those countries that stand to gain less than others? If not, how should the welfare of each
country be weighted in an optimal plan?
Moving beyond monetary policy, one important area for cooperation is in macroprudential policy. This has been addressed recently in Engel (2012) and Jeanne (2014). This is a
large topic – too large to address adequately in this space. An example of the problems that
might arise in an international context is the incentive that financial institutions may have to shift
activity from more highly regulated to less regulated countries. This may occur through an actual
shift in economic activity, so more lending occurs in the less-regulated country, or it may happen
through balance-sheet gimmicks.
The Basel III agreement introduces a “reciprocity” rule that comes into play when one
country imposes higher capital requirements than are required by Basel III. In essence, the
financial institution is required to hold a weighted average of the capital required in the countries
in which it does business. This does not eliminate the incentive to shift activity, however.
There are two types of spillovers that arise when there is lack of cooperation on policies
that regulate financial institutions. If financial regulations are successful in reducing bank
failures and other sorts of financial crises, the problem is that a wave of bank failures in a less
regulated country can have negative consequences in other countries. Second, as has been
implicitly noted, countries with tighter financial regulations may suffer consequences if banks
move activity to other countries. Worthy projects in the more highly regulated country may be
passed up in favor of less worthy projects that are subject to less regulation.
There are many other areas of central bank policy that are natural targets for cooperation,
including policies for bailouts of financial institutions, deposit insurance, banking union, etc. For
example, Acharya (2003, 2009), Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006), Morrison and White (2009),
and Kara (2014) consider the implications for cooperation in banking regulation when there are
cross-border spillovers in risk management.
13

2. What the Literature Tells us about Cooperation
Have the Federal Reserve and other developed countries been engaged in a currency war
on emerging markets?
In the first place, as Ostry and Ghosh (2013) note, the direction of spillovers from
expansionary monetary policy in the U.S. or other countries is not even clear. In the standard
story of competitive devaluations, a monetary expansion in the U.S. can have negative effects on
other countries because of dollar depreciation. The depreciation makes U.S. goods cheaper, so
consumers and firms may switch demand from foreign goods to the U.S. There is an effect that
works in the other direction, however. Expansionary U.S. monetary policy aims to increase
output and employment, which will drive up demand by U.S. consumers and firms. That increase
in demand falls on both domestic goods and foreign imports, creating a positive spillover. 5 The
size of the two effects will depend in part on the degree of exchange-rate pass-through. When
import prices are not much affected by exchange rate changes, the expenditure switching effect
will be small, and the aggregate demand effect may dominate.
The discussion in the introductory section above points to another channel for positive
correlation between dollar depreciation and output in emerging markets. During times of “search
for yield”, when the “safe haven” motive is attenuated, capital flows from the U.S. to emerging
markets. The capital inflows into emerging markets works to appreciate their currencies and
should have expansionary effects on output. As capital flows into the emerging markets, loans
should become cheaper, and equity prices increase, both of which encourage investment. Indeed,
I believe this may be the mechanism that concerns Rajan. The problem arises because, first, these
inflows may come at the wrong time. Expansion is not desirable if the economy is near full
employment and facing inflationary pressure. Second, these inflows may be short-lived. There
may be a mismatch between short-term foreign loans and long-term local investment projects, so
when the capital flows back out again, investment projects that have been undertaken may be
expensive to complete.
The question is whether these spillovers necessitate policy cooperation. It is a
misconception that the aim of policy cooperation should be to minimize or eliminate spillovers.

5

Frankel (1988) makes this same point. Interestingly, Frankel’s paper has a title very similar to that of Ostry and
Ghosh.

14

Though the literature on this is far from clear or complete, we can infer that there are plausible
reasons why optimal cooperation may not attempt to mitigate spillovers. It is inevitable in a
globalized economy, even when markets are efficient, that shocks in one country will have
impacts on other countries. For example, the innovation of new ways to mine shale oil in the
United States has increased the global supply of oil, benefiting some countries but perhaps
harming many oil exporting nations. These “pecuniary externalities” are the normal
consequences of market equilibrium and do not represent true externalities that policy need
address – unless they magnify other existing market distortions.
In the first place, the literature has shown that non-cooperative policy may produce the
same degree of spillovers as cooperative policy, and the gains from cooperation may be small.
This point is made forcefully by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002), although there are some
qualifications offered by Benigno and Benigno (2003). 6 Suppose that optimal policy in one
country calls for monetary expansion that depreciates the country’s currency. If that does indeed
lead to negative spillovers, the foreign country can respond with its own expansionary monetary
policy. There is not necessarily a need for cooperation even though there are spillovers. Benigno
and Benigno (2006), in a simple model, design a set of monetary policy rules that each country
could follow, in which they target domestic objectives, but achieve the goals of optimal
monetary cooperation.
Second, it seems plausible that cooperative policy should aim to spread the effects of
some types of idiosyncratic shocks, rather than to bottle them up within their country of origin. If
there is some sort of distortionary shock that leads to a downturn in one economy, the risk
sharing motive would encourage spreading the pain to other countries. In other words, under a
cooperative agreement, countries would be willing to accept more spillovers from abroad in
return for having other countries share in their downturns.
This risk sharing principle does not fully describe the aims of cooperative policy, of
course. In fact, in some cases, it may enhance global efficiency to reduce spillovers. In the case
of a negative productivity shock in one country, most of the decline in output should occur in the
country that has become less productive if resources are to be allocated efficiently. Even in this
case, optimal policy does not eliminate spillovers, because it does not eliminate the motive to
share the consumption risk across households in different countries.
6

See also Devereux and Engel (2003).

15

The central issue is whether the optimal non-cooperative policy leads to more spillovers
than under cooperative policy. Unfortunately, the academic literature has not established a clear
answer. There may be gains from cooperation even if cooperation means more spillovers.
Underlying the complaints about unconventional policy is a concern about capital flows.
However, the policy discussion on this issue is quite muddled. Some commentators point to the
large U.S. current account deficits prior to 2007 as an underlying cause of the global financial
crisis. The capital flows from the U.S. to emerging markets after the crisis stabilized has a benign
side, from this viewpoint, because it served to reduce the U.S. deficit. If the deficit was a
problem, reducing the deficit seems like a solution, not another problem. Emerging market
policymakers also lodged complaints when it appeared the Fed was beginning to wind down its
quantitative easing policy, and capital began to flow back to the U.S. Perhaps the problem is not
the size of the imbalances, but the changes in directions of capital flows. Indeed, Rajan (2014)
says, “Recipient countries are not being irrational when they protest both the initiation of
unconventional policy as well as an exit whose pace is driven solely by conditions in the source
country. Having become more vulnerable because of leverage and crowding, recipient countries
may call for an exit whose pace and timing is responsive, at least in part, to the conditions they
face.”
3. Conclusions
It is unfortunate that research has not caught up with policy concerns about spillovers
from monetary policy and the gain from monetary policy coordination. Perhaps the lack of
activity on the research side arises because it does not seem plausible that central banks would
actually undertake cooperation. The Federal Reserve has a domestic mandate to target inflation
and employment.
But it is important in an increasingly globalized world to understand how foreign
economies influence the domestic economy. An optimal policy aimed at inflation and
employment will increasingly need to take into account the impact of events in other countries,
including the effects of foreign monetary policy. It may ultimately be the case that greater
stability and growth at home depends on international coordination.
At the very least, it is important to know the answers to the questions that have been
raised in the recent international discussions. What are we losing by foregoing cooperation? If

16

there was cooperation, what would be different? Would spillovers always be smaller? Or is it
inevitable, and even desirable, that the impact of shocks in one country be spread internationally?
With a firmer basis in economic theory, economists could contribute more productively
to the policy debate.

17

Figure 1

The vertical axis on the left side measures the trade-weighted dollar index in percentage terms. The vertical
axis on the right side measures the log of the dollar/euro exchange rate. Both exchange rates are expressed in dollars
per foreign currency, so an increase represents a depreciation of the dollar.

18

References
Acharya, V. 2003. “Is the International Convergence of Capital Adequacy Regulation
Desirable?” Journal of Finance 58, 2745–2782.
Acharya, V. 2009. “A Theory of Systemic Risk and Design of Prudential Bank Regulation.”
Journal of Financial Stability 5, 224–255.
Bacchetta, P.; E. van Wincoop. 2006. “Can Information Heterogeneity Explain the Exchange
Rate Determination Puzzle?” American Economic Review 96, 552-576.
Bacchetta, P.; E. van Wincoop. 2013. “On the Unstable Relationship between Exchange Rates
and Macroeconomic Fundamentals.” Journal of International Economics 91, 18-26.
Basu, S.; B. Bundick. 2012. “Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of Effective Demand.” NBER
working paper, no. 18420
Benigno, G.; P. Benigno. 2003. “Price Stability in Open Economies.” Review of Economic
Studies 70, 743-764.
Benigno, G.; P. Benigno. 2006. “Designing Targeting Rules for International Monetary Policy
Coordination.” Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 473-506.
Benigno, P. 2009. “Price Stability with Imperfect Financial Integration.” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 41 (supplement), 121-149.
Benigno, P.; F. Romei. 2014. “Debt Deleveraging and the Exchange Rate.” Journal of
International Economics 93, 1-16.
Bianchi, J. 2011. “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle.” American
Economic Review 101, 3400-3426.
Bianchi, J.; C. Engel. 2015. “Banks’ Liquidity Management and Exchange Rate Fluctuations.”
Working paper, University of Wisconsin.
Blanchard, O.; J.D. Ostry; and, A.R. Ghosh. 2013. “International Policy Coordination: The Loch
Ness Monster.” International Monetary Fund, IMFDirect.
Bhattarai, S.; J.W. Lee; W.Y. Park. 2013. “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Currency Union with
Interest Rate Spreads.” Working paper, Department of Economics, Rutgers University.
Carriere-Swallow, Y.; L. Cespedes. 2013 “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks in Emerging
Economies.” Journal of International Economics 90, 316-325.
19

Chari, V.V.; A. Dovis; P. Kehoe. 2013. “Rethinking Optimal Currency Areas.” Working paper,
Department of Economics, Pennsylvania State University.
Coenen, G; G. Lombardo; F. Smets; R. Straub. 2010. “International Transmission and Monetary
Policy Cooperation.” International Dimensions of Monetary Policy (Gali, Gertler, eds.)
Cook, D.; M.B. Devereux. 2013. “Exchange Rate Flexibility under the Zero Lower Bound: The
Need for Forward Guidance.” Unpublished.
Corsetti, G.; L. Dedola; S. Leduc. 2011a. “Demand Imbalances, Exchange-Rate Misalignments,
and Monetary Policy.” Unpublished.
Corsetti, G; L. Dedola; S. Leduc. 2011b. “Optimal Monetary Policy in Open Economies.”
Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3. Benjamin N. Friedman and Michael
Woodford, eds., 861-933.
Corsetti, G.; P. Pesenti. 2005. “International Dimensions of Optimal Monetary Policy.” Journal
of Monetary Economics 52, 281-305.
Dedola, L.; G. Lombardo. 2012. “Financial Frictions, Financial Integration and International
Propagation of Shocks.” Economic Policy 27, 319-359.
Dell’Ariccia, G.; R. Marquez 2006. “Competition among Regulators and Credit Market
Integration.” Journal of Financial Economics 79, 401–430.
Devereux, M.B.; C. Engel. 2003. “Monetary Policy in the Open Economy Revisited: Exchange
Rate Flexibility and Price Setting Behavior.” Review of Economic Studies 70, 765-803.
Engel, C. 2011, “Currency Misalignments and Optimal Monetary Policy: A Reexamination.”
American Economic Review 101, 2796-2822.
Engel, C. 2012. “Macroprudential Policy under High Capital Mobility: An Academic
Perspective.” Working paper, Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin.
Financial Times. 2010. “Brazil in ‘currency war’ Alert.” September 27, 2010.
Frankel, J.A. 1988. “Obstacles to Macroeconomic Policy Coordination.” Journal of Public
Policy 8, 353-374.
Fujiwara, I.; N. Sudo; Y. Teranishi. 2009. “The Zero Lower Bound and Monetary Policy in a
Global Economy: A Simple Analytical Investigation." International Journal of Central
Banking.
20

Jeanne, O. 2014. “Macroprudential Policies in a Global Perspective.” NBER working paper no.
19967.
Kara, G.I. 2014. “Systemic Risk, International Regulation, and the Limits of Coordination.”
Working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Kolasa, M.; G. Lombardo. 2014. “Financial Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy in an Open
Economy.” International Journal of Central Banking 10, 43-94.
Leduc, S.; Z. Liu. 2012. “Uncertainty Shocks are Aggregate Demand Shocks.” Working paper,
Economic Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Morrison, A. D.; L. White. 2009. “Level Playing Fields in International Financial Regulation.”
Journal of Finance 64, 1099–1142.
Obstfeld, M.; K. Rogoff. 2002. “Global Implications of Self-Oriented National Monetary Rules.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 503-535.
Ostry, J.D., and A.R. Ghosh. 2013. “Obstacles to International Policy Coordination and How to
Overcome Them.” Working paper, Research Department, International Monetary Fund.
Rajan, R. 2014. “Competitive Monetary Easing: Is It Yesterday Once More?” Reserve Bank of
India.
Rodriguez-Lopez, J.A. 2011. “Prices and Exchange Rates: A Theory of Disconnect.” Review of
Economic Studies 78, 1135-1177.

21

